 

 

 

 

A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its implications
Author(s): Ramon Masià
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 2 (March 2016), pp. 175-204
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913477
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:11 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913477?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:175-204 CrossMark
 DO! 10.1007/s00407-015-0165-9 VC

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube
 and its implications

 Ramon Masiä1

 Received: 9 July 2015 / Published online: 21 September 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract The solution attributed to Archytas for the problem of doubling the cube

 is a landmark of the pre-Euclidean mathematics. This paper offers textual arguments

 for a new reading of the text of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, and an

 approach to the solution which fits closely with the new reading. The paper also reviews

 modern attempts to explain the text, which are as complicated as the original, and its

 connections with some XVI-century mathematical results, without any documented

 relation to Archytas' doubling the cube.

 1 Introduction

 The solution attributed to Archytas (V-IV century BC) for the problem of doubling

 the volume of a given cube (henceforth, Archytas' solution for doubling the cube)

 has been unanimously praised as one of the landmarks of pre-Euclidean mathematics:
 «the most remarkable of all [i.e. all methods to double the volume of a cube]» (Heath

 1921, p. 246, v. I); «Archytas must have had a truly divine inspiration when he found

 this construction» (van der Waerden 1954, p. 151); «a stunning tour de force» (Knorr

 1986, p. 50). The configuration of geometrical elements requested by the solution is

 actually complex, and the reconstructions suggested by scholars « are more or less as

 complicated as the original».1

 1 See Euclide (2007, p. 83): «Sono state proposte varie ricostruzioni di come Archita possa essere giunto

 a concepire questo complesso intersecarsi di solidi: sono piü ο meno complicate come l'originale» («Α
 number of reconstructions of the way in which Archytas made this complex intersection of solids has been

 suggested: they are more or less as complicated as the original»).

 Communicated by: Bernard Vitrac.

 [Ξ1 Ramon Masiä

 rmasia@gmail.com

 1 Universität Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 176

 R. Masiä

 This paper offers textual arguments for a new reading of the text of Archytas'

 solution for doubling the cube, transmitted by Eutocius (VI century AD). With this new

 reading, I will review modern attempts to explain or approach the text. In addition, I

 will offer my own approach which fits closely with the new reading.

 In the first section, I present the generic problem of doubling the cube, and its

 reduction to the search for two mean proportionals. In the second section, the two

 main historical sources of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube are discussed,

 with particular emphasis on Eutocius' text. I will make a literal translation of the text

 discussing some textual issues. Then, I will analyse the structure of the text, mainly

 from a formal point of view. The next two sections provide some ideas about how to

 place this text in the context of Greek Mathematics, being aware that we have no textual

 evidence that supports this sort of reconstruction, except for the ones already discussed.

 The first of these sections attempts to reconstruct a general mathematical context for

 Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, including a list of mathematical requirements

 for carrying it out, as well as some considerations concerning the genesis of the

 reconstruction and its links with textual evidence. The subsequent section reviews

 some modern reconstructions; I highlight the fact that these modern reconstructions do

 not recognize some important points derived from the wording of Archytas' solution

 as transmitted by Eutocius; I also present some xvi century mathematical results,

 without any documented connection to Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, that

 influenced in some way a number of these reconstructions. Finally, in the conclusion,

 1 will list the main consequences of this new reading, from the interpretation of the
 text to its re-evaluation.

 2 Establishing the elements of the problem of doubling the cube

 In this section and in some other sections, modern notation is used to describe geomet

 rical manipulations, although this misrepresents Greek language and concepts. This
 anachronism does not interfere at all with the core of my arguments and therefore

 should not lead to any confusion.

 The statement of the problem of doubling the cube is as follows: given a cube, find

 another cube whose volume is its double. A number of ancient geometrical solutions

 to this problem are based on the finding of two mean proportionals.

 The concept of the mean proportional is essentially as follows: given two magni

 tudes, a and b, m is the mean proportional between a and b (which I call simple to avoid

 any confusion) when ^ = j. On the other hand, m\,m2 are two mean proportionals
 between a and b when — — = 2jz. in general, a, m\,m2,, mn-\,mn, b are

 in continued proportion when ^ ^ = · · · = = η^-. Therefore, if m\ and
 m2 are two mean proportionals between a and b, then α, mi, mi, b are in continued

 proportion.

 The relation between doubling the cube and the finding of two mean proportionals

 is as follows: if V = a3 is the volume of a cube of edge a, the edge of the doubled

 cube is the first of the two mean proportionals between a and 2a. To see this, let m\

 and ni2 be the two mean proportionals between a and 2a, ^ Therefore,

 = mj ' ' Ία ~ Έ' ^at t0 Sa^' ^ = m\' Ά conse1uence> m\ is

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 177

 edge of a cube that doubles the volume of a cube with edge a, and therefore, it solves

 the problem of doubling the volume of a given cube.

 3 Textual tradition of Archytas' doubling the cube

 Archytas' solution has been transmitted by Eutocius, in his commentary on Book 2

 of Archimedes' De Sphaera et Cylindro? Archytas' solution in Eutocius' text is as

 follows (parallel text of Heiberg's edition and my translation; the numbering is mine):

 [1] Έστωσαν ai δομείσαι δύο εύιϊείαι
 αί ΑΔ, Γ. δει δή τών ΑΔ, Γ δύο

 μέσας άνάλογον εύρεΐν.
 [2] γεγράφ^ω περί την μείζονα την
 s ΑΔ κύκλος ό ΑΒΔΖ, και τη Γ ϊση

 ένηρμόσΰω ή AB καί έκβληΟεϊσασυμ
 πιπτέτω τή άπό τοϋ Δ εφαπτομένη
 τοϋ κύκλου κατά τό Π, παρά δέ τήν
 ΠΔΟ ήχι}ω ή ΒΕΖ,

 ιο και νενοήσΟω ήμικυλίνδριον όρι)όν

 έπϊ τοϋ AB Δ ημικυκλίου, έπ'ι δέ της
 ΑΔ ήμικύκλιον όρβόν έν τφ τοΰ ήμι -
 κυλινδρίου παραλληλογράμμφ κείμε
 νον.

 [1] Let there be two given straight lines

 ΑΔ, Γ. Then, one must find two mean pro
 portionals of ΑΔ, Γ.

 [2] Let a circle ΑΒΔΖ be traced around
 the greater <straight line> ΑΔ, and let 5R
 <a straight line> AB be fitted equal to r,c

 and, once produced, let it converge with

 the < straight line> from Δ tangent to the
 circle at Π, and let a <straight line> BEZ
 be drawn parallel to Π ΔΟ, ior
 and let a half-cylinder be conceived

 15 [3] τούτο δή τό ήμικύκλιον περια
 γόμενον ώς άπό τοϋ Δ έπί τό Β
 μένοντος τοΰ Α πέρατος της διαμέτρου
 τεμεΐ τήν κυλινδρικήν έπιφάνειαν έν
 τή περιαγωγή και γράψει έν αύτή γραμ

 20 μήν τινα.

 perpendicular to semicircle ΑΒΔ, and, on
 ΑΔ, a semicircle orthogonal <on semicircle

 ΑΒΔ>, lying in the parallelogram of
 the half-cylinder. isr
 [3] Then, this semicircle drawn around

 from Δ towards B,d while the extreme A

 of the diameter remains fixed, will cut

 the cylindrical surface in its being drawn
 around, and will trace a certain trace on 2or
 it.

 πάλιν δέ, έάν τής ΑΔ μενούσης τό
 ΑΠ Δ τρίγωνον περιενεχΛή τήν έναν
 τίαν τφ ήμικυκλίω κίνησιν, κωνικήν
 ποιήσει έπιφάνειαν ή ΑΠ ευθεία," ή0
 25 δή περιαγομένη συμβάλει τή κυλιν
 δρική γραμμή κατά τι σημεΐον.

 Again, if, while ΑΔ remains fixed, triangle
 ΑΠΔ is led around with a motion opposite

 to the semicircle, straight line ΑΠ will
 make a conical surface, which < straight 25R
 line>, then, once drawn around, will concur

 with the cylindrical trace at a certain

 point.

 άμα δέ καί τό Β περιγράψει ήμικύκλιον
 έν τή τοΰ κώνου έπιφανεία.
 [4] έχέτω δή θέσιν κατά τον τόπον
 30 τής συμπτώσεως τών γραμμών τό
 μέν κινούμενον ήμικύκλιον ώς τήν

 And at the same time, Β will also trace
 around a semicircle on the surface of the »r

 cone. [4] Then, on the one side, let the moved

 semicircle have a position at the place of

 convergence of the traces as the <position>
 of <semicircle> ΔΚΑ; on the other 35R

 τοϋ ΔΚΑ, τό δέ άντιπεριαγόμενον
 τρίγωνον τήν τοϋ Δ ΛΑ, τό δέ τής
 είρημένης συμπτώσεως σημεΐον έστω

 side, <let> the triangle drawn around in

 the opposite direction <have a position

 2 Archimedes (1910-1915, vol. πι, 84.12-88.2). The context is a long section of the commentary in which

 Eutocius reviews different methods used by Greek authors of antiquity for solving the problem of doubling

 the cube. The heading of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube reads: «the discovery of Archytas, as

 reported by Eudemus». Eudemus was a disciple of Aristotle, who wrote a history of geometry. For full
 details about the whole textual evidence, see Euclide (2007, pp. 79-81) and Knorr (1989, pp. 100-111).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 178

 R. Masiä

 35 τό Κ, έστω δέ και τό δια τού Β γρα

 as> that of ΔΛΑ; and let the point of the

 φόμενον ήμικύκλιον τό BMZ, κοι
 νή δέ αΰτοΰ τομή καν τοϋ ΒΔΖΑ
 κύκλου έστω ή ΒΖ, καί από τοΰ Κ
 έπί τό τοϋ ΒΔΑ ημικυκλίου έπίπε

 40 δον κάθετος ήχΐ)ω.

 πεσεΐται δή έπι τήν τοΰ κύκλου πε
 ριφέρειαν δια τό ορθόν έσ τάναι τον
 κύλινδρον.

 πιπτέτω και έστω ή ΚΙ, και ή άπό
 45 τοΰ I έπι τό Α έπιζευχιϊεΐσα συμβα
 λέτω τήΒΖ κατά τό Θ, ή δέ ΑΛ τφ
 BMZ ήμικυκλίω κατά τό Μ, έπε
 ζεύχβωσαν δέ και αί ΚΔ, ΜΙ, ΜΘ.
 [5] έπεΐ ούν έκάτερον των ΔΚΑ, BMZ

 so ημικυκλίων όρι}όν έστι προς τό ύπο
 κείμενον έπίπεδον, και ή κοινή άρα
 αυτών τομή ή ΜΘ πρός όρι)άς έστι
 τώ τοΰ κύκλου έπιπέδω. ώστε και

 πρός τήν ΒΖ όρι}ή έστιν ή ΜΘ.
 55 τό άρα ύπό τών ΒΘΖ, τουτέστι τό

 ύπό ΑΘΙ, ί'σον έστι τώ άπό ΜΘ.

 said convergence be K; also, let the semicircle

 traced through Β be BMZ, let the
 common section of this <semicircle> and

 of circle ΒΔΖΑ be BZ and let <a straight
 line> be drawn from Κ perpendicular to
 the plane of semicircle ΒΔΑ.
 Then, it will fall on the circumference of

 the circle because of the fact that the cylinder

 stands orthogonal <on the circum
 ference >.

 Let it fall and let it be KI, and let the

 <straight line> joined from I to A concur
 with BZ at Θ, and let ΑΛ <concur> with
 semicircle BMZ at M, and let ΚΔ, MI, ΜΘ

 be also joined.

 [5] Now, since each of the semicircles ΔΚΑ

 BMZ is perpendicular to the underlying

 plane, therefore, their common section

 ΜΘ is also at right <angles> with the plane
 of the circle, so that also ΜΘ is perpendicular
 to BZ.

 Therefore, the <rectangle contained> by
 ΒΘΖ, that is, the <rectangle contained>
 by ΑΘΙ, is equal to the <square> on ΜΘ.
 Therefore, triangle AMI is similar to each
 of <the triangles> ΜΙΘ, ΜΑΘ, and angle
 AMI <is> right. But angle ΔΚΑ is also

 δμοιον άρα έστι τό AMI τρίγωνον
 αατέρω τών ΜΙΘ, ΜΑΘ, και ορθή
 ή ύπό ΙΜΑ. έστιν δέ και ή ύπό ΔΚΑ

 ω όρ θή.

 right.

 παράλληλοι άρα είσίν αί ΚΔ, ΜΙ, και
 έσται άνάλογον, ώς ή ΔΑ πρός ΑΚ,
 τουτέστιν ή ΚΑ πρός ΑΙ ούτως ή
 ΙΑ πρός AM, διά τήν ομοιότητα τών

 Therefore, ΚΔ, MI are parallel, and, as
 ΔΑ is to AK, that is, KA <is> to AI, so IA

 will be in proportion to AM, because of

 the similarity of the triangles.

 65 τριγώνων.

 τέσσαρες άρα αί ΔΑ, AK, AI, AM
 έξης άνάλογόν είσιν. καί έστιν ή
 AM ϊση τή Γ, έπεί καί τή AB.

 Therefore, four <straight lines> ΔΑ, AK
 AI, AM are in continued proportion, and
 AM is equal to Γ, since it <is> also <equal
 to> AB.

 [6] δύο άρα δοϋεισών τών ΑΔ, Γ δύο

 [6] Therefore, two mean proportionals AK

 70 μέσαι άνάλογον ηύρηνται αί ΑΚ, ΑΙ.

 AI have been found of two given <straight
 lines> ΑΔ, Γ.

 a We read της ΑΠ εύϋείας in the manuscripts, but Heiberg corrected the text following the Basiliensis

 edition as τή ΑΠ εύι}εία. ή εύι)εΐα is a better correction, because the verb ποιέωΛο make usually has a

 subject, which is a mathematical object. This correction is of no consequence to the usual interpretation

 of the passage

 b This relative pronoun is rather unusual in this form (the relative όστις is the usual form but not very

 frequent). A feminine article (with an implicit noun «trace») could be argued to be a good alternative but

 at the price of a grammatical and pragmatic issue: the phrase ή περιαγομένη < γραμμή >, «the <trace>
 drawn around» (i.e. the intersection of the conical and the semi-cylindrical surfaces), has no explicit

 antecedent and no previous definition

 c AB is a chord of the circle, but the text does not say so explicitly. It is deduced easily from the fact that A

 and Β are letters contained in the name of the circle, ΑΒΔΖ. The use of the verb έναρμόσΟωΛο fit

 probably points to a quotation from Euclid, Elementa I v. 1

 d Translations usually read «as from Δ towards Β», but the use of ώς + preposition is a typical late use that

 only reinforces the preposition

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its..

 179

 Λ
 Λ

 Π

 Fig. 1 Three-dimensional view of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, following the planar rep
 resentation of Fig. 2. The point O, in the prolongation of line ΠΔ, has been omitted as well as line Γ

 The translation is very close to the Greek text, almost literal3 and so it may seem

 a bit odd in some passages. I have also reproduced the figure as it appears in the
 manuscripts (see Fig. 2) and a modern reading of it (see Fig. 1).

 The Arabic tradition has also transmitted a text quite close to Eutocius' text. This
 version appears as proposition 16 of the Verba filiorum, a geometric treatise by the
 three brothers Banü Müsä (Baghdad, s. IX). The older version of the text is the Latin
 translation of Gerard of Cremona (s. XII).4 The structures of Eutocius and the Banü

 Müsä's texts are nearly the same, and their steps have nearly the same order, except

 for one small detail at the end of the solution. However, the sources used by the two
 texts do not seem to be exactly the same, since there are two fundamental differences
 in the Banü Müsä's text:

 • The text attributes the construction to Menelaus (first century BC) and does not

 mention Archytas.5

 • The stated purpose of the construction of two mean proportionals is the search
 for the edge of a cube, given its volume, and its use for doubling the cube is not

 3 Not only at a lexical level; I have tried to preserve grammatical categories as well (translating verbs into
 verbs, nouns into nouns, and so on, and even on lower grammatical levels, e.g. participles into participles).
 I have tried to preserve the figurae etymologicae, so that words with the same root are translated using
 the same common root: e.g. γράφω/γραμμή, to trace (verb)/trace (noun; its usual translation is «line»);
 αγω /περιάγω /άντιπεριάγω, to draw/to draw around/to draw around in the opposite direction. The trans
 lations of Knorr (1989, pp. 102-107) and Thomas (1951, pp. 284-289) [and Euclide (2007, pp. 82-83), in
 Italian] are also very close to the original text, van der Waerden (1954, pp. 150-151) is a paraphrase, and
 Heath (1921, vol. I, pp. 246-249) and Knorr (1986, pp. 50-52) are commentaries on the text.

 4 Edited and commented on by Clagett (1964-1984, vol. I, chapter 4, pp. 223-367). There is a detailed
 comparative analysis of both texts in Knorr (1989, pp. 100-110).

 5 In fact, the Latin text of Gerard of Cremona reads «Mileus» but the most likely reading from the Arabic
 text is «Menelaus» (Clagett 1964—1984, vol. I, p. 365, prop. 16, 12).

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 2 Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, as shown in manuscripts

 mentioned. It is a more modern way to enunciate the problem: more general and
 more algebraic.6

 3.1 Parts of the text

 Greek geometrical treatises transmitted from Antiquity can be divided up into propo
 sitions. Each proposition usually sets out a geometrical property, which is proved
 thereupon. The proof usually includes a constructive process (whose outcome is a
 geometrical construction) and a demonstrative process (whose outcome is a demon
 stration). Both processes are mixed throughout the proof.7

 Some kinds of propositions are called problems, and we can recognize a problem

 either by its content or by its form. A problem requires the construction of some kind of

 6 In this case, the goal is to find two mean proportionals between V (whose cube root is sought) and 1. If

 m\, m2 are the two mean proportionals, then: ^ Therefore, · ^ · ^ = (τγ^Ϋ■ So,

 V = m\, i.e. m2 is the cube root of V, its side. The setting up of the problem as shown in the Banü Müsä's
 text is highly unlikely to be of Greek origin, because V is a volume and m2 is a length; Greek Mathematics
 never build proportions with non-homogeneous magnitudes (numbers, lengths and volumes). In fact, the

 presence of the unity in the Arabic text allows us to suggest that the Banü Müsä are thinking of the numbers
 that are the result of the measures, and this approach is impossible from the Greek point of view. At any
 rate, the Banü Müsä only explicitly attribute the finding of two mean proportionals to Menelaus, not its use
 in the extraction of the «side of a cube».

 7 Proclus (s. ν BC), In Primis Euclidis, pp. 203.1-207.25, shows the canonical division into parts of a
 Greek mathematical proposition (see also Netz 1999; Euclide 2007, pp. 259-312). We do not strictly follow
 this division, although some of the terms I use are identical to the English translation of Proclus terms.
 The division into parts I use is based upon the form and the content of Eutocius' text. Therefore, words
 such as proof.\ demonstration, construction and statement have the usual sense and not the technical sense
 in Proclus' division. Only the terms proposition and problem are used in its technical sense, and for this

 reason, they are written in italics in this section.

 <ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 181

 Fig. 3 Initial Configuration of geometrical elements as described in step [2] of the text

 geometrical configuration, and the statement of the problem always includes a phrase of

 this kind: δεΐ+ infinitive, «it should be found [...]», as in our text. Therefore, Archytas'

 text is formally written as a problem and [1] could be considered the statement of the

 problem.

 The group of the following three steps, i.e. steps [2]—[4], which I will refer to as
 Archytas' Construction,8 builds two configurations of geometrical elements (hence
 forth, Initial Configuration and Final Configuration) with some common elements,

 and the way to transform the Initial Configuration into the Final Configuration (hence
 forth, Transition):

 [2] Initial Configuration (see Fig. 3): there is a circle ΑΒΔΖ of a given diameter
 ΑΔ, a chord on it AB of a given length and a tangent to the circle in Δ. AB is
 produced to cut the tangent in Π. BEZ is a chord parallel to ΠΔ. A half-cylinder

 is drawn perpendicular to semicircle ΑΒΔ, and a semicircle perpendicular to the
 semicircle AB Δ (henceforth, semicircle SC) is also drawn on the plane face of

 the half-cylinder.9
 From a formal point of view, the text uses the imperative form, passive in most

 cases, to introduce the geometrical elements. This is a well-known characteristic
 of Greek mathematical style (see Acerbi 2012).

 [3] Transition (see Fig. 4): this step shows how to obtain the Final Configuration from

 the Initial Configuration. First of all, a motion that does not generate any surface is

 described: the semicircle SC rotates from its position in the Initial Configuration,

 revolving around A but remaining always perpendicular to the circle ΑΒΔ. Then,
 triangle ΑΔΠ is revolved around ΑΔ and generates a cone. Derived from these
 two motions (the one of the semicircle SC and the other of the triangle ΑΔΠ),
 the curved traces that allow point Κ to be found (only mentioned as «a certain

 8 Henceforth and for clarity, I define explicitly some geometrical configurations or manipulations. I always
 use terms in italics and initial capital letters to denote them.

 9 This semicircle, like the other geometrical elements, is explicitly mentioned in the text (see line 13R), but

 does not appear in the diagram of the transmitted text, and probably for that reason scholars have ignored
 SC and do not include it in their figures.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 182

 R. Masiä

 Fig. 4 Two frames (from left to right) of the Transition (step [3]), with the trace of the semicircle on the

 half-cylinder in bold, and also in bold the trace of line ΑΠ on the half-cylinder

 point», line 28R) are introduced: the «cylindrical trace» (lines 16R-20R) and the
 «<straight line> drawn around» (lines 22R-26R).10 The semicircle with diameter
 ZB «traced» by point Β (line 29R-31R) is also introduced.
 From a formal point of view, there are no imperative forms; all forms of verbs
 in the Transition are in the future. This is not a form frequently used in Greek
 mathematics, but it is not unusual.11

 [4] Final Configuration (see Fig. 5): this configuration shows the elements as they

 are represented in the diagram transmitted by Eutocius' text, as the text explicitly
 claims in two cases.12 The most important difference between the Final Config
 uration and the Initial Configuration is the position of semicircle SC. The exact
 «position» of this semicircle in the Final Configuration is defined as follows: «at

 the place of convergence of the traces» (line 33R). It is apparent that this «place»
 is the one mentioned a few lines before linked to a «certain point» (line 28R) in

 which «<the line> drawn around will concur with the cylindrical trace». This fact

 is confirmed a few lines after (line 38R): «let the point of the said convergence be

 K». The final position of the rotating triangle ΑΔΠ is defined in the same way.13

 Both «positions» are used to find the point of intersection, called K. Next, BZ is
 mentioned again to identify the intersection of SC and circle ΒΔΖΑ. A perpen
 dicular from Κ to the base semicircle AB Δ is also traced to find I. IA intersects

 10 That is to say, the rotating ΑΠ. An alternative reading could be the <«trace> drawn around», i.e. the
 intersection of the cylindrical and the conical surfaces, as discussed in note 4 (Fig. 4 also shows this trace).

 11 For example, when examining all verbal tokens in Archimedes De Sphaera et Cylindro (see Masiä
 2012, p. 204), only 5.2% of them are future verbal tokens. Euclid and Apollonius probably use more or
 less the same percentage of future verbal tokens. It is usually used in the apodosis of conditional clauses
 like the one in lines 22R-26R.

 12 «Let the moved semicircle have a position [...] as the <position> of the <semicircle> ΔΚΑ», line
 33R-35R; «let the triangle [...] <have a position as> that of ΔΛΑ», lines 36R-38R.

 13 It is worth noting, again, that the diameter of the rotating semicircle SC is denoted in the same way
 in both configurations, Initial and Final. But the rotating triangle ΑΔΠ is denoted differently in these
 configurations: ΑΔΠ and AAA. We can assume that the semicircle subsists during the motion and the
 rotating movement of SC does not generate a surface, while the line ΑΛ could be a line on the explicitly
 defined conical surface; it has different names in the two different positions: Α Α, ΑΠ. Then, the conical
 surface is also indirectly used to find the solution.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 183

 Λ Λ

 Fig. 5 Final Configuration of geometrical elements as described in step [4] of the text

 BZ in Θ and ΑΛ intersects the semicircle BMZ in Μ. Finally, ΚΔ, MI, ΜΘ are
 traced.

 From a formal point of view, the text returns to the imperative form to introduce

 the new elements, except for the future form πεσεΐτοα /will fall, in 41.14

 Step [5] contains the proof that the points Κ, I of the triangle ΑΚΔ at the mentioned

 «position» solve the problem. It is a quite regular and short proof. It begins with a usual
 sentence έπεί ... άρα/since ... therefore, and is introduced by oüv/now. As usual in
 this part of the proposition, the number of logical particles is higher than in other

 parts.

 the verbal form, as is usual.

 Step [6] shows the conclusion, almost repeating the wording of [I ], but changing

 After the analysis of the transmitted text, I will show in the next two sections:

 • Some ideas for unfolding the process of construction and proof of Archytas' solu

 tion for doubling the cube and its mathematical requirements. These explanations

 follow very closely the transmitted text of Eutocius, but my goal goes further: to

 offer a global account of the solution, including its plausible origins and the steps
 whereby it was discovered. Thus, it contains considerations not mentioned in our
 sources; again, I only try to counterbalance some scholarly ideas or prejudices
 about Archytas' solution for doubling the cube, and not to show what Archytas
 was thinking of when he developed his solution; it is actually impossible to dis
 cover Archytas' thought processes and historiographically misleading to try to do
 so.

 14 The sentence with the future form is a parenthetical commentary introducing a property of the straight
 line from Κ (it will be perpendicular to some plane), justified with a postponed explanation.

 "0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 184

 R. Masiä

 • Some scholarly approaches to Archytas' solution for doubling the cube and, also,

 in the case of the two-dimensional reconstructions, their historical origins.

 4 Some reconstructions based on the new reading

 I will develop two approaches in order to provide a plausible reconstruction of Archy

 tas' solution for doubling the cube:

 1st A fully two-dimensional approach: an account of what I call Archytas' Solution,

 using easy geometrical tools.

 2nd A three-dimensional approach: rewinding the motion of the elements of what

 I called Archytas' Construction, from the Final Configuration to the Initial

 Configuration, thereby recovering some ideas in the background of Archytas'

 solution for doubling the cube. The Initial Configuration will be the main key

 of the reconstruction, but also the rewriting of the problem in terms of locus

 problems.

 Before I develop these two approaches, I will list all the Greek mathematical tools that

 my approach to the solution needs.

 4.1 Mathematical tools

 Only some basic technical and conceptual tools, which were available in Archytas'

 day, are required. They are actually reducible to the determination of the simple mean

 proportional between two magnitudes and some elements concerning the geometry

 of the sphere. More specifically, the reconstruction of Archytas' solution for doubling

 the cube that I propose requires knowing only:

 1. One criterion for the similarity of triangles, namely the proportionality of sides:

 two triangles are similar if their sides are proportional.

 2. The properties of a right-angled triangle inscribed in a semicircle, one of the

 oldest and most successful configurations of Greek geometry: if ΑΚΔ is a triangle

 Fig. 6 Archytas' Simple

 Triangle, i.e. a semicircle with

 an inscribed right-angled

 triangle whose hypotenuse is the

 diameter and where the height of

 the triangle is KI

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its... 185

 Fig. 7 Archytas' Triangle, i.e.
 two right-angled triangles
 inscribed in two semicircles, MI

 and ΔΚ parallel and KI
 perpendicular to ΑΔ. In an
 Archytas' Triangle, AK and AI

 are the two mean proportionals
 of ΑΔ and AM

 inscribed in a semicircle and ΑΔ is the diameter,15 then ΑΚΔ is a right-angled

 triangle and ΑΚΔ, AIK and ΚΙΔ are similar triangles. Furthermore, ^ = |^.16
 I call this geometrical configuration Archytas' Simple Triangle (see Fig. 6).

 3. Two properties of the sphere: (a) a great circle of the sphere17 divides the sphere

 into two equal hemispheres; (b) any plane perpendicular to such a great circle

 intersects the sphere in two equal semicircles (and, obviously, the diameter that

 divides these two semicircles is a chord of the great circle).18

 4.2 Two-dimensional approaches

 As we have seen above (Sect. 2), Archytas' solution for doubling the cube comes
 down to the search for the two mean proportionals of two lines a and b, where a > b,

 based on the configuration of three-dimensional elements as shown in Fig. 1. The

 solution is derived from the triangles inscribed into the semicircle ΑΜΚΔΙ, as shown

 in two-dimensional Fig. 7.

 In other words, let there be a diagram ΑΙΔΚΜ with right-angled triangles and

 semicircles AIM and ΑΔΚ (see Fig. 7, henceforth Archytas' Triangle). Then AI, AK

 are two mean proportionals of ΑΔ, AM, i.e. in modern notation:19

 15 I use the same letters A, I, Κ, Δ used in other figures, but the new figure only shows a general right-angled
 triangle inscribed into a semicircle.

 16 Aristotle, some decades after Archytas, uses this configuration as an example in Metaphysica and
 Analytica posteriora (see Euclide 2007, pp. 118-119). Euclid's Elementa discusses the elements of this
 configuration in books III and VI.

 17 A great circle of a sphere is the intersection of the sphere with a plane which passes through the centre

 of the sphere.

 18 Solid geometry is known from very early in Greek geometry, because of its relationship with astronomy.

 It is also known that the division of the circle into two equal semicircles by a diameter is attributed to Thales

 of Miletus (s. Vi BC). This result can be easily translated to the three-dimensional space: after the creation

 of a sphere by rotating a circle around one of its diameters, the initial circle is a great circle of the sphere,

 and it is apparent because of the construction that the great circle divides the sphere into two equal parts.

 Property 3b) could easily be derived from arguments of symmetry and the application of Thales' property
 of the circle.

 19 As we have said, MI is perpendicular to AK, IK to ΑΔ and ΔΚ to KA. Therefore, ΑΔΚ, AIK and AIM

 are similar right-angled triangles (two right-angled triangles are similar when they have a common angle

 in addition to the right angle). And similar triangles have proportional pairs of corresponding sides.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 186 R. Masiä

 Fig. 8 Illustration of how to
 obtain two mean proportionals
 using the triangle ΑΚΔΙ of
 Fig. 6 and expression 1. The
 outcome is equivalent to the

 κ

 diagram of the solution for

 doubling the cube attributed to
 Plato by Eutocius

 ΑΔ _ AK _ AI
 AK ~ ~M ~ AM

 I will refer to the solution of the search for the two mean proportionals by means of
 Archytas' Triangle when ΑΔ and AM are given in length, as Archytas' Solution.20
 Two questions could be considered:

 • How could Archytas' Triangle have been derived?
 • How can Archytas' Solution be obtained? (i.e. Archytas' Triangle given two data)

 4.2.1 How to obtain Archytas' Triangle

 I show in this section some simple considerations that lead from Archytas' Simple
 Triangle (see Fig. 6) to Archytas' Triangle (see Fig. 7).

 As mentioned, Archytas' Simple Triangle shows two similar triangles with a com

 mon side, the geometric pendant of the simple mean proportional, ^ · There is
 another triangle similar to both triangles, the triangle ΑΔΚ. The similarity of the three

 triangles is a perfect stimulus for the search for the two mean proportionals (which
 requires three ratios): we can take all the possible combinations of two correspond
 ing sides to find two mean proportionals. The fact that the three triangles are similar
 assures us that:

 t ak _ Ai _ κι
 ' ■ ΚΔ — ΚΙ ~~ ΙΔ
 9 ΑΔ — AK — Μ
 AK — ΑΙ — ΚΙ

 ο Α Α ΚΔ _ ΑΚ
 ΚΔ — ΙΔ ~ ΚΙ

 21 See p. 2.

 Springer

 Each expression can be easily transformed to obtain a continued proportion and,
 therefore, to obtain two mean proportionals.21 The second equality of expression 1,

 = γ^, could be part of a continued proportion. In contrast, the first equality of

 20 It is worth noting that Archytas' solution for doubling the cube is one way of finding in three-dimensional
 space Archytas' Solution, i.e. it is one Archytas' Solution.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its... 187

 Fig. 9 Illustration of how to
 obtain two mean proportionals
 using the triangle ΑΚΔΙ of
 Fig. 6 and expression 2. The
 outcome is Archytas' Triangle

 κ

 expression 1, ^ , should be rewritten as ^ ^, to obtain the two mean propor
 tionals: ^ or analogously, AI and KI are the two means proportionals of
 χ and IA. How do we find χ geometrically? Taking into account the geometrical struc
 ture behind the second equality (a common side of two similar triangles and the angles

 between the two hypotenuses are right angles), we can deduce that the geometric struc

 ture of the first equality should be represented in the same way, as shown in Fig. 8.22

 The first equality of expression 2 could be part of a continued proportion. In contrast,

 the second equality, should be modified in this way: ~ Therefore,

 AK and AI are the two mean proportionals of ΑΔ and x, because ^ ^.
 The geometric structure behind the first equality is as follows: triangles ΑΔΚ, AKI;

 the second clipped onto the first; the shortest side of the first matches the hypotenuse
 of the second; the longest side of the second is perpendicular to the hypotenuse of
 the first. Therefore, this structure should be repeated for the triangles of the second
 equality, AKI, AIM23: the second clipped onto the first; the shortest side of the first

 matches the hypotenuse of the second; the longest side of the second is perpendicular

 to the hypotenuse of the first. In this way, we get Archytas' Triangle (see Fig. 9).

 The third expression is equivalent to the second, because its structure uses similar

 elements of this kind: hyp°ilj"Llse. The geometrical configuration of the solution will be,
 then, equivalent to the solution derived from expression 2.

 In short, from simple geometrical considerations concerning the simple mean pro
 portional, Archytas' Triangle24 has been derived. However, Archytas' Triangle is not
 the goal (i.e. the goal is not a geometrical configuration that shows two such mean
 proportionals), but how to obtain an Archytas' Triangle when ΑΔ and AM are given,
 namely Archytas' Solution.

 4.2.2 How to obtain Archytas' Solution

 Two ways to obtain Archytas' Solution, both starting with an Archytas' Simple Tri
 angle with two given sides, ΑΔ, AM (i.e. a right-angled triangle with the given sides

 22 This figure turns out to be equivalent to the diagram of the solution attributed to Plato by Eutocius in the

 same text where Archytas' solution for doubling the cube appears (see Knorr 1986, pp. 50-66; Archimedes
 1910-1915, vol. Ill, 56.13-58.14).

 23 Assuming that IM = χ.

 24 And even the construction behind the solution attributed to Plato by Eutocius for doubling the cube.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 188

 R. Masiä

 Μ Κ

 Fig. 10 Initial position of some
 Fig. 10 Initial position of some
 geometrical elements to find
 geometrical elements to find

 Archytas' Solution by collapsing
 Archytas' Solution by collapsing
 both triangles of Archytas'
 both triangles of Archytas'

 Triangle into a unique triangle
 Triangle into a unique triangle
 with given hypotenuse and side.
 with given hypotenuse and side.

 It turns out to be Archytas'
 It turns out to be Archytas'
 Simple Triangle. The given data
 Simple Triangle. The given data
 are AM, ΑΔ
 are AM, ΑΔ

 A

 Fig. 11 On the left, a step in the rotation of one of the coincident triangles, ΑΚΔ, of Fig. 10 in order to
 get an Archytas' Triangle, ΑΜΚΔΙ, on the right

 inscribed into a semicircle) will be shown. In both approaches, during the manipula
 tion of the Archytas' Simple Triangle, only one configuration of geometrical elements
 turns out to be an Archytas' Triangle, and therefore an Archytas' Solution.25 We have

 textual evidence of one of them in Archytas' text transmitted by Eutocius, as we will
 see in Sect. 4.3.1.

 The first solution begins with the two circles and the two triangles of Archytas'
 Triangle (see Fig. 7) collapsed into a single circle and a single triangle (see Fig. 10). It
 is actually an Archytas' Simple Triangle with given AM and ΑΔ, adding the triangle
 AIM, which is the same as ΑΔΚ. KI' in Fig. 10 stands for K1 in Fig. 7.

 What changes does the figure need to undergo to become an Archytas' Solution?

 Obviously, I and I' should match on ΑΔ,26 while Κ should remain on AM prolonged,
 and KI' and MI should remain perpendicular to ΑΔ and AM, respectively.

 A simple way to do this is to rotate the Archytas' Simple Triangle ΑΔΚ around

 A.27 What is going on during the rotation (see Fig. 11)?

 25 As we will see in Sect. 5.1, there are a number of historical and historiographical two-dimensional
 approaches to the solution of the two mean proportionals. All of them generate a curve: for each curve,
 every point on it generates an Archytas' Triangle and only one of them is Archytas' Solution. Therefore,
 these approaches are methodologically far from the Archytas' Solutions that I am ready to explain.

 26 In an Archytas' Solution Kl' and MI should intersect in I = I'.

 27 It is evident that the triangle that solves the problem should have a lesser angle ΔΑΜ. When making
 this rotation, the angle is reduced. It should be remembered that the lengths of AM, ΑΔ are given and this
 motion keeps AM and the length of ΑΔ the same.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 189

 Fig. 12 Initial Configuration to
 Fig. 12 Initial Configuration to
 find Archytas' Solution by
 find Archytas' Solution by

 collapsing the triangle ΑΚΔ of
 collapsing the triangle ΑΚΔ of
 Archytas' Triangle into a single
 Archytas' Triangle into a single
 segment ΑΔ (i.e. Κ = Δ). The
 segment ΑΔ (i.e. Κ = Δ). The
 given data are AM, ΑΔ
 given data are AM, ΑΔ

 • The line ΑΔ rotates around A, but MI should remain perpendicular to AK. Then,

 the new I is the intersection of the rotated ΑΔ and the fixed ΜΔ.

 • The semicircle ΑΚΔ also rotates around A, but Κ should remain on AM prolonged.
 Then, the new Κ is the intersection of the rotated semicircle ΑΚΔ and the initial

 • The new I' is found on the rotated ΑΔ and on the new KI\ which is perpendicular

 AM prolonged.

 to ΑΔ.

 The rotation should stop when I and I' match, as shown in Fig. 11, right.28

 Another possibility for obtaining Archytas' Solution is even simpler: the starting
 point is, again, Archytas' Simple Triangle with given data ΑΔ and AM (see Fig. 12).
 But in this case, Κ and I coincide with Δ: the semicircle AMI contains the right-angled

 triangle AMI with given side AM; the triangle ΑΔΚ is collapsed into a given line
 ΑΔ.

 If we move I towards A, the new Κ is found drawing the perpendicular from I to

 ΑΔ and cutting off the semicircle ΑΜΔ.29 Thus, we obtain the triangle ΑΚΔ. Then,
 the semicircle of diameter IA could be drawn. The new AM is found in this semicircle,

 because it has a given length. Thus we obtain the triangle AMI (see Fig. 13). Archytas'
 Solution is found when Α, Μ, Κ are aligned obtaining Archytas' Triangle.30 We will

 see in Sect. 4.3.1 that this configuration could be derived easily from the transmitted

 text of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube.31

 4.3 Three-dimensional approaches

 Archytas' Construction, as mentioned in Sect. 3.1, is a group of three steps (Ini
 tial Configuration, Transition and Final Configuration) needed to obtain Archytas'

 28 See this interactive diagram: http://www.geogebratube.org/student/ml 19505. The use of these interac
 tive diagrams is merely illustrative and facilitates the reading of our arguments; they do not introduce any
 supplementary (visual) argument.

 29 Or, alternatively, Κ can be moved around the circumference and the new I is found drawing the perpen
 dicular from Κ to ΑΔ, and cutting off te line ΑΔ.

 30 See this interactive diagram: http://tube.geogebra.org/student/m208427.

 31 And it is also in the background of Becker's curve (see Sect. 5.1).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 190

 R. Masiä

 Κ κ

 Fig. 13 Steps in the transition (left) from Fig. 12 to Archytas' Triangle (right). I moves from Δ towards A

 solution for doubling the cube. 1 present two approaches to the proof, the first of them

 fitting the wording of the transmitted text and the three steps just mentioned; for this
 reason I call it a Historical Reconstruction. The three diagrams are different from
 the diagrams drawn from the literal reading of the transmitted text, because they are

 deduced, first, by rewinding the motion from the Final Configuration backwards and,

 then, moving forward again from the new Initial Configuration. In any case, I maintain
 the names of Initial Configuration, Transition and Final Configuration for the steps
 of the reconstruction.

 4.3.1 A historical reconstruction

 As said before, the Initial Configuration of the reconstruction is obtained by rewinding

 the motion of the semicircle ΑΚΔ from the Final Configuration (see Fig. 5)32 to the
 Initial Configuration: after the rewinding, triangles AMI and ΑΚΔ are collapsed into

 a triangle and a line, and following the explicit traces of Κ, I, M, it is easy to see that
 both points Κ and I coincide with Δ, and Μ is the intersection of both semicircles.
 The new Initial Configuration, then, shows two intersecting semicircles that are per
 pendicular to each other, ΑΜΔ, BMZ, and also perpendicular to a circle, ΑΒΔ, and
 points Δ, Κ, I coincide (see Fig. 14). I have appended a sphere that circumscribes the
 circle and semicircles.33 Therefore, the original configuration could be an Archytas'

 32 The line ΑΠ and the cone are not shown in the figure to simplify the diagram. In fact, the cone is
 implicitly shown by the generatrix AM and the circle BMZ.

 33 The sphere is not in the transmitted text and is actually unnecessary for the technical details of the
 demonstration shown in it (the entire explanation I will develop does not need the sphere). But one of
 our goals is to find some ideas that may be behind the solution. It seems apparent that the starting point
 (temporally and logically) of the demonstration is this new Initial Configuration: the three intersecting
 and perpendicular (semi)circles. From a historical point of view, we cannot go any further. But we can
 try to explain where this Initial Configuration comes from. An explanation is that an Archytas' Triangle
 with given sides could be circumscribed into a sphere, in the search for an Archytas' Solution. Then, the
 sphere is only useful for my justification of the Initial Configuration, but not in the development of the
 rationale. And this justification is based on this argument: it is unlikely that whoever invented Archytas'
 solution for doubling the cube did not see the sphere in this new Initial Configuration; in addition, as a
 seminal idea, it seems to be easier to imagine an Archytas' Triangle inscribed into a sphere than the three
 (semi)circles mentioned. I postulate the sphere with the inscribed Archytas' Triangle to be previous to the
 figure with the intersection of circle and semicircles. That is, of course, a matter of opinion. But, from this

 point on, the sphere is irrelevant and could easily be removed from the description of what is happening
 with Archytas' construction and the demonstration (although it is more difficult to explain why the inventor

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 191

 Μ Μ

 Fig. 14 Initial Configuration once rewound from the Final Configuration as described in the transmitted
 text

 Simple Triangle inscribed into a sphere, with ΑΔ the diameter and AM a side and
 perpendicular to a great circle of the sphere.

 Once a plausible Initial Configuration has been recovered from the backwards
 motion, we can come up with some clues to explain how to derive Archytas' Con

 struction from this right-angled triangle inscribed into a sphere. Whatever the motion,
 Μ has two restrictions: AM is a given length and MI must be perpendicular to AM.
 These conditions have some obvious geometric translations in terms of locus prob
 lems: the first condition is satisfied when Μ is on the surface of a sphere of centre
 A and radius AM; the second condition, when the triangle AMI is perpendicular to
 the great circle and its base is a chord of the great circle and Μ is on the surface of
 the sphere. In summary, Α, Μ, I must be on the sphere: Μ on a semicircle ZMB on
 the sphere perpendicular to the hypotenuse of the triangle; A and I on the great circle
 ABZ.

 On the other hand, neither Δ nor Κ have to be on the hemisphere. Therefore,

 Archytas' Simple Triangle may rotate freely on the great circle, with centre A and radius

 ΑΔ, with the triangle perpendicular to this circle.34 At every moment of the rotational
 motion of Archytas' Simple Triangle (see Fig. 15), there is another semicircle AMI
 in the rotating semicircle ΑΚΔ. Κ must be on the rotating semicircle and KI must be

 perpendicular to ΑΔ: Fig. 13 shows two steps of this two-dimensional configuration in

 the plane of the semicircle AK Δ; it is precisely the 2nd two-dimensional reconstruction

 as described in Sect. 4.2.2. The figure shows two right-angled triangles, ΑΔΚ and AMI;
 KI is perpendicular to ΑΔ and tangent to the semicircle AMI. While Δ moves around
 A, I moves from Δ towards A until Κ, M, A are aligned; at this precise moment,

 Footnote 33 continued

 of the demonstration performs certain motions). Finally, the large circle of centre A and radius ΑΔ is added
 to help the reader to link Figs. 14, 15 and 16.

 34 The rotational motion is suggested by the restriction on I, which must be on the great circle. It is worth

 noting that the triangle must stay perpendicular to the great circle during the entire process.

 ® Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192

 R. Masiä

 Fig. IS Two frames of the Transition

 Fig. 16 Final Configuration, when AMK are aligned
 Fig. 16 Final Configuration, when AMK are aligned

 Archytas' Triangle is shown (see Fig. 16). The sequence of the changes inside the

 circle ΑΚΔ is implicit, but we can reconstruct the motion following the traces of Κ
 and Μ explicitly mentioned in lines 27R and 29R.35

 If we continue the process of translating the restrictions into the language of loci,
 the condition «ΙΚ must be perpendicular to ΑΔ» is translated as «I, Κ are on the
 surface of a (semi)cylinder of base the great circle of the sphere». And, finally, the
 last condition «Α, Μ, Κ must be aligned» is translated as «ΑΚ is a line on the cone
 defined by AM».36

 In short, the problem is solved with a simple sequence: first, inscribing Archytas'

 Simple Triangle into a sphere, with hypotenuse, the diameter ΑΔ, and a side, AM

 (almost the Initial Configuration of Archytas' Construction)·, second, rotating the tri
 angle on a great circle that contains ΑΔ, holding the point A. This sequence fully
 solves the problem when points Α, Μ, Κ are aligned; at this precise moment, Archy

 tas' Solution is shown. That is to say, there is no need to have in mind, from the very
 beginning, all the elements of Archytas' Construction to solve the problem; in fact,

 35 See this interactive diagram: http://tube.geogebra.org/student/m210965.

 36 It is worth noting, as mentioned before (see step [4] and Sect. 3.1), that the text explicitly underlines the
 fact that the last step of the process reads: Α, Μ, Κ should be aligned.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 193

 the Final Configuration of the construction is the outcome of imposing the geometri

 cal restrictions derived from the motion from Archytas' Simple Triangle to Archytas'

 Triangle?1 The only object we have to have in mind from the very beginning is an

 Archytas' Simple Triangle inscribed into a (hemi)sphere, and this figure is almost what

 we can find in the Initial Configuration of Archytas' Construction.

 4.3.2 A sequence of discovery

 The fact that an Archytas' Simple Triangle appears in the (new) Initial Configuration

 leads us to think that the implicit goal of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube

 was to find an Archytas' Solution from an Archytas' Simple Triangle with given sides.

 Then, we can assume that Archytas' Triangle was known to be the solution, perhaps by

 planar means (in Sect. 4.2.2,1 have given simple explanations without any documental

 support).

 Having in mind this main goal, a simple way to order some ideas in a tempo

 ral sequence of discovery of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube could be as
 follows:

 1. Discovery of Archytas' Triangle as a solution the two mean proportionals problem

 (for example, as shown in Sect. 4.2.1).

 2. Planar manipulation of Archytas' Simple Triangle to obtain Archytas' Solution: it

 is only necessary to move the two triangles inside the semicircle, beginning with

 Archytas' Simple Triangle and moving I from its initial position to find Archytas'

 Solution (as shown in Sect. 4.2.2, 2nd approach).

 3. The bright idea of placing Archytas' Simple Triangle inscribed into a (hemi)sphere.

 4. Rotation of Archytas' Simple Triangle which produces the same two-dimensional

 sequence (see step 2) that drives into Archytas' Solution.

 5. Translating the condition of the planar solution (Α, Μ, Κ must be aligned) into the

 language of loci: the cylindrical trace should intersect the rotating generatrix of
 the cone.

 We only have no textual evidence of steps 1 and 3. Step 3 does not need to have textual

 evidence, and even no logical explanation, precisely because it is a bright idea; the

 use of bright ideas does not leave witnesses outside the personal notes or drawings

 37 In other words, the entire process is a sequence of geometrization of all restrictions (in the form of a

 sphere, a cone, a cylinder and a semicircle), that is to say, restrictions are reduced geometrically:

 • «AM and ΑΔ are given in length» and «AMI is a right-angled triangle» is equivalent to the fact that

 the triangle is inscribed into a sphere of radius ΑΔ, perpendicular to one great circle, and AM is a side

 • «ΑΔΚ is a right-angled triangle» is equivalent to the fact that it is inscribed on the semicircle ΑΔΚ,

 (i.e. generatrix) of a right cone.

 in the Initial Configuration.

 • «IK is perpendicular to ΑΔ» is equivalent to the fact that IK is on the semicylinder.

 • Finally, «Α, Μ, Κ are aligned» is equivalent to the fact that Κ is on the cone. This is the last step of the

 process, achieved by rotating the semicircle ΑΚΔ.

 This kind of process of geometrization of all restrictions is usual in so-called locus problems (see Euclide

 2007, pp. 83-85). It is worth noting that the sphere disappears from the demonstration because it is actually
 unnecessary once the other conditions have been satisfied.

 ® Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 194

 R. Masiä

 of the mathematician.38 It must be stressed that this reconstruction minimizes the

 bright idea component of the solution. Some reflections about step 1 are developed in
 Sect. 4.2.1.

 In the end, it is all about delimiting the extent of the bright idea. Scholars seem

 to have decided, implicitly or explicitly, that the bright idea is Archytas' solution

 as a whole.39 Besides being a poor hermeneutical approach, it has a serious flaw: it

 overlooks the Initial Configuration, almost explicitly mentioned in the text, and its

 evolution.40 In other words, if Archytas' Construction was revealed to the mathemati

 cian as a whole, what is the role of the Initial Configuration and its evolution? Could

 they appear by chance, and the mathematician not be aware of them before he had

 the bright ideal If this is true, he was aware of a highly complex three-dimensional

 configuration without being aware of some simple two-dimensional figures (whose

 elements are explicitly mentioned in the text).

 In any case, all these considerations go further than the limits of the text, because we

 have no sources to support some of them. Therefore, the reconstruction or approach

 must be regarded cum granus salis\4i in fact, my only goal with this approaches is to

 counterbalance some modern approaches to the issue (see Sect. 5), and not to try to

 discover Archytas' thoughts.

 4.3.3 Another reconstruction

 In this short section, I present another reconstruction of Archytas' solution for doubling

 the cube, very close to the historical one. There are two goals of this reconstruction:

 first, to show the fact that the Initial Configuration of Archytas' Construction is a

 productive configuration; second, to highlight the difference between historical and
 non-historical reconstructions, even in reconstructions which are very similar.

 The Initial Configuration is the same, but with the point Κ displaced from Δ to Μ

 (see Fig. 17). Of course, it is not a historical reconstruction because, after rotating the
 semicircle, the trace of Κ does not coincide with the trace described in Archytas' text:

 now, Κ moves on the surface of the cone when the semicircle ΑΚΔ is rotated, because
 it is the intersection of this semicircle with the line AM. In addition, the evolution of

 the figures on the plane ΑΚΔ is the one discussed in the first approach of Sect. 4.2.2
 (see Figs. 10, 11)

 The Final Configuration of this reconstruction is the same Final Configuration (see

 Fig. 16). The only difference, again, is the trace of Κ and, therefore, the evolution

 38 It is worth noting that there are no such texts (private notes or drawings by mathematicians) in the

 Ancient Greek mathematical corpus. There are not even any original mathematical texts, but only later

 editions made by scholars centuries after the mathematician's death.

 39 With differing degrees: van der Waerden is perhaps the most explicit, while in Euclide (2007) this
 suggestion is only implicit. The general wonder that produces Archytas' solution for doubling the cube is

 due, mainly, to this implicit decision.

 40 Namely Archytas' Simple Triangle of the Initial Configuration, and the evolution of the two triangles
 inscribed into the semicircle.

 41 As Burkert remarks (1972, p. 303): «Still and all, in the history of science logical necessity and historical

 sequence are not always identical».

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 195

 Fig. 17 Initial Configuration of another reconstruction. In this case, Κ is the same point M. The Final
 Configuration will be the same as that of the historical reconstruction, only the Transition is different (and
 the trace of Κ is not as described in the transmitted text)

 of the figure into the semicircle ΑΔΚ: the motion stops when KI is perpendicular to
 ΑΔ.42

 5 Some modern reconstructions

 Some scholars have attempted to explain or reconstruct Archytas' solution for doubling
 the cube.43 All of these reconstructions are difficult, and a number of them are also

 confusing and/or even wrong at some point.

 The translations of Eutocius' text, in which the reconstructions are supported, are
 not homogeneous: the translation in van der Waerden (1954, pp. 150-152) of Archytas'

 solution for doubling the cube is in fact a paraphrase of Eutocius' text: there are the
 quite literal translations of Euclide (2007, pp. 82-83) and Knorr (1989, pp. 102-107)
 and, in some passages (Thomas 1951, pp. 284-289). All translations, except the ones of

 Acerbi and Knorr, differ in one point from Eutocius' text: the letter Δ in Eutocius' text

 designates two different points, both in the diagram and the text, while the translations

 denote the point in the rotated semicircle differently.44

 42 See this interactive diagram: http://www.geogebratube.org/student/m210935.

 43 A number of them mention the fact that Archytas' solution is developed in a synthetic way, and the
 reconstruction is analytical. The discussion about analysis!synthesis in Greek mathematics is a well-known
 subject (for a complete discussion on this subject, see Euclide 2007, section III Β. 1, pp. 439-518), but it is
 avoided in this article because my arguments stand apart from this issue.

 44 Van der Waerden (1954, p. 150, n. 2) use of Δ' is «for greater clarity». Diels, the editor of Euto
 cius' text, also corrected the text, denoting the rotated point as Δ'. This is a «inutile» coirection (Euclide
 2007, p. 162, n. 258).

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 196

 R. Masiä

 Fig. 18 Figure used by van der Waerden to explain his reconstruction of Archytas' solution for doubling
 the cube. It is apparent that the circles in the plane are erroneously concentric, and not tangent

 The reconstruction in Heath (1921, vol. I, pp. 246-249) uses, as is usual in Heath's
 reconstructions, the «language of analytical geometry». Obviously, this modern read

 ing is not useful for our discussion or for the evaluation of the discovery of Archytas,
 since it has nothing to do with the demonstration process as reported in Eutocius'
 text.45

 In contrast, in van der Waerden (1954, pp. 150-152) Archytas' Construction is

 explained from the text itself, searching for «the figure which Archytas saw before his

 mind's eye [...] the right triangle ΑΚΔ'» (p. 151).46 The explanation is a bit confusing
 and even erroneous in one point: «the semicircle AMI will then describe a hemisphere
 whose diameter is ΑΔ»; this sentence is only true in the Initial Configuration of
 the semicircle, when I coincides with Δ 47 The diagram accompanying the analysis
 contributes to the confusion (van der Waerden 1954, p. 151, Fig. 50) (see Fig. 18),
 since the segments of circle that contain I and Δ', respectively, should be tangent, and

 not concentric, as is apparent from the diagram.

 The description is based on the observation that «in Archytas' diagram, everything
 is in motion; he thinks kinematically». This view may seem founded in the language
 of the text itself, which includes some terms that denote/connote motion, mainly
 rotational motions. However, this kinematic appearance does not take into account
 the terminology of Greek geometry: the use of terms such as άγω, φέρω, γράφω
 (that I have translated always as «draw, lead, trace») and words derived from these
 verbs, such as περιάγω, άντιπεριάγω, περιφέρω, περιγράφω,... (that I have trans
 lated always as «draw around, draw around in the opposite direction, lead around,
 trace around»,...), are systematically used by Greek geometers, and their use is very
 homogeneous, even in our text. Van der Waerden seems to consider the second group
 of terms a kinematic lexicon, but not the first group, although all of them have the
 same root. Therefore, the issue is not whether Archytas' text has a kinematic char

 45 I mention this reconstruction only as an outstanding example of a modern reading in the early twentieth

 century, but useless for understanding Archytas* solution for doubling the cube.

 46 Van der Waerden even seems convinced of catching on to Archytas' intuition: «Archytas hit upon the
 following idea» (p. 152). As mentioned, van der Waerden and Knorr denote as Δ' one of the two Δ of the
 transmitted text and diagram.

 47 Attempting to understand what the scholar is trying to explain and leaving out the error, we could agree
 that the semicircle AMI will describe half a hemisphere, but not a complete hemisphere.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 197

 acter, but whether this character is different from Greek geometry. This lexicon is
 as kinematic as the lexicon of Greek geometry,48 because it is almost the same
 lexicon.49

 The key to the actual kinematic or static character of Greek geometry (and even

 of Greek mathematics), in its deepest sense, is not the lexicon, but the grammar: the

 systematic use of perfective forms50 in the construction of geometrical objects verbs

 shows that Greek geometry is mainly static, interested only in the result of the motion,

 not in its process. Archytas' text shows this same character. Only step [3]51 shows a

 different character, not because of the lexicon, but because of the grammar: the future

 verbal forms are the main forms in this step. But this characteristic is not so unusual

 in Greek mathematics in similar contexts, although perhaps the proportion of future

 verbal forms may be less.

 That said, two of the three alleged surfaces of the Archytas' solution for doubling the

 cube are never explicitly used, but only the motions of the objects that generate these

 surfaces: the conical surface, defined, as usual in Greek mathematics, as a rotating

 motion of a triangle, is never explicitly used; the toric surface is not even mentioned:

 in this case, the text only mentions the rotation of a semicircle.52

 Wilbur Knorr provides two explanations for Archytas' solution for doubling the
 cube: the first is described by Knorr as an analysis of the construction (Knorr

 1986, pp. 51-52) and the second, less important for our goal, is an attempt to design a

 mechanical device to solve the problem according to Archytas' Construction (Knorr

 1989, pp. 109-110). The first one is based on the search for loci, and not on the relent

 less motion of some geometric elements: «[...] one can seek the common intersection

 of the loci associated with the points Κ, I, and M».

 Knorr's argument attempts to «approach» the «arrangement» of Archytas' Tri

 angle «available to Archytas» to make «clearer the pattern of thought». In other

 words: the reader might understand that Knorr will show how the three-dimensional
 construction will appear from Archytas' Triangle. It starts with a fully two
 dimensional approach. But then it swaps abruptly from that two-dimensional approach
 to a three-dimensional approach.53 The link, if any, between the two explana

 48 If we decide to qualify the verb περιάγω /«draw around» as a kinematic verb, the verb άγω /«draw» must

 be qualified as a kinematic verb too. But this last verb is one of the most common verbs in Greek geometry,

 used to draw lines. Therefore, we also have to characterize all Greek geometry as kinematic. In fact, I would

 agree that the lexicon of Greek geometry is kinematic in a very elemental way: it is built with words that

 describe a drawing activity, which, of course, is a kinematic activity.

 49 In fact, only one kinematic root is not usually found in Greek geometry, with two occurrences: the noun

 κίνησις/Ämovement», and the participle xivoupevov/«moved». It is worth noting that there are also two

 explicitly static words in the text, unusual in Greek geometry (except that the first one is quite common in

 Euclid, Data: Def. 4,6,8, 13,14,15, Prop. 25-41): #έσις, τόποςΛφοβίΰοη, place», repeated several times,

 but sometimes implicit (see beginning of section [4] of the translation).

 50 Underlining the resultative aspect of the verbal action.

 51 And some passages of [4] in which certain elements of step [3] are mentioned.

 52 In addition, following the reading proposed in note 4, both rotating elements (semicircle and triangle)
 are not used to find the solution, but instead their traces on the cylindrical surfaces, and these traces are

 static lines. With the usual reading, only the triangle is a moving element in the solution.

 53 The two-dimensional approach and its origin are broadly discussed in Sect. 5.1.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 198

 R. Masiä

 tions is unknown, and we do not know why Knorr abandons the two-dimensional
 approach.

 The three-dimensional exposition (qualified as a «clearer underlying pattern of

 thought» and a different «approach available to Archytas») needs all of the geomet

 rical elements of Archytas' Construction (Archytas' Triangle with the cone and the

 cylinder). In other words, it must assume that the entire construction appeared fully

 formed in Archytas' mind, because «Archytas' approach» needs all the elements of

 the construction; that is not only an extreme assumption but it cannot explain anything

 more than the «synthetic expository», because it does not simplify anything in either

 the construction or the rationale. The innovation is in the reformulation of some argu

 ments in the language of loci', for example, «the length AM can be kept equal to AB

 by setting Μ on the trace of Β as its semicircle rotates on its axis ΑΔ» is the parallel

 formulation in terms of locus problems of these two facts: ΖΘ · ΘΒ = ΜΘ2 and ZB is

 perpendicular to ΑΔ. But this reformulation hardly «clarifies the underlying pattern of

 thought», nor is it a different «approach available to Archytas». It is the same approach

 as the «synthetic exposition mode» but using different language, the language of loci.

 Acerbi (Euclide 2007, pp. 83-84) deepens Knorr's line of argument using loci on

 surfaces. The goal of his explanation is «to search for understanding of how to figure

 out the demonstration» and the relation between Archytas' Triangle and the three

 dimensional construction around it.54 He systematically translates the geometrical

 restrictions into the language of loci on surfaces but, again, this translation does not

 help very much to simplify the proof: the explanation requires all the elements of

 Archytas' Construction and all the arguments of the demonstration working together;

 it isolates neither clusters of geometrical elements nor groups of arguments that can

 run independently.

 In fact, there are two main elements that obscure all the reconstructions we have

 reviewed of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube:

 1. The condition which ensures that the final construction is correct is always

 expressed in the original form of Eutocius' text. This condition links the lines

 ΑΘΙ, ΒΘΖ and their point of intersection, M, as follows: ΑΘ ■ ΘΙ = BZ · ΖΘ =

 ΘΜ2. Taking into account that Α, Β, I, Ζ are on the same circle, this condition (in

 the context of Greek geometry) is virtually equivalent to the fact that Μ is on the

 surface of a hemisphere with base on circle ABIZ.55

 2. More importantly, there is a common methodological shortfall in all the reconstruc

 tions: Archytas' Triangle, ΑΜΚΔΙΘ, appears at the beginning of all considerations

 and its (possible) origins are not discussed by scholars; it seems that either the

 54 «Sono state proposte varie ricostruzioni di come Archita possa essere giunto a concepire questo com

 plesso intersecarsi di solidi: sono piü ο meno complicate come l'originale. Cercando anche noi di capire
 come funziona la dimostrazione [...]» (Euclide 2007, p. 83).

 55 As we have shown before, only van der Waerden seems aware of this fact, even though the error in the

 text and in the diagram linked to the solution suggests that his intuition is not accurate.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 199

 origin cannot be discussed, or the triangle appeared in the mind of the mathemati

 cian already complete, like Athena from the head of Zeus.

 My approach has discussed both elements and has tried to link them with a plausible
 rationale. In the next section, I will look at some historical and historiographical

 approaches to the second element, usually in contexts that have no direct relation with

 Archytas' solution for doubling the cube.

 5.1 Two-dimensional approaches to the resolution of the two mean

 proportionals problem

 Knorr's reconstruction begins with a two-dimensional approach to Archytas' solution
 for doubling the cube, which is abandoned and replaced with a purely three
 dimensional approach. As I have mentioned before, there is no apparent link between

 the two approaches in Knorr's text and, in fact, the two-dimensional approach has

 a very ancient origin in a group of resolutions of the two mean proportionals prob
 lem using curved lines, called proportionatrix (prima and secunda), oval, folium or

 multiplicatrix, with no plausible historical relation to Archytas' solution for doubling

 the cube.56 A technical link between this group of resolutions and Archytas' solution

 could be suggested but without any basis in all cases, except one.

 These two-dimensional solutions, although they have no historical or technical

 relation to Archytas' solution, have what we will call an Archytas' solution flavour. But

 it is only a mirage; I will briefly review some technical, historical and historiographical

 details of the issue to show the differences. In summary, I will show now that there is

 no technical or direct historical relation between these curves and Archytas' solution

 for doubling the cube.57 In fact, the original historiographical link between these two

 dimensional approaches and Archytas' solution is quite entangled and, in the end, the
 link has been obscured.

 In recent historiographical works, these curves appeared in Becker (1966, p. 79)
 as opposed to Tannery's proposal to Eudoxus' solution to the two mean propor
 tionals (Tannery 1912-1915, "Sur les solutions du probleme de Delos par Archy

 tas et par Eudoxe. Divination d'une solution perdue", pp. 53-61). Eudoxus' solution is

 mentioned by the same Eutocius' text that contains Archytas' solution for doubling the

 cube, but it is only mentioned in passing: «since he [Eudoxus] says in the introduction

 that he discovered it by means of a curved trace (δια καμπύλη γραμμή). However, in

 the solution, in addition to not using curved lines, he even finds a discrete proportion

 and then uses it as if it were continuous» (Archimedes 1910-1915, v. Ill, 56.3-8). With

 this single mention, Tannery attempts to reconstruct the «curved line» and, later on,

 Becker attempts his own curve (see Becker 1966, p. 79). Becker achieves an «elegant

 and straightforward» curve that «directly ties in with the planimetrical core piece of

 56 Or, if there were some relation, it disappeared before the XVI century.

 57 Only Becker's curve has an indirect relation through an alleged Eudoxus' solution for doubling the
 cube.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 200

 R. Masiä

 solution of Archytas ».58 In addition, he claims that «already Father Villapaudo (sic)59

 used it as "Duplicatrix" (sic)».60

 A reference to Becker's work appears in a note to Knorr's two-dimensional recon

 struction (Knorr 1986, p. 88, n. 6): «Becker (op. cit. p. 79) presents this curve via a

 somewhat modified construction and cites its use by Villapaudo (sic) as reported by
 Viviani (1647); see also G. Loria. Ebene Kurven, 1902, p. 317. Kepler's use of the

 same curve is noted by W. Breidenbach, Das delischt Problem, Stuttgart, 1953, pp. 31

 f». In fact, Loria seems to be the original source of all recent scholarly work on the

 issue, in the section «Multiplicatrix and mediatrix curves».61

 The sequence of facts described by Loria is erroneous in one point, as Kepler's

 Astronomia Nova62 is later than Villalpandos' book about the Solomon temple.63

 The correct sequence is as follows: Villalpando probably invented the proportiona

 trix (prima and secunda) to calculate two mean proportionals (Prado and Villalpando

 1596-1604, Problema X and XI, pp. 289-290). Later on, Kepler uses an oval (known

 as Kepler's folium), similar to the one Villalpando used, to describe a possible model
 of the path of the planet Mars (Kepler 1609). Viviani invents a new way, as he
 claims, to trace Villalpando's proportionatrix secunda.64 Loria and Becker derived

 their definitions of this curve from Viviani's text, or from posterior texts (of Seidel or

 Longchamps).65 None of them mentions Archytas' solution for doubling the cube as

 the initial inspiration for the curve; rather it is a new fully two-dimensional approach

 to solve the problem of the two mean proportionals.

 58 But Becker, strangely, attributes the discovery to Eudoxus (an alleged disciple or follower of Archytas).

 Would it not be easier to attribute or link this curve to Archytas, if the curve is found in the «core» of his

 solution? In any case, Archytas' solution does not contain a reference to a curve of this kind, even indirectly,

 although the construction of the curve is certainly very close to some elements of Archytas' Construction.

 Note that nobody has associated the curved traces on the cylinder (of the semicircle and, perhaps, of the

 triangle) explicitly mentioned in Archytas' text with the «curved trace» linked to Eudoxus.

 59 Knorr, Becker and Loria misspell the name of the Spanish Jesuit Juan Bautista Villalpando, mathemati
 cian and architect, who wrote, with another Jesuit, Jeronimo Prado. a commentary on the prophet Ezekiel

 and the Solomon temple, In Ezechielem explanations et apparatus urbis, ac templi Hierosolymitani com
 mentaries et imaginibus illustratus which includes some chapters devoted to proportional lines (Prado and

 Villalpando 1596-1604). Probably, Loria only consulted Viviani's book where Villalpando is mentioned,
 misspelling the name of Villalpando, Becker copied Loria and Knorr both Becker and Loria. Villalpando

 would seem to have not been consulted by these scholars.

 60 The curve mentioned is Villalpando's proportionatrix secunda, although Becker offers a slightly different

 definition; he calls it "Duplicatrix" because it is the name that Loria (the source of Becker) uses for these
 kinds of curves.

 61 Loria (1902, p. 317). It is worth noting that the point of view of Loria's book is completely algebraic,

 and not geometric. There is no mention of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube.

 62 I have not found Kepler's mention of this curve; the Loria citation «Astronomia Nova (Prag, 1609) S.

 337» in Loria (1902, p. 317, η. 1) is not correct, as p. 337 of Kepler's book does not contain the oval; it is

 actually the last page of the treatise.

 63 Astronomia Nova was published in 1609 and Villalpando's third and last volume of his work was
 published in 1604.

 64 «Vi ö nello stesso tempo osservato che questa curva puo segnarsi in altro modo senza bisogno di quel
 secondo mezzo cerchio» (Viviani 1674, p. 279).

 65 Only in Becker's text the context is the discussion of Eudoxus' curve mentioned by Eutocius. As I have

 said, he is answering Tannery's proposal for Eudoxus' curve, both are without any textual support.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 201

 Therefore, Villalpando'sproportionatrixprima and secunda are, as far as I know, the

 most ancient description of curves of this kind. The curves of Viviani, Becker and Knorr

 are equivalent to the proportionatrix secunda but defined in a different way, and Knorr's

 definition is even the same as Viviani's definition; the only difference is that Knorr cuts

 off this curve with a circle to obtain Archytas' solution. Becker's curve is the only one

 associated with the implicit process developed in Archytas' solution for the problem

 of doubling the volume of the cube, as Becker himself highlights: «Eudoxos could

 also have used another construction, which is elegant and straightforward. Besides, it

 directly ties in with the planimetrical core piece of solution of Archytas».66 All the

 rest have no direct historical or technical relation with Archytas' solution for doubling
 the cube.

 5.1.1 Proportionatrix secunda and Becker's curve

 Villalpando's proportionatrix secunda is built as shown in Fig. 19: let there be AG
 the diameter of a semicircle, D the centre of the semicircle and DG the diameter of a

 second semicircle. For each point F of the greater semicircle, we can define a point

 Κ of the proportionatrix secunda as follows: FG cuts the smallest circle in Η; I is the

 intersection of AG with the perpendicular to AG that passes through H; the circle of

 centre I and radius IG cuts FG in K. Point Κ generates the proportionatrix secunda

 when F moves around the greater semicircle.

 Now, if we define L as the intersection of the circle GK with the line AG and we

 unite AF, LK, the triangle ALGKF is an Archytas' Triangle, i.e. for each Κ of the

 proportionatrix secunda there is an Archytas' Triangle, and, therefore, the curve can

 be used to find two mean proportionals between lines a, b, with a > b, i.e. to find an

 Archytas' Solution, in this way: if we set AG = a and draw the proportionatrix secunda,
 we can cut it with a circle of centre G and radius b, and obtain K, with GK = b. F is

 obtained by lengthening GK and cutting it with the semicircle of diameter AG; the

 resulting Archytas' Triangle solves the problem.67

 Becker's curve is built as shown in Fig. 20: let there be AG the diameter of a

 semicircle. For each point F on the semicircle, we can define a point Κ of Becker's

 curve as follows: L is the intersection of AG with the perpendicular to AG passing

 through F; FA cuts the semicircle of diameter AL in K. Point Κ generates Becker's

 curve when F moves on the semicircle, and the figure ALGFK is an Archytas' Triangle,

 i.e. for each Κ of Becker's curve there is an Archytas' Triangle, and, therefore, the

 curve can be used to find an Archytas' Solution in a way equivalent to that of the

 proportionatrix secunda just mentioned.

 66 Becker (1966, p. 79) (italics are mine). Becker, as we have said, also associates this curve with Vil

 lalpando's Proportionatrix secunda: «The curve is a beautiful oval, is consequently completely contained
 within the finite. It is symmetrical around the axis AD. From the 17th c. onwards, this curve is well known.

 Already Father Villapaudo (sic) used it as "Duplicatrix" (sic)» (Becker 1966, loc.cit.). Although this is a

 clever piece of intuition by Becker, which seems not to have been understood by Knorr (he actually uses

 Viviani's curve, and not Becker's), he does not explain exactly what the «direct tie» consists of. In fact, the

 curve is only indirectly tied with «the planimetrical core piece of solution of Archytas», as we will see.

 67 Villalpando's actual use of this curve to find the two mean proportionals between two assigned straight

 lines is a bit different, but is still equivalent to the one just explained.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 19 Villalpando's proportionatrix secunda (in bold) defined by point Κ

 Fig. 20 Becker's curve (in bold), defined by point Κ

 Becker's curve is equivalent to Viviani's (and Knorr's) curve, but its definition is

 slightly different. That definition is the one most like the Archytas' Construction, and
 Becker was aware of this fact: the curve «directly ties in with the planimetrical core

 piece of solution of Archytas» as is easy to see comparing the elements of the process
 of construction of Becker's curve (see Fig. 20) and those of the triangles ΑΔΚ and
 AIM (see Figs. 13, 15, 16).

 In short, the curves of Loria, Becker and Knorr have no technical relation with the

 motion in the semicircle ΑΚΔ during the Transition in Archytas' Construction, nor

 any historical relation, except for the fact that all curves and motions are defined into
 a semicircle and their goal is to build two mean proportionals. In fact, every point of
 each curve mentioned in this section can be used to build two mean proportionals,

 but the process inside the rotating semicircle of Archytas' Construction only shows
 a unique two mean proportional. The way of building Becker's curve is the closest
 to Archytas' Solution, but the point that defines his curve is never defined or even
 mentioned in Eutocius' text, and neither is its trace, of course: it is the intersection

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A new reading of Archytas' doubling of the cube and its.

 203

 point of the semicircle AIM and KA (see Fig. 13), in other words, the trace of the

 intersection of AK with the sphere (see Figs. 15, 16).68

 6 Conclusion

 I have presented a translation very close to the original Greek text and, in a number

 of points, a new reading of Archytas' solution for doubling the cube transmitted by

 Eutocius, mainly unfolding the structure behind the text and the steps of Archytas'

 Construction. This reading has helped us to find some simple and original ideas behind

 the incredibly clever solution provided by Archytas and to discard some traditional

 ideas transmitted by scholars, namely:

 • The solution is found in three explicit steps, that I call Initial Configuration, Tran

 sition and Final Configuration. Scholars have focussed their attention on the Final

 Configuration, but have given less importance to the Transition and the traces

 explicitly made in this step of the construction, as well as ignoring the Initial

 Configuration.

 • The solution of the problem is never couched in terms of the intersection of three

 surfaces; this is only an anachronistic interpretation of the text. The elements of

 the solution are a trace on the cylindrical surface and a rotating triangle.69 There

 is no toric surface, but only a rotational movement of a certain semicircle that

 intersects the cylindrical surface to make a trace; there is a conical surface, but it

 never seems to be explicitly used, only perhaps implicitly.

 These ideas have helped us to unfold a new approach to Archytas' solution for doubling

 the cube. The key part of my approach takes the steps of Archytas' Construction further:

 I rewind the motion from the Final Configuration to a certain original configuration,

 more complete than the Initial Configuration (see Fig. 14). This original configuration,

 made of an Archytas' simple triangle inscribed into a hemisphere, can be claimed to

 be a logically previous step to Archytas' solution for doubling the cube. This original

 configuration gives us a way to divide up Archytas' solution for doubling the cube into

 some simple steps, almost all derived easily from Archytas' Construction. The goal of

 this approach is not to try to show Archytas' thoughts, but to provide some arguments

 that counterbalance scholars' global approaches and even to reassess in some way the

 aura that surrounds this solution.70 For this reason, I have also presented a review of

 some modern approaches to Archytas' solution for doubling the cube in the light of

 68 A definition and an interactive visualization of all curves (proportionatrix prima, proportionatrix
 secunda, Viviani's (and Knorr's) approach and Becker's curve) and my reconstructions discussed before

 are shown in http://tube.geogebra.org/book/title/id/791183. All curves, except the proportionatrix prima,
 are in fact the same (as Becker points out, it is r = acos30) and Archytas' Triangle could be shown

 easily in the final diagram of each one. Tannery's curve (Tannery 1912-1915, "Sur les solutions du Prob

 leme de Delos par Archytas et par Eudoxe. Divination d'une solution perdue", pp. 53-61) is shown in circle

 ΑΒΔ and not in semicircle ΑΚΔ because the point he is searching for is I.

 69 But following an alternative reading presented in note 4, these elements could be two cylindrical traces
 that meet at one point.

 70 In fact, no Ancient source places distinction on it.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204

 R. Masiä

 the new reading and of some XVI century mathematical results concerning the search

 for two mean proportionals that have influenced the historiography of the problem.

 References

 Acerbi,Fabio. 2012. Icodici stilisticidellamatematicagreca: Dimostrazioni, procedure, algoritmi. Quaderni

 Urbinatidi Cultura Classica 101: 167-216.

 Archimedes. 1910-1915. Archimedis Opera Omnia, cum Commentaries Eutocii, iterum edidit I.L. Helberg.

 3 vol. Leipzig, B.G: Teubner (reprint: Stuttgart und Leipzig: B.G. Teubner 1972).

 Becker, Oskar. 1966. Das Mathematische Denken Der Antike. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

 Burkert, Walter. 1972. Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Clagett, Marshall. 1964-1984. Archimedes in the Middle Ages. 5 vol. in 10 tomes. Vol. 1. The Arabo
 Latin Tradition. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press 1964; Vol. 2. The Translations from the

 Greek by William ofMoerbeke. Memoirs 117. 2 tomes. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society
 1976; Vol. 3. The Fate of the Medieval Archimedes 1300-1565. Memoirs 125. 3 tomes. Philadelphia:

 American Philosophical Society 1978; Vol. 4. A Supplement on the Medieval Latin Traditions of Conic
 Sections (1150-1566). Memoirs 137. 2 tomes. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society 1980;
 Vol. 5. Quasi-Archimedean Geometry in the Thirteenth Century. Memoirs 157. 2 tomes. Philadelphia:

 Euclide. 2007. Tutte le Opere. Introduzione, traduzione, note e apparati di Fabio Acerbi. Milano: Bompiani

 American Philosophical Society 1984.

 (reprint: 2008).

 Heath, Thomas Little. 1921. A history of greek mathematics, 2. vol. Oxford: Oxford University Press,

 (reprint: New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 1981).

 Kepler, Johannes. 1609. Astronomia Nova. Heidelberg: Voegelin. Web e-rara. doi: 10.393 l/e-rara-558.
 Knorr, Wilbur Richard. 1986. The ancient tradition of geometric problems. Basel: Birkhäuser.

 Knorr, Wilbur Richard. 1989. Textual studies in ancient and medieval geometry. Basel: Birkhäuser.
 Loria, Gino. 1902. Spezielle algebraische und transscendente Ebene Kurven: Theorie und Geschichte.

 Leipzig: Teubner. Web Internet Archive. https://archive.Org/stream/speziellealgebi001origoog#page/

 Masiä, Ramon. 2012. La llengua d'Arquimedes α De Sphaera et De Cylindro, Ph.D. Thesis. http://diposit.

 n4/mode/2up.

 ub.edu/dspace/handle/2445/46868.

 Netz, Reviel. 1999. Proclus' division of the mathematical proposition into parts: How and why was it

 formulated? Classical Quarterly 49(1): 282-303.

 Prado, Jeronimo, Villalpando, Juan Bautista. 1596-1604. In Ezechielem explanationes et apparatus urbis,

 ac templi Hierosolymitani commentariis et imaginibus illustratus. Opus tribus tomis distinctum. Roma:

 ex typographia Aloysii Zannetii. Web e-rara. http://www.e-rara.ch/zut/content/titleinfo/3799530.
 Tannery, Paul. 1912-1915. Memoires Scientifiques, v. I. Paris: Editions Jacques Gabay (reprint: 1995).
 Thomas, Ivor. 1951. Greek mathematical works, v. II. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, (reprint:

 2000).

 van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert. 1954. Science awakening. Groningen: Noordhoff.

 Viviani, Vincenzio. 1674. Diporto Geometrico. In Quinto libro degli Elementi d'Euclide, owero, Scienza
 universale delle proporzioni spiegata colla dottrina del Galileo. Firenze: alia Condotta. Web Museo

 Galileo, http://193.206.220.! 10/Teca/Viewer?an=300943.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:11:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

