 

 

 

 

A Strategic Assessment of the Scientific Performance of Five Countries
Author(s): Rémi Barré
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring, 1987), pp. 32-38
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690461
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:46 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/690461?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 POLICY REPORT

 A Strategic Assessment of the Scientific Performance of Five
 Countries

 Conservatoire National Des Arts-et-Metiers

 Remi Barre

 Abstract

 This report compares the concentration of effort among subfields of science across five in-

 dustrialized nations, as shown in numbers of publications. The analysis is based on the PAS-

 CAL database maintained by the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique

 (CNRS) for the years 1980 to 1983. Japan and Germany show strong concentrations in areas

 of strategic basic research such as new materials, biotechnology, and communications tech-

 nology. The United States effort is concentrated in environmental and space sciences as well

 as health sciences and technologies. France and the United Kingdom concentrate on the
 health sciences.

 Editor's Note: Policy Reports in S&TS are an experimental form

 allocation decisions and to assess their results in terms of

 of communication between the worlds of science studies and

 modified scientific strength over a period of time.2

 science policy. They call the attention of S&TS readers to re-

 sults of studies commissioned with direct policy applications

 in mind. Volunteers or nominations for contributors to this se-

 ries are invited, and comments on its usefulness are welcome.

 The indicators published by the United States National
 Science Foundation (NSF) provide very useful informa-
 tion in this respect, especially the bibliometric indicators
 based on the Science Citation Index or CHI-NSF database.3

 Analysis of national scientific performance is part of

 the strategic assessment of science policy which is, explic-

 itly or implicitly, performed by all governments. Such an
 assessment is needed because ever more difficult decisions

 Nevertheless, they do not solve the problem because the
 results are reported in a rigid classification of fields and
 subfields, unchanged for a decade, which may-or may
 not-be suitable to perform strategic assessment.

 Because of the lack of alternative data, M. R. Chabbal

 about resource allocation among scientific fields have to

 from the French Ministry of Science and Technology com-

 be made . Furthermore, those decisions can obviously have
 farreaching consequences for industrial and economic
 performance. Part of basic research is sometimes labelled

 "strategic," as opposed to "curiosity-oriented," in that it can

 relate directly to innovations in the scientifically-driven

 "core technologies," which in turn can affect a broad spec-
 trum of activities.'

 Such allocation decisions determine a flow of resources

 which is aimed at changing the scientific level or strength

 of the nation (which is a stock), as compared to other na-
 tions. Year after year, the allocation decisions, whether ex-
 plicit or implicit, centralized or decentralized, determine

 the relative level of the country, in each field and sub-field

 of science: it determines its scientific profile, which can be

 seen as the "sedimentation" of all past resource allocations.
 For these science policy decisions, a knowledge of the na-
 tional scientific profile is clearly needed both to ground the

 Author address: Author address: Conservatoire National des Arts-et-
 Metiers, 292, Rue Saint-Martin, 75141 Paris Cedex 03, France

 Science & Technology Studies 5(1): 32-38, 1987.

 missioned the bibliometric study reported here4 to identify
 the scientific profile of various countries according to
 subfields considered meaningful for a strategic assess-
 ment of science in those countries. Such an enterprise was
 all the more needed because a law passed in 1985 made

 it compulsory for the Ministry of Science and Technology
 "to present a yearly assessment to the Parliament of the

 'strategic choices' of national science and technology pol-
 icy, presenting the position of France in international com-

 petition in comparison with major foreign countries."5

 Methodology

 The PASCAL database

 Two points set our study apart from the Science Indicators
 data. First, we chose to work with the PASCAL data base

 for the study. This multidisciplinary data base, which is
 produced by the Centre National de la Recherche
 Scientifique (CNRS), is drawn from about 9,000 scientific

 and technical journals which are chosen to represent the
 core of the world's scientific activity, even though, like the
 SCI (and therefore the CHI-NSF), it underrepresents sci-

 32 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ence published in non-Roman alphabets. A disadvantage
 of PASCAL is that it does not include citations; this is why

 the reliability of the results, the numbers were computed

 as a total over 4 years (1980 to 1983). This being done, we

 we did only publication counts and could not perform any
 impact analysis.

 ing criteria:

 retained subfields for analysis if they met all of the follow-

 An advantage of PASCAL, on the other hand, is that it
 includes keywords with each article. This feature enabled
 us to define subfields which were meaningful in terms of

 -The world total of articles had to be greater than
 200 per year, in order to avoid subfields which were too
 narrowly defined.

 science policymaking and strategic assessment. This is the
 second distinctive feature of this study.

 -The proportion of articles without country affilia-

 tion had to be less than 30%. We assumed that articles

 Definition of the subfields

 In order to be meaningful in terms of strategic assess-
 ment of science policy, yet manageable for the PASCAL
 database, the subfields of interest were determined

 through a discussion among policymakers, their scientific
 advisors, and PASCAL data base specialists. This led to the
 identification of 145 subfields. For various reasons, mathe-

 matics, particle physics, clinical medicine, and the social
 sciences were excluded. Each subfield is accessible with-

 out ambiguity or overlap through the classification scheme

 or the PASCAL keywords, and all subfields taken together
 cover about 85% of PASCAL.

 Constitution and validation of the data base

 The number of articles contained in PASCAL for each

 one of the 145 subfields was then computed for France, the

 United States, the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), the
 United Kingdom (U.K.), and Japan6; in order to increase

 follows.

 without country affiliations were randomly distributed

 among countries. The 30% criterion gave us some assur-

 ance that even if this assumption were false, the impact
 would not be significant.
 Then we computed the number of articles for each
 subfield which appeared in another data base, chosen case

 by case according to the subfield (e.g., Chemical Abstracts
 for chemistry). At this stage we added a third criterion:

 similarity in relative importance of the different countries

 when computed with PASCAL and the other data base.

 In the end, selection by these criteria left us with 103
 subfields out of the 145 initially defined. Most of the
 subfields we had to drop were applied sciences and tech-

 nology. We still have very good coverage of basic research

 and fair coverage of the applied sciences, but poor cover-
 age for technology. To simplify matters, these 103
 subfields will be referred to as "science" in what

 Scientific Profiles of the Countries (on the macro-profile fields

 Table 1:

 Field F FRG UK USA JPN
 I Theoretical physics and chemistry 93 110 97 100 119
 II Life sciences, basic research 98 101 107 147 143

 III Semiconductors; analytic and electro-chemistry; 94 95 81 68 166

 catalysis; condensed matter

 IV Materials science plus applied and organic 57 127 80 59 126

 chemistry

 V Physics and technology of electronic 74 91 86 116 255

 components, integrated circuits, "Group III-V"
 semiconductors, photocmemistry

 VI Computer science and imaging technology 78 102 101 106 84
 VII Technology for pollution treatment, energy 71 136 74 72 59

 storage, civil engineering, plus machine
 tool research

 VIII Earth sciences 98 62 83 77 52

 IX Environmental sciences and space sciences 68 84 88 114 55
 X Renewable resources 129 78 97 83 45

 XI Agronomy, food production, biotechnology 98 69 97 90 67

 for agriculture

 XII Life sciences: health and drugs 155 114 130 121 69
 XIII Other applied life sciences 109 99 142 143 70

 Mean 100 100 100 100 100

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 * 33

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Each number is the mean for each field of the value of the relative specialization index of its sub-fields; each number therefore
 represents a macro-specialization index. Details on the subfields included in each field are available from the author.

 Our PASCAL-profiles data base thus comprises a matrix

 of the world articles in that subfield. For a country, the ratio

 of 103 lines (subfields) and 6 columns (5 countries plus rest

 of its weight in a subfield to its overall scientific weight

 of the world). The total number of articles recorded in the

 103 subfields (for 4 years, world total, including nonaffili-
 ated articles) is 1,452,500, the number of articles and world

 share per country being the following:7

 France 107,001 (6.1%)
 United Kingdom 118,603 (6.8%)
 Germany 106,632 (6.1%)
 USA 511,764 (29.4%)
 Japan 105,916 (6.1%)

 measures the relative specialization of the country in that
 subfield.

 The "scientific profile of a country" is the set of measures
 of its relative specialization for each subfield-a vector of

 103 elements. If Aij is the number of articles of a country

 iin subfield j, then the relative specialization of i in j is: Aij/

 A.j: Ai./A.. = Kij. The scientific profile of country i is the
 vector Vi = ( Kil, Ki2, ... Kij, .... Kil03).

 In exactly the same way, each subfield has a profile of

 countries, which we call the "geographic profile of a
 The mean number of articles for the 4 years, per subfield
 subfield." It is made up of the relative concentration in each

 is 14,000, with a minimum of 800 and a maximum of
 9,500.

 country, the concentration being the ratio of the weight of

 subfield j in country i to the overall weight of subfield j in
 world science (Aij/Ai.: A.j/A.. = Kij). Therefore the geo-

 Scientific and geographic profiles

 Each country was given an overall "scientific weight": its
 share of world scientific articles. Each country also has a

 graphic profile of subfield j is the vector Vj = (Klj, K2j, ..
 Kij .... K6j).

 weight relative to each subfield, which is simply its share

 UK FRG

 France USA Japan

 Definition of the macro-profile fields

 Comparing the scientific profiles of the countries (that

 o50 o 70 so 90 4oo 10 120 30 o140 10

 is, vectors made up of 103 numbers) is no easy task; some

 ,At

 % %'

 m4

 aw

 sort of aggregation of the subfields into a dozen or so major

 fields has to be done if we want to be able to interpret the

 figures. A common way to aggregate such vectors is to put
 together the subfields considered to belong to the same
 area of science in terms of the disciplinary categories
 (chemistry, physics, biology.. .); but each one of those
 fields would contain about 10 subfields which have no rea-

 son to have the same profile. Therefore the profile of the
 field, being an average of the profiles of the subfields,
 would mask the diversity of the sub-profiles. In other
 words we would lose all the information gathered at
 subfield level and end up at a high level of generality. As
 an alternative, we clustered the subfields which had a sim-

 ilar geographic profile. Those sets of subfields, called the

 "macro-profile fields" or simply "fields" enable us to sim-

 plify the interpretation of the scientific profiles while mini-

 mizing the amount of information loss in the process.

 In practice, to determine the macro-profile fields we

 clustered the subfields from the PASCAL-profiles matrix,
 which gave us nine algorithmically-defined clusters. If at
 this point our macro-profile fields had consisted of unre-

 lated subfields in terms of scientific disciplines, character-
 ization of the macro-profiles would have been difficult. In

 fact, it appeared that with only minor modifications of the

 initial nine clusters to ease interpretation, we got 13 well-
 characterized macro-profile fields.

 The ease of interpreting these groups suggests that
 subfields having the same geographic profile are also re-
 lated in terms of scientific discipline. Thus, to the extent

 30 6 7il 10 9 100 110d0 120 iO 140

 Figure 1. Scientific profiles of the five countries on the 13

 macro-profile fields. The mean weight of each country is
 100. For each field, the relative specialization index is
 shown.

 that discipline concentrations are shaped by a nation's eco-

 nomic system, national or macro patterns of scientific spe-

 cialization can be interpreted in terms of science policy and

 34 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the socio-economic objectives which underlie them. This

 fisheries, ecology and marine ecology.

 leads us to the interpretation of each field:

 -Field XI is agronomy in a broad sense, including food

 -Field I is theoretical physics and chemistry, including

 production and biotechnology applied to agriculture

 controlled fusion.

 -Fields XII and XIII are health sciences from

 -Field II is basic research in the life sciences (molecular

 pharmacetical products to medical technologies;

 biochemistry and genetics, molecular and cell basis of
 pharmacology, biotechnology).

 -Fields III to VI are basic and applied research in areas
 such as new materials, solid-state physics, electronics,
 chemistry, computer and communication.

 *Field III is physics of semi-conductors and compo-
 nents, analytic and electro-chemistry, catalysis, and the
 science of condensed matter.

 *Field IV is materials science plus applied and organic

 In summary, Field I is theoretical physics and chemistry;

 fields II to VI are the areas of strategic basic reseach, that
 is, fields with a clear potential, on a long time scale, for
 wide-ranging applications (communication technology,
 new materials and biotechnology); Field VII is about tech-
 niques and machines; Fields VIII and IX are earth,
 environmnental and space sciences; and Fields X to XIII are

 linked to various sectors of economic activity dealing with
 living matter, respectively renewable resources, agricul-
 ture and health.

 chemistry.

 *Field V is physics and technology of electronic com-

 ponents, integrated circuits, "group III-V" semiconduc-
 tors and photochemistry.

 *Field VI is computer science plus imaging

 technology.
 -Field VII is research on technology and devices for
 applications such as water and pollution treatment, energy
 storage, civil engineering, and new materials, plus re-
 search on machine tools and their automation.

 -Field VIII is earth sciences.

 Results

 The results of the study-that is, the scientific profiles

 for the five countries in the 13 fields-are given in numeri-
 cal and graphical form in Table 1 and Figure 1).

 Overall comparison of the profiles

 It is possible to define the distance between two profiles

 as the sum of the squares of the differences of their relative
 specialization indices over the 13 fields. Given such dis-

 tances for all pairs of countries, it is possible to visualize
 their relative similarity with a "hierarchical tree" which

 -Field IX is environmental sciences and space

 sciences.

 -Field X is research on renewable resources: forestry,
 wood and wood pulp, biomass for nutrition and energy,

 embodies as well as possible all the distances among coun-

 tries. (See Figure 2.) Clearly, the scientific profiles of Japan

 Fields of relative strength and weakness for the countries

 Table 2

 Important Relative Around the Relative Important
 relative weakness mean of the strengh relative
 weakness country strength

 France I, II, IV, V, IX III, VI, VII, VIII, X XII
 XI XIII

 FRG XI II, VIII, X, I, III, V, IX, IV, VI, VII

 XIII XII

 UK I, III II, IV, V, VII, VI, XII, XIII

 VIII, IX, X, XI

 USA I, III, IV, XII V, VII, XIII II, VI, IX

 VIII, X, XI

 Japan VIII, IX, X, XI, VII I, VI II III, IV, V

 XII, XIII

 The numbers from I to XIII refer to the 13 macro-profile fields.
 If A is the value of the macro-specialization index of a country on a field, then we have the following scheme:

 A- 70: field of important relative weakness

 70 < A- 90: field of relative weakness

 90 < A-110: field of around the mean position of the country

 110 < A-130: field of relative strength

 A-130: field of important relative strength

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 * 35

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and Germany are relatively similar, and very different
 from the three other countries; those three countries (U.S.,

 U.K., and France), in turn, have very similar profiles,
 France and the U.K. being closest.

 Let us now describe those similarities and differences

 more precisely. (See Table 2.)

 The profiles of Germany and Japan show clearly-
 differentiated strengths and weaknesses, in other words
 clear-cut scientific priorities:

 -Fields II, III, IV, V and VI (materials sciences, elec-

 tronics, solid-state physics, chemistry), all parts of what
 we call strategic basic research, are never below the
 mean. In fact, four of them for Japan and two for Ger-

 many are indeed areas of important relative strength.
 (The third area of important relative strength for
 Germany-machine tools-might also be considered
 strategic.)

 -Fields VIII, X, XI and XIII (earth sciences, renewa-
 ble resources, agronomy, and part of the health sci-
 ences) are relatively weak.

 -Fundamental research is around average. We note,
 however, that in the life sciences (Field II), another area

 of strategic research, Japan has a relative strength, while
 Germany exhibits a relative weakness.

 -Japan shows an important relative weakness for
 Fields IX and XII (space and environmental sciences
 plus medical sciences, including pharmaceticals) while
 Germany is around its average for these.

 France and the United Kingdom have much more homog-
 eneous profiles, showing almost no important relative
 strengths nor weakness.

 -Among the fields of strategic research (II to VI),
 none is above average, except field VI (computer sci-
 ence) for the U.K..

 -Fields XII and XIII (health sciences) are the (rare)

 relative strengths.

 -Fields VIII and X (earth sciences and renewable re-

 sources) are at average or just above.

 -Fundamental research is a relative weakness, ex-

 cept for life sciences where the U.K. is at average.

 -For France, Fields IX and XI (space and environ-
 mental sciences, plus agronomy) are areas of relative
 weakness.

 Even though it is not very different from the profiles of
 France and the United Kingdom, the scientific profile of
 the United States shows some interesting
 particularities.

 -Fields V and VI(electronics and computer science)

 are respectively areas of relative and important relative
 strength, showing here a focus even sharper than that
 of Japan and Germany. Fields III and IV (materials sci-
 ence, solid-state physics, chemistry), unlike Japan and
 Germany, are areas of relative weakness for the U.S., as
 they are for France and the U.K..

 -Field II (fundamental research in the life sciences)

 36 e SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 UK F USA FRG J

 Figure 2. The distances of the scientific profiles of the five

 countries. The higher one must go to link two countries, the
 more different their scientific profiles are. UK = United
 Kingdom F = France FRG = West Germany J = Japan.

 is an area of important relative strength. This is another

 sharp focus in a strategic research area, again sharper
 than Japan. (In Germany, Field II is an area of relative
 weakness.)

 -Field IX (space and environemental sciences) is an-

 other area of important relative strength, all the more

 remarkable since the U.S. is the only country where this
 field stands above average.

 -Fields XII and XIII (health sciences) are, as in

 France and the U.K., areas at or above average.

 Comparing strengths and weaknesses in abso-
 lute terms

 Using the same definition of the fields, we now compare

 the absolute weights (world shares) of each country. This
 amounts simply to calculating the percentage of total arti-

 cles in the field produced in each country. This being done,
 we arbitrarily set the value for France at 100 for each field.
 (See Table 3 and Figure 3).

 The United States compared to the other countries.
 The U.S. is dominant in all fields without exception; but
 the level of dominance varies widely from field to field.

 -For Fields III and IV (material sciences, solid-state

 physics, chemistry), where Japan and Germany have a
 strength and the U.S. a weakness, the U.S. dominance is
 only between 2.0 and 2.2 , that is, the U.S. share is twice

 as great as Japan's and twice as great as Germany's (3.5 as
 much for Field III)

 France FRG
 IUK

 2 00 300 4 00 Sws W 700

 J 1apan USA

 i

 i n

 -- 

 iT

 - N -, ,o - oo- -i

 .f r __ vz.........

 IL

 xn

 I

 -U

 o 100 200 30 4CC 500 60 70

 -For Field V (electronics) the dominance is also only 2.2

 with Japan, even though this is an area of relative U.S.
 strength. The reason is that the Japanese focus is much
 sharper here; European countries for which this is not a

 strength are dominated by factors of 6.0 to 7.5 times in this
 field by the U.S.

 -For all other fields the U.S. dominance is at least by
 a factor of 3; it is particularly striking for Field II (funda-
 mental research in life sciences) where dominance is by a

 factor of 5 to second-place Japan, even though it is an area

 of relative Japanese strength. For Field IX (space and envi-
 ronmental sciences), the U.S. dominance is by a factor of
 5.6 to second-place U.K. The U.S. dominance is not as
 strong in the health sciences (around a factor of 4).

 -Japan is in second place in Fields I to V, the U.K. for

 Fields VI, IX, XI and XIII, France for Fields VIII, X and XII

 and Germany for Fields IV and VII.

 Europe as compared to the United States and Japan.
 An aggregation of the relative scientific specialization indi-

 ces of the U.K., Germany and France gives an idea of where

 Europe would stand9 as compared to the U.S. andJapan.

 -Europe is dominant over Japan in all fields except
 Field V (electronics), where the shares are approximately
 equal. In Fields I to VII the dominance is moderate (a factor

 3 to 4). In Fields VIII to XIII the dominance is stronger (fac-
 tors greater than 5).

 -Europe is never dominant over the U.S.; nevertheless,
 its scientific weight is similar to the U.S. in Fields III and

 IV (materials sciences), which are strategic research areas.
 It is also similar for Fields VII, VIII, X, XI and XII. On the

 contrary, the U.S. has dominance over Europe in Fields II,
 V, and VI (life sciences, electronics, information sciences)
 which are also strategic research areas, as well as in Field
 IX (space and environmental).

 Summary of the results

 Japan and Germany share a marked focus on all areas

 of strategic basic research. The only exception is biotech-
 nology for Germany, but the German profile includes a
 focus on Field VII, which includes machine-tool automa-

 tion and could also be labelled "strategic." Almost all other
 areas of science are below average for these two countries.
 (The exception is environmental and health sciences
 which are at average for Germany.)

 The U.S. is focused on some of the strategic areas (bio-

 technology and computer science plus electronics) but
 below average on others (material sciences, chemistry).
 The U.S., however, is highly concentrated on environmen-
 tal and space sciences, as well as health sciences and
 technologies.

 France and the U.K. share a profile which shows little
 contrast among fields; furthermore the contrasts appar-
 ently have little to do with the concept of strategic basic re-
 search. On the contrary, France has no areas of strategic
 basic research above its average but three below; and the

 Figure 3. Absolute scientific weight of the five countries on

 the 13 macro-profile fields. By convention, the weight of
 France has been set at 100.

 U.K. has only one above (computer science) and one below.
 The relative emphasis in both counties is in health sci-
 ences, as well as, for France, earth sciences and renewable

 resources.

 The fields of relative strength for the U.S. are totally

 dominated by it (by a factor of 4 or more as compared to

 the next strongest country), with the exception of Field V
 (physics and technology of electronic components) where
 Japan is even more highly focused. In fields where the U.S.

 is not focused, while Japan and Germany are, dominance

 by the U.S. again is only by a factor of 2.0 to 2.5. This ap-
 plies to several areas of strategic basic research.

 Europe (as represented by its three major countries) has
 a scientific weight which is comparable to the U.S. in areas
 of strategic basic research such as materials sciences,

 chemistry, some aspects of electronics, machinery and ma-
 chine tools. This holds true also for some aspects of the
 health sciences. In all fields European levels of effort are

 significantly above Japanese, sometimes by a wide margin

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 * 37

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Absolute Scientific Weight of the Countries on the Macro-profile Fields

 Table 3:

 Field F FRG UK USA JPN

 I Theoretical physics and chemistry 109 118 116 518 128

 II Life sciences, basic research 100 103 121 722 146

 III Semiconductors; analytic and electro-chemistry; 100 101 96 349 177

 catalysis; condensed matter

 IV Materials science plus applied and organic 100 223 156 498 221

 chemistry

 V Physics and technology of electronic 100 123 128 755 345

 components, integrated circuits, "Group III-V"
 semiconductors, photocmemistry

 VI Computer science and imaging technology 100 131 144 655 108

 VII Technology for pollution treatment, energy 100 192 116 489 83

 storage, civil engineering, plus machine
 tool research

 VIII Earth sciences 100 63 94 378 53

 IX Environmental sciences and space sciences 100 124 144 807 81

 X Renewable resources 100 61 84 310 35

 XI Agronomy, food production, biotechnology 100 71 110 443 69

 for agriculture

 XII Life sciences: health and drugs 100 74 93 376 45

 XIII Other applied life sciences 100 91 145 632 64

 Mean 100 100 100 100 100

 Notes and References

 1. For a more detailed definition of "strategic research" or "strategic
 basic research" see J. Irvine & B. Martin, Foresight in science: picking the
 winners (London: Frances Pinter, 1984), 1-13.

 2. This leads to the concept of strategic management; see R. Barre, "Sci-

 ence and technology in France: from planning to strategy", Futures, April
 1986, 298-308.

 7. These figures for world share of scientific articles per country are un-

 derestimates, since the articles which do not mention a country of origin

 (about 15%) are counted with "rest of the world." It is interesting to com-

 pare those figures with those published recently for 1982 by D. C. Smith,

 P. M. D. Collins, D. M. Hicks and S. Wyatt, "National performance in basic
 research," Nature 323 (1986), 681-684. They get the following results
 with the CHI-NSF data base: USA, 37.2%; UK, 8.3%; Japan, 7.3%; West
 Germany, 6.3%; France, 5.4%. It is to be noted first that the figures are
 comparable to those found with the PASCAL data base, and, second, that

 what could be interpreted as an overrepresentation of France in PASCAL

 3. These indicators appear in Science Indicators, a biennial volume pre-
 pared for the National Science Board. The CHI-NSF data base, from
 which many of the bibliometric indicators in the volume are drawn, is
 prepared under contract at CHI, Inc.

 has little importance for our study which deals with profiles and not with
 absolute levels (except in the last section).

 8. The clustering was done with a hierarchical ascendant classification
 of the subfields using a CHI-square distance. The modifications of the

 4. This study was been done by R. Barre with J. P. Bordet from Applica-

 tions Scientifiques Statistiques et Informatiques (ASSI) Company and D.
 Pelissier from Centre de Documentation Scientifique et Techniques
 (CDST) of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS).
 5. Law No. 85-1376, 23 December 1985, concerning research and tech-

 nological development, Article 16.

 clusters we introduced to ease interpretation are the following: 2 clusters
 have been split in two and one split in three; five subfields have been
 shifted from one cluster to another.

 9. Germany, the U.K. and France together account for 80% of the total

 R&D spending of the 12 countries which belong to the European Eco-
 nomic Community.

 38 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (as in renewable resources, health, and earth sciences).
 The notable exception is electronics, where Japan and Eu-
 rope are about equal.

 6. In fact, the work was done with a total of 11 countries (the five already
 mentionned, plus Canada, The Netherlands, Sweden, Italy, India, and
 Australia); the clustering of the subfields discussed later in the article was
 done according to the profiles of those 11 countries and not on the five
 countries only.

