 

 

 

 

The collaboration of Emil Artin and George Whaples: Artin's mathematical circle extends

to America
Author(s): Della Dumbaugh and  Joachim Schwermer
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 5 (September 2012), pp. 465-484
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23251743
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:07 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2012) 66:465^184
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0100-2

 The collaboration of Emil Artin and George Whaples:
 Artin's mathematical circle extends to America

 Delia Dumbaugh • Joachim Schwermer

 Received: 5 January 2012 / Published online: 8 May 2012
 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract In his biography of Emil Artin, Richard Brauer describes the years from
 1931-1941 as a time when "Artin spoke through his students and through the mem
 bers of his mathematical circle" rather than through written publications. This paper

 explores these seemingly quiet years when Artin immigrated to America and dissem
 inated ideas about algebraic number theory during this time in his collaboration with

 George Whaples, a young American mathematician who had just completed his Ph.D.

 at the University of Wisconsin. The main result of their work is the use of the product

 formula for valuations to come up with an axiomatic characterization of both algebraic

 number fields and algebraic function fields with a finite field of constants. These two

 families of fields are exactly the fields for which class field theory is known to hold.

 We situate their mathematical work in the broader context of algebraic number theory
 and their lives within the broader historical context.

 1 Introduction

 Solomon Lefschetz had two points in mind when he wrote to Father John F. O'Hara,
 President of Notre Dame University, in early January, 1937. After congratulating

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 D. Dumbaugh (IS)
 Department of Mathematics, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA
 e-mail: ddumbaugh@richmond.edu

 Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Nordbergstrasse 15, 1090 Vienna, Austria
 e-mail: Joachim.Schwermer@univie.ac.at

 J. Schwermer

 J. Schwermer

 Erwin Schrodinger International, Institute for Mathematical Physics, Boltzmanngasse 9, 1090 Vienna,
 Austria

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 466 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 O'Hara on Notre Dame's recent appointment of Karl Menger to their faculty, Lefs
 chetz offered a "constructive suggestion" about another European mathematician. "I
 permit myself," Lefschetz wrote to O'Hara

 to name for your strong consideration another absolutely first rate man, the alge

 braist E. Artin, at the present time Professor at the University of Hamburg. He is

 an Austrian Aryan, but his wife is one-half Jewish. They have a couple of small

 children and you know the rest. Like Menger, Artin is in the middle thirties,
 famous not only as a first rate scientist but also as a teacher, and inspirer of
 youth, and is a most attractive personality. Although still very young he was
 in 1930, runner-up for the post of successor to Professor David Hilbert at Got
 tingen, himself an outstanding mathematical genius of all times (Lefschetz to
 O'Hara, 12 January, 1937).

 Apparently, then, from his position within the AMS, Lefschetz learned of Artin's sit
 uation and took up his cause.1 Fortunately, Father O'Hara "made a place for him on
 the [Notre Dame] faculty....in order to relieve his mind of the strain under which he
 labored in Germany (O'Hara to H. B. Wells, 11 June, 1938)." Thus it was a personal
 letter and a commitment from an institution, and not one of the organized committees,

 that initially brought Artin to America.2

 For all of Lefschetz's (accurate) accolades, he did not mention that Artin had not

 published since 1932. In fact, this request and subsequent appointment occurred dur
 ing a time that a "casual observer" might describe as "ten years of silence" (roughly

 1931-1941) in terms of written publications where, instead, "Artin spoke through his
 students and through the members of his mathematical circle (Brauer 1967, p. 36)."3
 This paper begins to explore these "ten years of silence" and how Artin disseminated
 ideas about class field theory during this time and, in particular, how Artin began to
 work with George Whaples, a young American mathematician who had just completed
 his Ph.D. at the University of Wisconsin.

 1 Discouraged by the "efficacy" (or, lack thereof) of the organized committees to aid refugees, Harlow
 Shapley, Oswald Veblen and Hermann Weyl adopted this strategy of appealing directly to an academic
 institution on behalf of a particular scholar in the late 1930s (Rider 1984, pp. 151-153). Weyl, for exam
 ple, arranged for a position at Trinity University for Bernard Baule, his former colleague at Graz. Writing

 candidly, Weyl described the position as "nothing to be particularly enthusiastic about, but certainly a lot
 better than a concentration camp (Weyl to American Friends Service, as quoted in Rider 1984, p. 119)."

 2 The work of these committees has been examined elsewhere in more general works such as Rider (1984),
 Reingold (1985), and Siegmund-Schultze (2009), to name only three.

 3 In fact, this work will serve as something of a case study for Brauer's more detailed assessment of Artin.

 As Brauer puts it, "[t]he ten year period 1921-1931 of Artin's life had seen an activity not often equalled in

 the life of a mathematician. They were followed by what may appear to a casual observer as a period of ten

 years of silence. This would be a false impression. It is true that Artin developed a strong aversion against

 the writing of papers for publication. But the essential change was that from now on, Artin spoke through

 his students and through the members of his mathematical circle. He gave his own ideas generously to his
 students. Some of the dissertations written under Artin were probably mostly his own work. Sometimes,
 he had had an idea before and led his student to find it for himself. On all of his students, Artin exerted a

 profound influence. It would be impossible to separate what was Artin's work and what was that of others

 and we shall not attempt this. Artin detested discussion of questions of priority. It did not matter in the least
 to him, whether some work was done by him or by somebody else. What mattered was that it was done the
 way he felt it should be done (Brauer 1967, pp. 36-37)."

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 467

 Artin and Whaples met at the University of Indiana in 1939 and eventually collabo

 rated on three papers. Their main result is the use of the product formula for valuations
 to come up with an axiomatic characterization of both algebraic number fields and
 algebraic function fields with a finite field of constants. These two families of fields are

 exactly the fields for which class field theory is known to hold. Their work was very
 much inspired by the notion of the idele group, a new approach to class field theory

 introduced by Claude Chevalley. Artin and Whaples defined valuation vectors as the

 additive counterpart of the ring of ideles attached to an algebraic number field. This
 association enabled them to derive the fundamental results of number theory from
 simple axioms.

 The current paper puts the work of Artin and Whaples into a larger context by trac

 ing relevant personal and professional points in their individual and collective lives.

 For Artin, this discussion begins with his important lectures on class field theory at
 the University of Hamburg in 1931/1932, which Chevalley among others attended,
 passes over to his forced emigration to the United States in 1937, and his moves to the

 University of Indiana at Bloomington in 1938 and Princeton University in 1946. For

 Whaples, we focus on his work as a Ph.D. student at Wisconsin, his collaboration with

 Artin at Indiana, and his subsequent short-term position at the Institute for Advanced

 Study in 1941-1942. We also include a discussion of the influence of the work of Artin
 and Whaples on the development of algebraic number theory in the following years.

 In the final section of the paper, we offer a fuller analysis of the salient underlying

 point of this time in Artin's career, that of his life as an immigrant.

 2 Courses in class field theory in 1931/1932

 In the summer of 1931, Artin informed Helmut Hasse that "Ich habe die Klassen

 korperbeweise jetzt endlich aufgeschrieben und werde sie Ihnen hoffentlich bald zus

 chicken konnen. Es hat doch langer gedauert als ich annehmen konnte (Artin to Hasse,
 24 August, 1931, also in: Frei and Roquette 2008, p. 396)."4 Unfortunately, these the
 orems never appeared in manuscript form and it seems doubtful that Artin sent them
 to Hasse since they are not located in the Hasse Nachlass (Cod. Ms. H. Hasse, NSUB).
 Shortly afterwards, however, Artin gave a course in Hamburg in 1931/1932 on class
 field theory that had a lasting and, in some sense, measureable influence on mathe
 matics. Shokichi Iyanaga and Rockefeller Fellow Claude Chevalley were among the
 members of Artin's audience for these lectures and discussion (Iyanaga 2006, p. 52).

 Chevalley had already worked in class field theory and communicated his results, one

 jointly with Jacques Herbrand, to the Acadmie des Sciences de Paris (Chevalley 1930,
 1931, 1932, 1933; Chevalley and Herbrand 1931). Thus, he came to Artin's course
 not only with some background but also with some contributions to class field theory.

 Within this course, Artin provided new and simpler proofs for certain statements in

 class field theory (Chevalley 1933, p. 370). As Iyanaga (2006, p. 52) reports, Chevalley

 suggested some of these simplifications. "Chevalley had the idea for improving the pre
 sentation in Artin's course. He communicated these ideas to me and then to Artin who,

 4 "Finally I have written up the class field proofs and, hopefully, I will soon be able to send them to you
 (our translation)."

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 468 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 in turn, passed them on to the audience at the beginning of the following hour (Iyanaga
 2006, p. 52)." Chevalley (1933) describes his thesis "Sur la theorie du corps de classes

 dans les corps finis et les corps locaux" as a "new exposition in class field theory" and

 thanks Artin, among others, for simplifications of theorems. Thus, although Chevalley

 was not an "official" Ph.D. student of Artin, his thesis represents a prominent example
 of Artin's success in "speaking through the members of his mathematical circle." We

 note the somewhat obvious contrast between the "silence" of Artin's promised theo

 rems of August, 1931 that never appeared and the lasting influence of a course begun

 shortly thereafter. Perhaps this historical record offers contemporary academicians a

 more expanded view of how to measure the success of a mathematician?

 Continuing with what was an apparently good idea, in 1932, Artin also offered a
 course in class field theory at Gottingen. Olga Taussky wrote up the notes for this
 course and sold them for 1 Mark to cover printing costs. A translation of these notes

 is now preserved in (Cohn 1978, pp. 277-304). Taussky comments that in these notes,
 which "were very much used despite their limited circulation" Artin "made use of
 the ideas of Herbrand and was more modern than probably any other publication on
 some of the basic facts in class field theory for some time (Cohn 1978, p. 276)." In the

 summer of 1933, Artin gave a course on algebraic number theory, designated in the
 list of courses as "Algebra," at the University of Hamburg. We know the content of

 this course from the notes taken by E.A. Eichelbrunner (Artin 1933). In particular, in

 this course, Artin presented the basic material regarding the theory of valuations. It is

 worth noting that, at the time, Artin had only the original papers of Kurt Hensel, Josef
 Kurschak, and Alexander Ostrowski, among others, at his disposal, accompanied by
 the course material ofHensel published in 1908 and 1913(Hensel 1913). Ostrowski's
 seminal paper "Untersuchungen zur arithmetischen Theorie der Korper (Die Theorie
 der Teilbarkeit in allgemeinen Korpern)" was already submitted at that time but only
 appeared in 1935 (Ostrowski 1935).

 After the three manuscripts and one book Artin published in 1931 and 1932 (Artin

 1931a,b, 1932a,b), he would not publish again until 1940. During the time before he
 left Hamburg, however, he not only hosted international visitors such as the young
 Herbrand, Chevalley and Iyanaga, but he also advised several students including Max
 Zorn (1931) and Hans Zassenhaus (1934). (In 1927 he advised his first student, Kate

 Hey (1927), in her thesis work that extended the theory of the Dedekind Zeta func
 tion to the semi-simple hypercomplex number systems). As Brauer notes, although
 this may have seemed like a period of silence, indeed Artin was distributing mathe

 matical ideas through the meaningful avenues of courses and dissertations. He would
 continue this trend when he arrived in America as well as resume publishing math
 ematics. George Whaples would be among the first young Americans to join—and
 benefit from—Artin's mathematical circle.

 3 Artin and Whaples

 Artin and Whaples met in 1939 when their paths overlapped at Indiana University.

 Artin had immigrated to America only 2 years earlier and taken a short-term position at

 Notre Dame University in South Bend, Indiana (Fenster 2007). News of Artin's arrival

 in America did not go unnoticed at Indiana University, some 174 miles south of Notre

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 469

 Dame, particularly by the Chairman of the Mathematics Department, K. P. Williams.
 "It seems to me that departments should be strengthened from time to time as occasion

 offers," K. P. Williams wrote to his dean. "There is the opportunity to strengthen this
 one... There is Professor Artin at Notre Dame, almost on our doorstep, perhaps the
 leading man in algebra in the world, and one of the outstanding mathematicians of
 all fields (Williams to Payne, 6 April 1938)." Williams apparently made a convincing

 case to the dean since Indiana University offered Artin a permanent position beginning
 in the 1938-1939 academic year.

 In 1939, Whaples earned his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin under the

 direction of Mark H. Ingraham. In his dissertation, "On the structure of modules with

 a commutative algebra as operator domain," as Whaples described it, he "worked on

 the problem of finding necessary and sufficient conditions for the similarity of two
 matrix representations of a commutative algebra (Whaples, Application to IAS, 10
 February, 1941)." Ingraham would later call Whaples "one of the strongest students
 we have ever had at Wisconsin. His mind is rather the original type, and more like
 E. H. Moore in always wishing to pass from the general to the concrete rather than
 in the reverse order than any student I have had (Ingraham to Veblen, 11 February,
 1941)." To be compared to E. H. Moore in American circles was the highest of praise.
 In this case, this comment had particular meaning since Ingraham and Veblen were
 both students of Moore at Chicago (Archibald 1938, p. 146).

 Whaples spent 1939-1941 at Indiana in a post-doctoral position where he learned
 class field theory and worked with Emil Artin (Whaples, Application to IAS, Feb
 ruary, 1941). This collaboration with Artin ultimately resulted in the publication of
 three papers: "The Theory of Simple Rings," "Axiomatic Characterization of Fields
 By the Product Formula for Valuations", and "A Note on Axiomatic Characterization

 of Fields." In the first paper, Artin and Whaples dealt with the structure of simple rings

 and extended existing theorems for simple algebras to simple rings. In their second and

 third publications, Artin and Whaples provided an axiomatic characterization of what
 is nowadays called a global field by means of the product formula. The commitment

 to clarify the role played by the basic result in a theory was fundamental to Artin's
 approach to mathematics. Later, Whaples would capture the essence of Artin's style
 as he had experienced it in his collaboration when he described

 the tradition of the lectures of Emil Artin, who enjoyed developing a subject

 from first principles and devoted much research to finding the simplest proofs at

 every stage. From him we learned how important it is to do this: it is a matter of

 honor that one should have in his memory the complete proofs of all the theorems

 he uses; the proof of a new theorem often is found by adapting and extending a

 method used to prove an old one; and sometimes a known proof using hard com

 putations with the results of lemmas can be replaced by an elegant conceptual

 one using arguments and sub-results from the proofs of those lemmas (Whaples
 1965).

 While working with Artin, Whaples also published his own results on the "ramifica

 tion of class fields and of the theorem of Grunwald on [the] existence of cyclic fields

 with given local properties (Whaples, Application to IAS, February, 1941; Whaples
 1942)." Artin would later cite his non-analytic approach in this work in his letter of

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 470 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 recommendation for Whaples to the Institute for Advanced Study without, apparently,
 noticing the mistake that his own student Shianghaw Wang would find in 1948 (Artin
 to Veblen, 13 February, 1941).

 4 Joint papers of Artin and Whaples

 4.1 Artin/Whaples "The Theory of Simple Rings" (1943)

 Given the focus of Whaples' dissertation, it seems not so surprising that the first joint

 work Artin and Whaples pursued was on simple associative rings. In this paper, Artin
 and Whaples used a new approach to prove structure theorems that generalized known
 theorems of simple algebras. Specifically, Artin and Whaples presented the foundation

 for a structure theory of simple associative rings, that is, associative rings R containing

 no two sided ideal other than itself and 0, such that R2 0. They proved theorems that

 generalized results in the structure theory of simple associative algebras as initiated by

 J. H. M. Wedderburn in his theory of hypercomplex number systems and pursued by
 A. Adrian Albert and Artin among others. "The reader will be able, if he wishes" Artin

 and Whaples point out in their introduction, "to extract from our discussion proofs of
 the structure theorems for algebras which are shorter than those usually given (Artin

 and Whaples 1943, p. 87)." This applies, for example, to their "Theorem 4" where
 the authors indicate in a footnote that this result was first proved (for simple algebras)
 by Wedderburn (Wedderburn 1907). It concerns Wedderburn's groundbreaking result
 that, given a finite-dimensional simple algebra A over a field F, there exists a finite
 dimensional division algebra D (unique up to isomorphism) and a unique integer r
 such that A is isomorphic to the matrix algebra Mr{D). As Artin would later reflect,

 [t]he essential point in the definition of an algebra is that it is a vector space
 of finite dimension over a field. This fact allows us to conclude that ascending

 and descending chains of subalgebras will terminate. After the great success that
 Emmy Noether had in her ideal theory in rings with ascending chain condition,

 it seemed reasonable to expect that in rings where the ascending and descending
 chain condition holds for left ideals one should obtain results similar to those of

 Wedderburn (Artin 1950, p. 67).

 The new point of view introduced by Emmy Noether was the notion of a represen
 tation space, that is, a vector space where the elements of the algebra act as linear
 transformations. The work of Artin and Whaples showed that this treatment of sim
 ple algebras could be generalized to a wider class of rings. This new point of view
 would also allow Chevalley and Nathan Jacobson, independently of one another, to
 generalize Wedderburn's fundamental theorem.

 4.2 Artin/Whaples "Axiomatic Characterization of Fields by the Product Formula for
 Valuations" (1945) and "A Note on Axiomatic Characterization of Fields" (1946)

 Artin and Whaples' "Axiomatic Characterization of Fields by the Product Formula for
 Valuations" appeared in the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society in 1945

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 471

 and represented a conceptual breakthrough in algebraic number theory in so far as it
 clarified the role played by the product formula in characterizing the basic objects of
 algebraic number theory from a valuation theoretic point of view. At the same time,
 the paper emphasized the close analogy between the theory of algebraic number fields
 and the theory of algebraic function fields with a Galois field as the field of constants.
 The axiomatic method used in this paper unifies these two cases, nowadays bound
 together by the general notion of a global field as the basic object of study. These two

 families of fields are exactly the fields for which class field theory is known to hold.

 The ideal theoretic approach as developed by Dedekind and his successors had

 dominated the development in algebraic number theory for a long time. However,
 Hensel (1913) introduced a new methodological approach to questions in number the
 ory alongside the ideal theoretic approach at the turn of the century. Hensel's new

 concept of p-adic numbers marked the beginning of the theory of valuations.5

 In 1921-1924, Hasse had demonstrated the importance of Hensel's ideas for clas

 sical questions in number theory, in particular, in the arithmetic theory of quadratic
 forms over number fields (Hasse 1923a,b, 1924a,b). At that time, Artin was still quite

 "in favor" of the ideal theoretic approach to algebraic number theory. "I remember
 numerous conversations," Hasse later recalled,

 which I had with Artin in the years 1922-1925 about the p-adics. Artin was

 very much in favor (with fire and flame) of Dedekind's theory of ideals in which
 the greater elegance and simplicity deeply impressed him, and he had the same

 5 The valuation theoretic approach to number theory grew out of a new view of prime ideals in the ring
 of integers in an algebraic number field k. In analogy to the usual absolute values on k which correspond
 to the real, respectively complex embeddings of k, one introduced absolute values associated with prime
 ideals.

 More precisely, a valuation | | on k is a function defined on k with values in the non-negative real numbers

 satisfying the following axioms:

 (1) |a| = 0 if and only if a = 0
 (2) |a£>| = \a\\b\ for all a, b e k
 (3) \a + b\ < |a| + \b\ for all a, b e k.

 One calls a valuation non-archimedean if in addition to (3) it satisfies \a + b\ < max(|a|, \b\). If it is not
 non-archimedean, then it is called archimedean. The valuation \a\ = 1 for all a / 0 is called the trivial

 valuation. Two valuations | |j, | I2 on the same field are equivalent if there is a c > 0 such that |a|j = \a\2
 for all a € k. Equivalence is clearly an equivalence relation.
 A set of equivalent and non-trivial valuations of the field k is called a prime (divisor) or a place of that field,

 and denoted by letters like p, p or v. We denote by kv the completion of k with respect to the topology
 induced on k by the place v. There are two types of valuations possible. First, there are a finite number of

 completions kv = R or C corresponding to the places given by embeddings of k into R or C (up to complex
 conjugation in the latter case). These valuations are archimedean. In other words, all real embeddings of
 k and all pairs of conjugate imaginary embeddings give rise to archimedean valuations. These are all the
 archimedean places an algebraic number field admits. Second, there are an infinite number of non-archime

 dean places, one for each prime ideal in the ring of algebraic integers of k. For example, on the field Q of

 rational numbers there is one non-archimedean place for each prime p > 0, the p-adic valuation defined by

 for u,x,y 6 Z, x, y not divisible by p. It is a fundamental result of Ostrowski that the only non-trivial

 valuations on Q are those equivalent to the | \p or the ordinary absolute value | |oo

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 472 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 regretful smile for the p - adics as my Gottingen teachers at the time. .. .Only
 the later great success of the p -adics in the theory of algebras and class fields
 made it possible to call his attention to Hensel's method, to allow him to fully
 acknowledge its value and lead him to contribute papers on the foundation of
 the p -adic (valuations of algebraic number fields) (Hasse 1950, p. 10).6

 At the same time Hasse developed the idea of the /j-adic transfer from the "small" to
 the "large," later to be called his local-global principle (Schwermer 2009). It served

 as a far reaching focus in his research in the following years and came to full fruition

 in his joint work with Brauer and Emmy Noether when they established the structure
 theory for central simple algebras defined over an algebraic number field in late 1931
 (Brauer et al. 1932).

 At end of the 1920s and in the early 1930s, Artin shifted his own thinking from the

 ideal theoretic approach to the valuation theoretic approach. It might very well have
 been the success of the local-global principle in the theory of central simple algebras
 that ultimately convinced Artin to give the valuation theoretic method or point of

 view a more central role in his own work. His first contribution to the theory of val

 uations was his short note " Uber die Bewertungen algebraischer Zahlkorper" which
 he submitted on August 24, 1931, to Crelle's Journal for publication in the special
 volume in honor of Kurt Hensel's 70th birthday. In this short note (Artin 1932b), Artin

 determined all possible valuations that an algebraic number field admits.

 Although Artin had initially embraced the ideal theoretic approach to class field
 theory—with no less than what Hasse called "fire and flame"—he ultimately inte
 grated the valuation theoretic approach in his work, not only in his research but also

 in his teaching. In particular, he imparted that approach to Whaples and it formed the
 essence of their second and third papers.

 The second paper is based on an invited address delivered by Artin on April 23,
 1943 to the Chicago meeting of the American Mathematical Society. In Section 1 of
 the written version, Artin and Whaples briefly recall the background material in the
 theory of valuations on fields. However, the first section culminates with a result not

 previously found in the literature in this form, namely the so-called Weak Approxi
 mation Theorem. This result reads as follows (where k denotes a field):

 THEOREM. If we are given any n nontrivial inequivalent valuations | |„ of k,
 an element av of k for each valuation, and an e >0, then we can find an element
 a of k such that

 W — au|u < e for each v = 1, 2,... n

 (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 472).

 6 Ich entsinne mich an zahlreiche Gesprache, die ich in den Jahren 1922-1925 mit Artin iiber den Wert

 der p-adik fiihrte. Artin war Feuer und Flamme fur die Dedekindsche Idealtheorie, in der ihn die grossere
 Eleganz und Einfachheit bestach, und hatte fur die p-adik dasselbe mitleidige Lacheln wie seinerseits meine
 Gottinger Lehrer... Erst die spateren grossen Erfolge der p-adik in der Theorie der Algebren und Klas
 senkorper vermochten es, ihn fiir die Henselsche Methode zu gewinnen, ihn zur vollen Anerkennung ihres

 Wertes zu bringen und gar eigene Arbeiten von ihm zur Begriindung der p-adik (Bewertungen algebraischer
 Zahlkorper) herbeizufiihren.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 473

 We briefly discuss the relation of the statement of this theorem to another approx
 imation result, namely, the "Chinese Remainder Theorem," the generalization of a
 classical result for the ring of integers Z to all Dedekind rings. Let Ok be the ring of
 algebraic integers in the given algebraic number field k, and let pi,..., p„ denote n
 distinct prime ideals in Ok- For each of these prime ideals there is a corresponding

 valuation | |p. Let x\,,xn be elements of Ok, and let v be a positive integer. Then,
 by the Chinese Remainder Theorem, one can find an element y e Ok, rather than

 just in k, such that y = x, mod p(y for i = 1,..., n. In terms of the corresponding
 valuation this reads as |_y — jt,-1 Pl < tv for some real number t with 0 < t < 1.

 The "Chinese Remainder Theorem" only covers valuations corresponding to prime

 ideals, i.e., non-archimedean valuations whereas the Weak Approximation Theorem
 includes archimedean valuations as well. However, it is worth noting that the "Chinese

 Remainder Theorem" places integrality conditions at all places.

 Artin and Whaples' Weak Approximation Theorem has important consequences.

 First, given an algebraic number field k, let o\,..., ar denote r distinct embeddings
 k —> R of k into the field of real numbers, and let e,-, i = 1,..., r, be an element in the

 "set of signs" {+1, —1}. Then the Approximation Theorem implies that there exists
 an element a e k* with sign(cr, (a)) = e,-. This result is very useful in the arithme
 tic theory of algebraic groups, in particular, orthogonal groups attached to quadratic

 forms over number fields. It permits, for example, the construction of quadratic forms
 / over k which are indefinite at one real place, say a, of k and whose conjugates
 f', a, / a, are positive definite.

 Second, as pointed out by Artin and Whaples, one has the independence of valua

 tions as a corollary:

 COROLLARY. If | |i, | I2,..., | |„ are nontrivial and inequivalent then a
 relation

 Wl1 \x\V2 ■ ■ ■ \x\Vnn = 1

 is true for all x e k,x ^ 0, if and only if all v, = 0 (Artin and Whaples 1945,
 p. 473).

 However, for the circle of questions of interest to Artin and Whaples, the approxima

 tion theorem implies that no "finite number of valuations can be interrelated in a field.

 Such an interrelation may nevertheless happen for an infinite number of valuations.

 In the case of the ordinary function fields and number fields that is not only the case

 but this fact may even be used to derive all the properties of these fields on a common

 basis (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 473)." As Artin and Whaples put it, a prime divisor

 of a given field k is a set of equivalent and non-trivial valuations of that field. Then

 they introduce the following axiom:

 AXIOM 1. There is a set M of prime divisors p of k and a fixed set of valuations

 | |p , one for each p e M, such that, for every a ^ 0 of k, |a|p = 1 for all but
 a finite number of p € M. and

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 474 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 nwp=1

 p

 where this product is extended over all p e M (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 473).

 One should point out that the set M. may or may not be the set of all prime divisors
 of k. Suppose that the field k satisfies this axiom then the set M. can contain only a
 finite number of archimedean divisors, and if M. contains some of these archimedean

 divisors then there is no field of constants, that is, we are not in the case of a function
 field.

 Associated to the set A4 is a certain space of vectors a with one component ap for
 each divisor p. The component ap may range freely over the p-completion kv of k.
 If the set M. is the set of all prime divisors of k then the space is what is known as
 the space of valuation vectors. Artin and Whaples did not introduce this notion yet

 but they point out that "the ideles of Chevalley are special cases of these vectors; for

 an idele we must have ap ^ 0 for all p and |a|p = 1 for all but a finite number of p
 (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 473)." Artin and Whaples continue, "Our field k may be
 considered a subset of this space inasmuch as a e k may also be considered as the

 vector whose p-coordinate is the element a of kp (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 474)."
 This first axiom is supplemented by the second axiom

 AXIOM 2. The set M. of Axiom 1 contains at least one prime q, which is one
 of the following two types:

 1. Discrete, with a residue class field of finite order Nq.

 2. Archimedean, with a completed field kq which is either the real or the complex
 field (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 475).

 The main result of the paper is stated in Artin and Whaples' Theorem 3 (Artin and
 Whaples 1945, p. 484):

 If k is a field that satisfies the Axioms 1 and 2 it is an extension of a finite degree
 n either of the rational field R or of the field R = ko(z) of rational functions

 over its field of constants &o- All valuations satisfy Axiom 2. M. consists of all
 extensions of the well known valuations of R.

 Artin and Whaples concluded this paper by deriving from the two axioms some basic
 results in algebraic number theory that were fundamental in the previous non-axi
 omatic approach. These included, among others, Dirichlet's unit theorem and the
 finiteness of the class number.

 Ten months after submitting this paper, Artin and Whaples added a short note where

 they were able to weaken one of the assumptions in Axiom 1, namely they replaced

 "that for every a ^ 0 of k, |a|p = 1 for all but a finite number of p e M" by the
 assumption that the product of all valuations converges absolutely to the limit 1 for all
 a. They easily adapted the proof of the previously given axiomatic characterization
 of fields to the new axiom with a few modifications.

 This work of Artin and Whaples played a critical role in the development of alge

 braic number theory. Their work is important because it is strongly related with the

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 emergence of the notions of ideles, due to Chevalley, and valuation vectors. The mod
 ern term for these valuation vectors is adeles.

 Artin-Whaples 475

 This view was previously expressed by Andre Weil in his review of the The Col

 lected Papers ofEmil Artin where he notes

 [t]he joint work with Whaples in 1945 played an important role in the introduc

 tion of the adele concept in algebraic number theory (Weil 1967a).

 Weil was even more explicit in the foreword to his book Basic Number Theory where

 he explained in some detail that "[t]o improve upon Hecke, in a treatment along the
 classical lines of the theory of algebraic numbers, would be a futile and impossible
 task." Instead, the point of view Weil adopted in this book was the adelic one. He
 pointed out

 [i]n the days of Dirichlet and Hermite, and even of Minkowski, the appeal to
 "continuous variables" in arithmetical questions may well have seemed to come
 out of some magician's bag of tricks. In retrospect, we see now that the real
 numbers appear there as one of the infinitely many completions of the prime
 field, one which is neither more nor less interesting to the arithmetician than its

 /;-adic companions, and that there is at least one language and one technique,

 that of the adeles, for bringing them all together under one roof and making them

 cooperate for a common purpose (Weil 1967b).

 As mathematics advanced, the concept of adeles and the accompanying Local-Global
 Principle became the language of choice in the arithmetic theory of algebraic groups,

 their representation theory and the theory of automorphic forms as well in large parts

 of arithmetic algebraic geometry.

 These collaborative papers underscore Artin's willingness to share his ideas with
 his students and to include them in the publication of that work. Whaples had arrived

 at Indiana in 1939 without any apparent deep knowledge of algebraic number theory,
 in particular, class field theory. By April, 1943, he and Whaples had begun to think

 about the structural and conceptual underpinnings of the main results in class field the

 ory. As they point out, these results hold for algebraic number fields and for function
 fields with a Galois field as the field of constants. Indeed, number fields and function

 fields are characterized by their possession of a product formula. In turn, as Artin and

 Whaples assert, "this shows that the theorems of class field theory are consequences
 of two simple axioms concerning the valuations (Artin and Whaples 1945, p. 469)."
 Their work represents a significant contribution to algebraic number theory and, in

 particular, to the very foundations of class field theory, a field that Weyl would describe
 as one of the "most difficult and elaborate theories] in all of mathematics (Secretary
 of IAS School of Mathematics to Professor Tracy Thomas, 20 June, 1947)." While

 Artin may have served as the leader on these collaborations, Weyl noted that he knew

 "that Whaples's contributions to these joint papers were very considerable (Secretary
 of IAS School of Mathematics to Professor Tracy Thomas, 20 June, 1947)." Later,
 Artin and Tate's lectures on class field theory would develop the subject further using

 the methods of cohomology theory (Artin and Tate 1968). It was, however, the work

 of Artin and Whaples that began this transition in the approach to class field theory.

 "£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 476 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 5 Whaples on his "own feet"

 Whaples' work and association with Artin opened the door for him to visit the Institute
 for Advanced Study in Princeton (IAS). In early 1941, apparently while working on
 these papers with Whaples, Artin contacted Hermann Weyl at the IAS about the pos
 sibility of Whaples serving as an assistant to Weyl for the 1941-1942 academic year.7

 Weyl indicated that Artin's proposition was indeed a possibility and sent the requisite
 instructions and application materials for Whaples. Whaples' application and asso
 ciated letters of recommendation provide insight into Whaples as a mathematician,
 teacher, and man.

 In his outline of his plans for his mathematical work during the year at the IAS,
 Whaples indicated that while he had focused on finding matrix representations of a
 commutative algebra in his dissertation, he had spent most of the past year at Indiana
 "learning class field theory (Whaples 1941)." That would be learning class field the
 ory from Artin. Whaples showed a great deal of vision when he wrote "I am trying

 to find a non-analytic proof of the theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions, and
 am also seeking existence theorems for non-abelian fields with given local properties.

 I plan to continue work on problems of this sort next year, with the general goal of
 simplifying class field theory, finding a generalization of it to non-abelian fields, and

 applying it to the question of what groups can be Galois groups of extension fields
 (Whaples, Application to the IAS, February, 1941, p. 2)."8 In many ways, then, Wha
 ples' research plan represented a continuation of research in class field theory, only
 now in America and by an American. The items of his planned research were very
 much in line with the current research topics in algebraic number theory, namely, to

 acquire some insight into non-abelian class field theory. Initiated by Artin, Hasse and
 Emmy Noether among others, one line of thought was to view the commutative case,
 i.e., algebraic number theory, as a special case of a general theory of hypercomplex
 number systems. This focus gave rise to a full development of that theory but was
 not successful in reaching the sort of conclusion to class field theory one had desired.
 Today, it is still only in the abelian case that class field theory leads to the laws of
 decomposition for prime ideals within a field extension and to the law of reciprocity.

 All three letters of recommendation described Whaples as "shy" and with a dream

 like quality about him. Whaples' dream-like, absent minded qualities made it difficult

 for him in the classroom where he was apparently not inspiring (MacDuffee to Veblen,
 17 February, 1941). However, C. C. MacDuffee also noted that Whaples' manner
 isms were "deceptive" since "his mind is very alert. I think he has unusual powers

 of concentration, and will make a typical specimen of the absent-minded professor
 (MacDuffee to Veblen, 17 February, 1941)". It may have been this combination of
 qualities that prompted Artin to cite Whaples' affable personality that helped him
 prove "very inspiring" to other graduate students at Princeton. Or, perhaps, indeed

 7 Here, again, we aim to give further shape to Brauer's insight into Artin's desire "to help [his students] to

 develop their own mathematical personalities, to assist them to stand on their own feet, to kindle in them a
 deep love of mathematics (Brauer 1967, p. 39).

 8 Whaples applied for a stipend but was ultimately funded as Weyl's assistant with a salary of $1,500 for
 the year (Weyl to Whaples, 13 March, 1941).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 477

 Whaples had "out grown" some of these tendencies as Ingraham surmised. In any
 case, his teaching ability really did not matter at the IAS since the position focused on
 research. "Of course," Weyl described the position to Whaples,

 this means that you would not be entirely your own master, that you would have
 to help me a little with my lectures and with my mathematical endeavors, and
 there would be some routine work to be attended to. But it wouldn't be very
 much and it would not interfere with your research work. I am quite anxious
 that you continue your work in close contact with Professor Chevalley (Weyl to
 Whaples, 18 March, 1941).

 In some sense, Weyl picked up where Artin left off, particularly with creating oppor

 tunities for Whaples to interact with Chevalley who at that time was a professor at

 Princeton University.

 While at the IAS in 1941-1942, Whaples gave a course on class field theory and a

 series of lectures titled "Remarks on class field theory." Thus, what began at Indiana
 in a post-doctoral position now continued at the celebrated IAS. Weyl's other assis
 tant, Alfred T. Brauer, gave at least one lecture on "On the Solvability of the Linear
 Diophantine Equation in Positive Integers." Brauer, the brother of Richard Brauer,
 had arrived in the U.S. in 1939 and worked at the Emergency Aid for Displaced Ger
 man Scholars. Weyl hoped to help him by appointing him as his assistant in 1941.
 In addition to Weyl, during the year Whaples spent at the IAS, then as now, a veri
 table who's-who of celebrated mathematicians came into his sphere including James
 Alexander, Marston Morse, John von Neumann, Wolfgang Pauli, and Carl L. Siegel
 among the more permanent members and A. Adrian Albert, Richard Courant, Paul
 Erdos, Jacques Hadamard, Saunders Mac Lane, and Oscar Zariski for shorter visits.
 In March, 1942, Weyl wrote a letter of recommendation for Whaples for a Ben

 jamin Pierce Instructorship at Harvard. Weyl mentioned that he "should not describe

 him as brilliant, and yet someday he might achieve the unexpected; there is something
 about him of the still waters that run deep (Weyl to Stone, 12 March, 1942)." Appar
 ently Whaples did not secure this position at Harvard; instead, he took a position as an

 instructor of mathematics at Johns Hopkins University. Weyl commented that Whaples

 "is not irreplaceable at this time in his present position, but this is much less the case
 in his new position as instructor of mathematics at Johns Hopkins (Weyl to no name
 given, 21 May, 1942)." Whaples assumed a position at the University of Pennsylvania
 in January, 1944 and then moved to Indiana in 1947, perhaps not coincidentally the

 year after Artin left Indiana for Princeton.

 6 Beyond the work of Artin and Whaples

 In 1950, nearly two decades after Chevalley took Artin's course on class field the

 ory at Hamburg and almost a decade after Artin and Whaples began their work on
 valuation vectors at Indiana University, John Tate completed his Princeton doctoral
 thesis under Artin's supervision on "Fourier analysis in number fields and Hecke's

 zeta-functions." In his thesis, Tate provided the most elegant and unified treatment of

 the analytic properties, the analytic continuation and the functional equation of the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 478 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 generalized zeta-functions. Hecke had introduced these zeta-functions in 1920 in his
 two seminal papers " Uber eine neue Art von Zetafunktionen und ihre Beziehungen
 zur Verteilung der Primzahlen" (Hecke 1918, 1920). Tate followed a new methodo
 logical approach that relied on abelian harmonic analysis in the conceptual framework
 of the notions of ideles and adeles as introduced by Chevalley and Artin. Margaret
 Matchett had already taken a first step in this direction in her 1946 thesis, "On the Zeta
 Function for Ideles," written under the direction of Artin at Indiana. She redefined

 classical Zeta-Functions in terms of integrals over the idele group. She interpreted the

 characters of Hecke as exactly those characters of the ideal group that could be derived
 from idele characters. She did not, however, succeed in proving the functional equa
 tion for the zeta-functions in terms of the idelic approach. Tate established this last
 result in his thesis. Tate summarized the importance and position of the contributions
 of Chevalley and Artin and Whaples to algebraic number theory in the introduction to

 his thesis. "In a work," Tate began,

 the main purpose of which was to take analysis out of class field theory, Chev

 alley introduced the excellent notion of the idele group, as a refinement of the
 ideal group. In ideles Chevalley had not only found the best approach to class
 field theory, but to algebraic number theory generally. This is shown by Artin

 and Whaples (1945). They defined valuation vectors as the additive counterpart
 of ideles, and used these notions to derive from simple axioms all of the basic
 statements of algebraic number theory (Tate 1950, p. 306).

 A year later, Artin published his Algebraic Numbers and Algebraic Functions
 (Artin 1951), a text Artin viewed as a collection of lecture notes. "These lecture
 notes," as Artin described them in 1967, "represent the content of a course given at
 Princeton University during the academic year 1950/1951. This course was a revised
 and extended version of a series of lectures given at New York University during the
 preceding summer. They cover the theory of valuations, local class field theory, the

 elements of algebraic number theory and the theory of algebraic function fields of one
 variable."

 Artin credited Mr. I. Adamson for preparing the notes and Tate for helpful discus
 sions that led to simplifications of some proofs. Artin arranged the lecture notes into

 three parts:

 • General Valuation Theory (chapters 1-5)
 • Local class field theory (chapters 6-10)
 • Product formula and function fields in one variable (chapters 11-17).

 In chapter 12, familiarly titled "Characterization of Fields by the Product Formula,"

 Artin covers the material of the Artin-Whaples paper of similar title. He introduces

 Axiom 1 and Axiom 2 from the original paper and refers to fields that satisfy these
 axioms as Product Formula Fields, or PF-fields. The main result here is the same as

 the Artin-Whaples paper: A PF-field is either an algebraic number field, or a finite
 extension of a field of rational functions.

 It took little time for what Artin called his "lecture notes" to influence young and
 advanced scholars. In December, 1951, for example, Kenkichi Iwasawa submitted his
 paper "On the rings of valuation vectors" to the Annals of Mathematics. In this work,

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 479

 Iwasawa refers to specific results in Artin's Algebraic Numbers and Algebraic Func
 tions. In his 1958 publication, "On the zeta-function of the simple algebra over the
 field of rational numbers," G. Fujisaki extended Tate's methods for dealing with zeta
 functions over number fields to one of a simple algebra over a number field [Fujisaki
 1958]. In his introduction, Fujusaki outlines that "[i[n section 5 we define, after Artin
 [Algebraic Numbers and Algebraic Functions] the concepts of valuation vectors and
 ideles in A [our emphasis]." Fujusaki's reference suggests that no other text on valu
 ation vectors was available, or, at least, that Artin had created an accessible, helpful
 text.

 Thus, Artin's professional opportunities from the course in Hamburg in 1931/1932

 to the courses in New York and Princeton in 1950/1951 highlight the critical impor
 tance of well-conceived lectures that hinged, in part, on an integration of ideas rather
 than a more traditional delivery. In between, Artin's direct work with students calls

 attention to his natural inclination to exchange ideas freely in a different setting. These
 exchanges were mutually beneficial. In the introduction to Artin's Collected Works,
 Lang and Tate commented that Artin's "lectures and seminars ... inspired his stu
 dents, towards whom his generosity and affection were unsurpassed [Artin, Collected
 Works, p. x]." In one of his last conversations with Richard Brauer, reflecting on his

 students John Tate and Serge Lang, Artin remarked that "[t]his happens only once to
 a man. Not many mathematicians have been that lucky (Brauer 1967, pp. 28-29)."
 These observations give further insight into Hans Zassenhaus's characterization of
 Artin. Specifically, in his obituary of Artin, immediately after his overview of Artin's

 life, Zassenhaus chose to focus first on Artin's teaching and then on his mathemati

 cal contributions. "In my memory," Zassenhaus reflected, "Artin stands out as a great
 teacher....A teacher in our field can work through many channels of communication:

 by formal lectures, by research papers, by textbooks, by private conversation, and by

 generating an infectious spirit of doing research in a large group of students, working

 through a few (Zassenhaus 1964, pp. 1-2]." Research papers and textbooks represent
 one form of teaching. Lectures, private conversation and an infectious spirit form
 another. So Brauer was right. There were no years of "silence" in Artin's professional
 career. Lefschetz was also right: Artin was "famous ... as a teacher, and inspirer of
 youth."

 The mathematics discussed in this paper occurred during a time of tremendous
 upheaval in Artin's life. Artin immigrated to America in 1937 with his (then) two
 children and wife. They were a young family displaced by the Nazis. He initially held

 a (temporary) position at Notre Dame, then moved to Indiana University and finally

 to Princeton. Artin seemed to embody the quintessential attributes of scholarship and
 adaptability which later scholars would designate as critical to an emigrant's suc
 cess (Ash 2003; Siegmund-Schultze 2009). Artin was remarkably fortunate to have a

 position at an institution waiting for him when he arrived in America and equally as

 fortunate to secure a position at Princeton less than a decade after his arrival in Amer

 ica. He willingly distributed his mathematical ideas to American students, women

 included, and ultimately wielded a mighty influence in the country he called home for
 two decades.

 As Mitchell Ash points out in his "Forced Migration and Scientific Change,"
 "[e]migre scientists and scholars were not only victims, but also agents (Ash 2003,

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 480 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 p. 255)." This investigation of Artin's work suggests that Artin worked as something
 of an "agent" in terms of distributing ideas about class field theory and algebraic
 number theory to America. In terms of Brauer's characterization of his "mathematical

 circles," the work of Artin and Whaples highlights Artin's ever-expanding mathemat

 ical circle. "Adaptability" was an issue for immigrants to America (and elsewhere for

 that matter). Carl Ludwig Siegel, for example, after a return visit to Europe admitted
 that "I no longer have the hope, which led me to America four years ago, of find
 ing a tolerable position abroad. My character is too clearly developed, and I can no
 longer suppress my asocial instincts and individualistic tendencies. I can no longer
 adapt, I am too much of a Prussian (Siegel to Courant, March 22, 1939, as quoted in
 Siegmund-Schultze 2009, p. 238)."

 Artin's ease at folding students into his mathematical circle suggests he was adept
 at adapting, at least professionally. Ash rightly urges caution when it comes to estab
 lishing "causal relationships between forced migration and scientific change (Ash
 2003, p. 255)." In the case of Artin, however, even with this cautionary approach
 in mind, it seems reasonable to suggest that his forced migration played a pivotal
 role in bringing class field theory to America. It was a confluence of critical events
 that shaped this moment in the history of mathematics. Artin had given a course
 on class field theory in Hamburg in the early 1930s that Chevalley, among others,
 had attended. The political situation in Germany forced Artin's departure for Amer
 ica not long after. The "for America" cannot be overstated. Had a similar politi
 cal situation occurred even 40 years earlier, a mathematical research community in
 America would not have existed for Artin to emigrate to. Whaples, a second-genera
 tion, American-trained mathematician, with an advisor who worked under the influ

 ential E. H. Moore at the University of Chicago, had the opportunity to work closely
 with Artin, a distinguished European mathematician. The published papers of Ar
 tin and Whaples show their advancements in algebraic number theory, advancements

 that helped simplify fundamental proofs of class field theory. Whaples' year at the
 IAS highlights other benefits of this association, including the chance to work with
 Chevalley, another distinguished European mathematician. Matchett and Tate's the
 sis topics point to other lasting implications of this work for students at Indiana and
 Princeton.

 This investigation of one sliver of Artin's work calls attention to an ever-expanding,

 international mathematical circle that persisted, even flourished, in the most adverse of

 circumstances. It highlights the significance of Artin's migration "both for its conse

 quences and for what it discloses about historical processes of human and intellectual
 transfer (Reingold 1985, p. 176)." Without intentionally setting out to explore the
 effects of "forced migration" on Artin and his work, this broader study suggests a

 remarkably seamless "human and intellectual transfer" in this particular case.

 For Artin, that seamless transfer seemed to gain momentum as his time in Amer

 ica progressed. In 7 years at Indiana, Artin authored at least six papers and advised
 two students. At Princeton he advised 18 students and wrote 16 papers and at least 2

 books or lecture notes. He not only adapted to the new culture in America, but he also

 integrated his culture into the mathematical milieu, particularly at Princeton (Rota
 and Palombi 2008). His black leather jacket with a belt at his waist was as much a

 part of Artin in Princeton as it had been in Europe nearly a decade earlier. For Artin,

 •£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin-Whaples 481

 then, "acquiring membership in the culture of a given country by adapting to the local
 academic habitus and/or the social standards of the educated elites was" not, appar
 ently, "an important precondition" for his acceptance as a mathematician or scholar
 (Ash 2003, p. 251). Artin was comfortable as Artin, in America or Germany.

 Artin seems to have possessed a certain serenity that helped him adjust to his new

 surroundings. If we look more broadly, particularly to larger studies on immigration
 such as Reingold, Ash, and Siegmund-Schultze, then we see that Artin's life suggests

 that a sort of internal strength may have served as a prerequisite for an immigrant to

 survive, even thrive, in a host country. It could also be that this inner serenity allowed

 Artin to remain comfortable with his pursuit of mathematics for the sake of mathemat

 ics rather than for the publication of mathematics. His Collected Papers span fewer
 than 560 pages. By comparison, the Collected Papers of Leonard Dickson, an Amer
 ican algebraist and number theorist slightly older than Artin, for example, include six
 volumes totaling more than 3,600 pages. Even here, in this comparison offered 50
 years after his death, Artin makes himself heard. Mathematics was about more than

 publications.

 Thus, this work calls to mind what Peter Galison refers to as "microhistory." As he

 describes it, "[m]icrohistory is supposed to be exemplification, a display through par

 ticular detail of something general, something more than itself. It is supposed to elicit
 the subtle interconnections of procedures, values and symbols that mark science in a

 place and time, not as a method but more as a kind of scientific culture (Galison 2008,

 p. 120)." What is particularly interesting here is that Artin seems not to be marked in

 a place and time, at least not as we expect him to be marked for this place or time,

 but, rather, surprisingly unmarked by the time and place. In particular, in contrast to
 so much of what Ash describes, the culture of American mathematics had room for

 Artin or, perhaps, Artin made room for his own style of mathematics, which included
 his own version of Viennese Kultur (Rota and Palombi 2008).

 Galison compares these microhistories, these case studies as it were, to stepping

 stones and raises the important question "where does the path lead?" If this study
 serves as one of these stepping stones, we suggest that it leads to a deeper understand
 ing of Artin and how he plied his trade as a mathematician, particularly relative to

 students; greater insights into what Brauer calls a "mathematical circle," what they are

 and how they grow; an introductory look at George Whaples and this early phase in
 his mathematical career; and, at least one almost tangible example of the intangible,
 inextricable link between the human and intellectual transfer that came with forced

 migration.

 Quite fittingly, this last comment brings us full circle, back to another observation

 about Artin by Brauer. After his discussion of Artin's mathematical trajectory begin

 ning with his 1921 Ph.D. from Leipzig, to his Privatdozent position at the University of

 Hamburg in 1923, and his full professorship there three years later, Brauer noted that

 "[t]he intellectual atmosphere of German universities of that period is remembered

 with nostalgia by all who knew it." Relative to Artin, he added, that

 Artin, with his wide interests in all fields of human endeavor became the stim

 ulating center of a circle of friends. His strange nickname "Ma" which he

 always preferred to his given name Emil goes back to those days. It is short for

 "£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 482 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 "Mathematics"; he simply appeared to these young men as an embodiment of
 mathematics (Brauer 1967, p. 27).

 It seems that Artin's "embodiment of mathematics" created a special sense around
 him of the importance of mathematics, a style that worked well in both Germany and

 America. In particular, Artin fostered an intellectual atmosphere that drew in other
 young men (and women), including Chevalley, Iyanaga, Whaples, Matchett, and Tate,

 among others, at formative stages in their careers. Robin Rider rightly points out that

 behind the numerical count of mathematicians dismissed from their positions in Ger

 many were "individuals, each with a story, often a poignant one (Rider 1984, p. 110)."
 Artin's story, particularly his work with Whaples and other young mathematicians,

 shows he worked best with a circle of mathematical friends surrounding him.

 Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank Dr. H. Rohlfing for his permission to quote from the
 archives at the NSUB, University of Gottingen and Erica Mosner for her permission to quote from the
 Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives.

 References

 Archival sources

 Artin File, Notre Dame Archives, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana [=NDA]
 Artin File, Indiana University Archives, Indiana University, Boomington, Indiana [=IUA]
 Artin, Emil, to Helmut Hasse, 27 November, 1930, Cod. Ms H. Hasse, 1:59, nr. 35, [NSUB]
 Artin, Emil, to Helmut Hasse, 24 August, 1931, Cod. Ms H. Hasse, 1:59, nr. 39. [NSUB]
 Artin, Emil, to Oswald Veblen, IAS, Princeton, 13 February, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Artin, Emil, to Hermann Weyl, 31 January, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Chevalley, Claude, to Helmut Hasse, 20 June, 1935, Cod. Ms. H. Hasse, 1:19. [NSUB]
 Ingraham, Mark H., to Oswald Veblen, 11 February, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Kleene, S. C., to Oswald Veblen, 14 February, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Lefschetz, Solomon, to Father John O'Hara, 12 January, 1937, [NDA]
 MacDuffee, C. C., to Oswald Veblen, 13 February, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Matchett, Margaret, On the Zeta Function for Ideles, Thesis (Ph.D) -Indiana University, 1946, [IUA]
 Niedersachsische Staats-und Universitatsbibliothek Gottingen, Handschriftenabteilung [=NSUB]
 O'Hara, John, to H. B. Wells, 11 June, 1938, [NDA]

 Secretary of IAS School of Mathematics to Professor Tracy Thomas, 20 June, 1947, [AC, IAS]

 The Shelby White and Leon Levy Archives Center, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton [=AC, IAS]
 Weyl, Hermann, to George Whaples, 15 March, 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Weyl, Hermann, to Marshall Stone, 12 March, 1942, [AC, IAS]
 Weyl, Hermann, to no name given, 21 May, 1942, [AC, IAS]
 Whaples, George, Application to IAS, 10 February 1941, [AC, IAS]
 Williams, K. P., to Fernandus Payne, 6 April, 1938, [IUA]

 Archibald, Raymond C., Ed. 1938. Semicentennial Addresses of the American Mathematical Society 1888

 1938. New York: American Mathematical Society.

 Artin, Emil. 1930. Zur Theorie der L-Reihen mit allgemeinen Gruppencharakteren. Abhandlungen mathe

 matisches Seminar, Universitat Hamburg 8: 292-306.

 Artin, Emil. 1931 a. Die gruppentheoretische Struktur der Diskriminanten algebraischer Zahlkorper. Journal

 fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 164: 1-11.

 Published sources

 *£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Artin, Emil. 1931 b. Einfiihrung in die Theorie der Gammafunktion. (Hamburger mathematische Einzelsch

 riften 11) Leipzig, Berlin: B. G. Teubner. 35 S.

 Artin, Emil. 1932a. Uber Einheiten relativ galoisscher Zahlkorper. Journal fur die reine und angewandte

 Artin-Whaples 483

 Mathematik 167: 153-156.

 Mathematik 167: 157-159.

 Artin, Emil. 1932b. Uber die Bewertungen algebraischer Zahlkorper. Journal fur die reine und angewandte

 Artin, Emil. 1933. Algebraische Zahlentheorie, Lecture Course Hamburg 1933 (Notes taken by E. A. Ei
 chelbrenner, edited by Peter Ullrich, Mitteilungen der Mathematischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg 21/2
 (2002), 159-223).

 Artin, Emil. 1950. The influence of J. H. M. Wedderburn on the Development of Modern Algebra. Bulletin

 of the American Mathematical Society 56: 65-72.

 Artin, Emil. 1951. Algebraic numbers and algebraic functions. Notes by I. Adamson. New York: Institute

 for Mathematics and Mechanics, New York University.

 Artin, Emil. 1959. Theory of algebraic numbers. Notes from Lectures at Gottingen 1956/7. Gottingen:

 Artin, Emil. 1965. Collected papers (Ed. Serge Lang and John Tate). New York: Springer.
 Artin, Emil. 1967. Algebraic numbers and algebraic functions. New York: Gordan and Breach.
 Artin, Emil and Tate, John T. 1968. Class field theory. New York: W. A. Benjamin, Inc. Advanced Book

 Classics. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.

 Artin, Emil and Whaples, George. 1943. The theory of simple rings. American Journal of Mathematics 65:

 Striker.

 87-107.

 Artin, Emil and Whaples, George. 1945. Axiomatic characterization of fields by the product formula for

 valuations. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51: 469^192.

 Artin, Emil and Whaples, George. 1946. A note on axiomatic characterization of fields. Bulletin of the

 American Mathematical Society 52: 245-247.

 Ash, Mitchell. 2003. Forced migration and scientific change: Steps towards a new overview. In Intellectual
 migration and cultural transformation: Refugees from national socialism in the english-speaking world,
 ed. E. Timms and J. Hughes, 241-263. Vienna: Springer.

 Brauer, Richard. 1967. Emil Artin. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 73: 27—43.
 Brauer, Richard, Helmut Hasse, and Emmy Noether. 1932. Beweis eines Hauptsatzes in der Theorie der

 Algebren. Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik 167: 399—404.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1930. Sur la theorie des restes normiques. Comptes Rendus de I'Academie des Sciences

 Paris 191: 426-428.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1931. Relation entre le nombre des classes d'un sous-corps et celui d'un sur-corps.

 Comptes Rendus de I'Academie des Sciences Paris 192: 257-258.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1932. Sur la structure de la theorie du corps de classes. Comptes Rendus de I'Academie

 des Sciences Paris 194: 766-769.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1933. Sur la theorie du corps de classes dans les corps finis et le corps locaux. Journal

 of the Faculty of Science, University of Tokyo 2: 365-476.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1936. Generalisation de la theorie du corps de classes pour les extensions infinies.

 Journal de Mathematiques Pures et Appliquees. 15: 359-371.

 Chevalley, Claude. 1940. La theorie du corps de classes. Annals of Mathematics 41: 394-418.
 Chevalley, Claude. 1953. Class field theory. Nagoya: Nagoya University.
 Chevalley, Claude and Jacques Herbrand. 1931. Nouvelle demonstration du theoreme d'existence en theorie

 du corps de classes. Comptes Rendus de I'Academie des Sciences Paris 193: 814—815.

 Cohn, Harvey. 1978. A Classical invitation to algebraic numbers and class fields. With two appendices by

 Olga Taussky, New York: Springer.

 Dickson, Leonard. 1983. The collected mathematical papers of Leonard Eugene Dickson (Ed. A. Adrian

 Albert. 6 vols). New York: Chelsea Publishing Com.

 Fenster, Delia D. 2007. Artin in America (1937-1958): A time of transition. In: Emil Artin (1898-1962)

 Beitrage zu Leben, Werk und Personlichkeit, ed. K. Reich and A. Kreuzer, Algorismus 61, Augsburg:
 Dr. Erwin Rauner Verlag.

 Frei, Giinther and Peter Roquette. 2008. Emil Artin und Helmut Hasse: Die Korrespondenz 1923-1934
 (Ed. and commented by G. Frei and P. Roquette, with contributions of F. Lemmermeyer). Gottingen:
 Universitatsverlag.

 Fujisaki, Genjiro. 1958. On the zeta-function of the simple algebra over the field of rational numbers.

 Journal of the Faculty of Science, University of Tokyo Section 1A, Mathematics 7: 567-604.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 484 D. Dumbaugh, J. Schwermer

 Galison, Peter. 2008. Ten problems in history and philosophy of science. Isis 99: 111-124.
 Hasse, Helmut. 1923a. Uber die Aquivalenz quadratischer Formen im Korper der rationalen Zahlen. Journal

 fur die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 152: 205-244.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1923b. liber die Darstellbarkeit von Zahlen durch quadratische Formen im Korper der

 rationalen Zahlen. Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 152: 129-148.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1924a. Aquivalenz quadratischer Formen in einem beliebigen algebraischen Zahlkorper.

 Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 153: 184—191.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1924b. Darstellbarkeit von Zahlen durch quadratische Formen in einem beliebigen alge

 braischen Zahlkorper. Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 153: 113-130.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1924c. Symmetrische Matrizen im Korper der rationalen Zahlen. Journal fiir die Reine und

 Hasse, Helmut. 1950. Kurt Hensel zum Gedachtnis. Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik

 Angewandte Mathematik 153: 12-43.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1975. Mathematische Abhandlungen (Ed. Heinrich Wolfgang Leopoldt and Peter Roquette,

 187: 1-13.

 3 vols). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

 Hecke, Erich. 1918. Uber eine neue Art von Zetafunktionen und ihre Beziehungen zur Verteilung der

 Primzahlen, Erste Mitteilung. Mathematische Zeitschrift 1: 357-376.

 Hecke, Erich. 1920. Uber eine neue Art von Zetafunktionen und ihre Beziehungen zur Verteilung der

 Primzahlen, Zweite Mitteilung. Math. Zeitschrift 4 (1920), 11-21.

 Hensel, Kurt. 1913. Zahlentheorie. Berlin and Leipzig: G. J. Goschen'sche Verlagshandlung.
 Hey, Kate. 1927. Analytische Zahlentheorie in Systemen hyperkomplexer Zahlen. Thesis Hamburg 1927.
 lyanaga, Shokichi. 2006. Travaux de Claude Chevalley sur la theorie du corps de classes: Introduction.

 Japanese Journal of Mathematics 1: 25-85.

 Ostrowski, Alexander. 1935. Untersuchungen zur arithmetischen Theorie der Korper (Die Theorie der

 Teilbarkeit in allgemeinen Korpern). Mathematische Zeitschrift 39:269-320.

 Reingold, Nathan. 1985. Refugee mathematicians in the United States of America, 1933-1941: Reception

 and reaction. Annals of Science 38: 313-338.

 Rider, Robin. 1984. Alarm and opportunity: Emigration of mathematicians and physicists to Britain and

 the United States, 1933-1945. Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 15: 107-176.

 Rota, Gian-Carlo and Fabrizio Palombi. 2008. Indiscrete Thoughts. Boston: Birckhauser.
 Schwermer, Joachim. 2009. Minkowski, Hensel and Hasse—On the beginnings of the local-global princi
 ple. In Episodes in the history of modern algebra (1850-1950), ed. Jeremy J. Gray and Karen Hunger
 Parshall. Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society.

 Siegmund-Schultze, Reinhard. 2009. Mathematicians fleeing from Nazi Germany: Individual fates and

 global impact. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 Tate, John. 1950. Fourier analysis in number fields and Hecke's zeta functions, thesis, Princeton 1950, In:
 Algebraic number theory, ed. J. W. S. Cassels and A. Frohlich, pp. 305-347. London: Academic Press.
 Wedderburn, Joseph H. M. 1907. On hypercomplex number systems. Proceedings of the London Mathe

 matical Society 6: 77-118.

 Weil, Andre. 1951. Sur la theorie du corps de classes. Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan 3: 1-35.
 Weil, Andre. 1967a. Review: The collected papers of Emil Artin. Scripta Mathematica 28: 237-238.
 Weil, Andre. 1967b. Algebraic number theory. Grundlehren Math. Wissenschaften, Bd. 144, Berlin:

 Whaples, George. 1942. Non-analytic class field theory and Grunwald's theorem. Duke Mathematical

 Whaples, George. 1965. Review of introduction to quadratic forms by O. T. O'Meara. American Mathe

 Springer.

 Journal 9: 455^173.

 matical Monthly 72: 211-212.

 Zassenhaus, Hans. 1964. Emil Artin, his life and his work. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic V: 1-9.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

