 

 

 

 

Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach: the history of the Klein-Kramers equation
Author(s): Stefano Zambelli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 4 (July 2010), pp. 395-428
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342424
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:38 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342424?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:395-428
 DOI 10. 1007/s00407-010-0059-9

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach: the history
 of the Klein-Kramers equation

 Stefano Zambelli

 Received: 1 March 2010 / Published online: 20 May 2010

 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract In this essay, the first statistical and stochastic treatments of chemical

 dynamics are analyzed and discussed, in particular the diffusive description of chem-
 ical reactions. The first part of the paper introduces the historical and methodolog-
 ical basis of the theories about stochastic processes and diffusion as well as their

 lesser-known applications in chemical kinetics, which were advanced by Jens Anton
 Christiansen (1888-1969). In the second, part we will focus our attention on the early

 works of Oskar Benjamin Klein (1894-1977) and Hendrik Anton Kramers ( 1 894-

 1952) on electrolytes and the latter' s more mature work, which completes and gives a

 firm theoretical background to Christiansen's description.

 Keywords Christiansen • Kramers • Diffusion • Reaction • Kramers-Klein •
 Stochastic

 1 Introduction

 The main development of the history of chemical kinetics, as it is usually known, seems

 to be nearly linear. This may be largely true but there are several notable exceptions,

 including Perrin's radiation hypothesis and the diffusion approach to chemical dynam-
 ics. Introduced in 1915 and developed until 1928, the radiation hypothesis turned out
 to be unsuccessful, but in spite of its failure that hypothesis was fiercely debated

 Communicated by Tilman Sauer.

 S. Zambelli

 Silcart S.r.L., via Spercenigo 5, 31030 Carbonera (TV), Italy

 S. Zambelli (E3)
 Museo di storia della fisica, via Loredan 10, 35121 Padova, Italy

 e-mail : Zambelli .Stefano @ gmail .com

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 396 S. Zambelli

 during its brief lifetime (King and Laidler 1984). The diffusion description, however,

 elaborated by Christiansen around 1935 (Christiansen 1936) and fully systematised in

 1940 by Kramers (1940), was an interesting and successful method complementary to

 transition state theory (TST). It received, however, little or no attention in chemistry

 circles for a long time. The mechanical approach to molecular interactions and reac-

 tion dynamics, in combination with the newly developed quantum theory (Polanyi and

 Eyring 1931a), provided a strong foundation for the historical achievement of transi-
 tion state theory by Henry Eyring (1901-1981) and Michael Polanyi (1891-1976) in

 1935 (Eyring 1935; Evans and Polanyi 1935). This represented the first self-consistent
 theory on chemical kinetics not flawed by phenomenological data or approximations.

 At about the same time, Christiansen introduced the diffusive-stochastic approach to

 reaction dynamics. In this approach chemical reactions are interpreted as diffusive pro-

 cesses. This description derived from the tradition of studies about Brownian motion

 and colloid dynamics started by Albert Einstein (1879-1955) and Marion von Smolu-
 chowski (1853-1932) (Einstein 1905; Smoluchowski 1906, 1916) and culminated in

 a significant paper by Kramers in 1940.

 Didactical explanations follow the history of kinetics from 1800 to the develop-

 ment of TST, see, e.g., Laidler and King (1983). As it had happened during the thirties,

 diffusion-controlled reactions and the Christiansen-Kramers approach are again being

 ignored. This approach is treated only in rather advanced and specific courses of phys-

 ical chemistry. A similar situation exists regarding the researches in this field. Few

 scholars are today directly concerned with chemical kinetics, although there are many

 of them indirectly involved. The stochastic-diffusion description of chemical dynam-

 ics, in particular, involves only a handful of researchers in theoretical and computa-

 tional chemistry. Owing to its intrinsic difficulties and the great chemical success of

 TST, due probably to its "pseudo-molecular dynamics" vision, the diffusion descrip-

 tion has been completely forgotten for nearly thirty years. It was only rediscovered,
 with some notable prior exceptions (Delbrück 1940; McQuarrie 1967), at the end of the

 seventies (Skinner and Wolynes 1978), with the birth of computational chemistry. The

 Christiansen-Kramers vision has some advantages over TST because, being equally
 independent from phenomenologies and approximations, it considers intrinsically the

 interactions with a solvent, even though results are more difficult to apply to real sys-
 tems that are not extremely simple. It describes better the case of diffusion-controlled

 reactions, which, however, are relatively rare. A description of the origins and the
 developments of the Christiansen-Kramers approach is useful to comprehend the rea-

 sons why it was underestimated and its chequered history. In the last two sections, the

 main part of this essay, I will carefully examine one of the first papers written by Klein
 (1922) and the work of Kramers himself, which was exposed in the today famous
 paper of 1940: "Brownian motion in a field of force and the diffusion model of chemi-

 cal reactions ". The paper of Klein resulted from an early collaboration with Kramers,

 and in it we will discover the origins of the well-known Klein-Kramers equation.

 2 Einstein's theory of Brownian motion

 As a background for the later development, we will briefly review here Einstein's work
 on Brownian motion and its historical relevance. These remarks are not intended as a

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 397

 thorough discussion of Einstein's and Smoluchowski's work, but rather to place these
 works into a historical perspective relevant for the diffusion approach to chemical

 kinetics. Around the turn of the twentieth century the debate about the compatibility

 of the kinetic theory of gases, more generally the new statistical mechanics, and clas-

 sical thermodynamics was at a critical point (Brush 1976), particularly concerning the

 explanation of Brownian motion. From a purely abstract point of view the question
 had already been resolved by Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann (1844-1906), relative to the

 maximal entropy tendency of systems, but his work was fully recognized only after the

 first decade of the twentieth century. It was therefore necessary to gain an alternative

 vision to conjugate the kinetic and thermodynamic models.

 Albert Einstein found such a solution in 1905 (Renn 2005). He began research on
 the mechanical nature of heat in 1903 (Einstein 1903) with a first paper in this field,

 Eine Theorie der Grundlagen der Thermodynamik , then in 1904 (Einstein 1904) fol-
 lowed it with a second one, Zur allgemeinen molekularen Theorie der Wärme . The

 second work laid the basis for two of the papers of 1905, the annus mirabilis. One of

 these two papers is particularly important in our context: Ueberdie von der molekular-
 kinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten

 suspendierten Teilchen (Einstein 1 905). This work is of extraordinary significance and,

 although it is less esteemed than other papers of the annus mirabilis , it established

 the starting-point for all disciplinary ambits. In his paper, Einstein emphasized that he

 had no experimental data for his theory on Brownian motion, the existing data lacking

 precision or sense. Direct experimental observations suggested the absurd conclusion
 that the velocity of Brownian particles grew larger when times of observation were

 smaller. The velocity would be infinite in the limit of infinitesimally small observation

 time. As we know today, from a statistical point of view, it is impossible to define
 the distance covered by a single Brownian particle, so it is impossible to obtain the

 classical velocity of that particle. Einstein assumed another fundamental discordance

 with macroscopical behaviour: classical thermodynamics was inapplicable for micro-
 scopically small systems. On the other hand, if the assumptions relative to Brownian
 motion are inconsistent the kinetic-molecular description of heat would be false. How

 did Einstein resolve this conflict? He introduced, indirectly, the modern concept of fluc-

 tuations. There is a first exception to thermodynamics if we find an osmotic pressure

 for particles suspended in a solution (colloids). Then the free energy of the system
 does not change, because it is independent of the position of these particles or of a

 half-permeable barrier. So, according to thermodynamics, there will be no particular

 forces against the barrier. On the other hand, according to kinetic theory, the irregular
 motion of the suspended particles may very well generate forces against the barrier.
 Einstein assumed that suspended particles are not different from solute molecules or

 ions and obtained the expression for osmotic pressure from Newton's equations of the

 particles in phase space and from thermodynamical expressions for the entropy and

 free energy. After these considerations on osmosis it is natural to consider the diffusion

 of suspended particles. Assuming dynamical equilibrium, Einstein noted that the free

 energy does not change for an arbitrary motion of a suspended substance. He obtained
 the free energy as a function of internal energy and entropy using Boltzmann's H
 theorem. The equilibrium is between osmotic pressure and irregular forces due to
 thermal agitation. Assuming spherical particles and applying Stoke's law Einstein

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 found a relation between the diffusion coefficient and the viscosity (Kirchhoff 1897,

 p. 26, Vorlesung 4). This is the simplest and earliest form of what we today call the

 fluctuation-dissipation theorem. In particular, Einstein ignored the apparent incompat-

 ibility of these two coefficients, the first obtained from thermodynamics, the second

 from micro-mechanics. There is no explicit demonstration of the consistency between

 these different conceptual frameworks, but Einstein's carelessness in this respect,
 which was probably intended, opened the way for that demonstration, which would

 later be given explicitly by Smoluchowski, and for the development of the concept of

 fluctuations. Einstein put down two fundamental premises relative to the motion of
 the particles:

 398 S. Zambelli

 (1) Their motion is mutually independent (in the limit of low concentration). Simi-

 larly, the motion of a single particle is independent of its previous movements.

 (2) Time intervals must be short in relation to observation times but long enough to

 validate the first premise.

 These conditions are similar to those of the Markov processes, the simplest cases of
 stochastical dynamics. Although Norbert Wiener (1894-1964) in 1923 and Andrej
 Nikolaevič Kolmogorov (1903-1987) in 1930 were the first scientists who treated the

 Markov processes with rigour and provided the foundation of a general theory for
 them, the pioneering use of their assumptions by Einstein is very interesting. Andrej
 Andreevič Markov (1856-1922) did his research on this subject around 1900 (Markov
 1906) and it would be interesting to know whether or not Einstein knew the Russian's

 work. In any case, the use of statistics in the Einstein paper is relatively basic. He

 introduced the distribution function for particle displacements and compared it with

 the solution's concentration, finding, from a purely statistical consideration, the sec-

 л y-i rj2 ^

 ond law of Fick (which says: ^ = ^^pf)- The displacement probability follows a
 Gaussian distribution, the same as for random errors. The same result turns out to be

 valid for variations of concentration in a given volume in time:

 C<*',)= véš7exp<"S7'- <2I)

 Here C(x,t) is the concentration at the position x at the instant of time t , n denotes
 the number of particles and D the diffusion coefficient. With a Gaussian distribution

 we can consider the standard deviation of the displacement rather than the displace-
 ment itself for the study of the motion of Brownian particles. The same conclusion is

 valid for concentration variations. This was the reason for the lack of significance of
 previous measurements of Brownian motion, as they were based on the direct obser-
 vation of displacements rather than on their standard deviation. Einstein found his

 well-known formula, Sx = yfx^ = л/2 Dt, where he put into relation the standard
 deviation of the displacements Sx with the diffusion coefficient D and time t. So the

 resulting movement is statistically proportional to the square root of time, not directly
 to time as in a classical description. In the last and most famous part of the paper,
 Einstein used these relations to obtain the Avogadro number Na as:

 ' RT

 N* = (2-2)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 399

 With water at 17°C, its viscosity coefficient £, a radius of Brownian particles of

 R = 1 д, and a mean square displacement x2 of 6 ß after a time t of 1 min, the
 resulting value for Na = 6 x 1023 was in good agreement with other estimates, and so

 Einstein's methodology was confirmed. This was the first theoretical self-consistent

 proof of the validity of an atomistic theory and hence of the existence of atoms as well.

 The issue was so important that Einstein reconsidered it a year later in 1906. But he

 remained on theoretical grounds and left the experimental proof to Perrin.

 Jean Baptiste Perrin (1870-1942) was awarded the Nobel prize in physics in 1926
 for his work on the discontinuous structure of matter and for his discovery of sedimen-

 tation equilibrium. Using Zeiss cells he did microscopic observations and counting of
 colloid particles of constant and known size.

 Apart from the extraordinary importance of the first direct demonstration of atomic

 theory there is another fundamental point to consider in the work of Einstein and
 Perrin. On a theoretical level their work gave the basis for the mechanics of stochastic

 processes, a necessary basis for their application to physical and chemical systems.
 Furthermore, Einstein introduced the first material examples of Boltzmann's statistical

 description, thus reconciling the apparent incompatibility between thermodynamics

 and gas kinetics. On a practical level, the work of Perrin allowed important develop-
 ments in the observation of colloids and diffusion.

 Smoluchowski would continue to develop this work. He found laws for the dynam-

 ics of suspended particle solutions and for diffusion processes in general. From these

 researches the first applications to chemical systems and reactions would be developed.

 3 Smoluchowski's applications to colloids and chemistry

 The study of diffusion is fundamental for the understanding of the nature of fluids and

 of their dynamics. It is thereful useful not only in the investigation of specific chemi-

 cal phenomena, like electrolysis, but also for the investigation of all condensed-phase
 chemical processes..

 The theoretical basis of diffusive processes in chemistry was established by the

 Polish physicist Marion von Smoluchowski, who studied mainly diffusion and related
 topics (Teske 1977). He arrived at almost the same conclusions as Einstein about
 Brownian motion but he published his results a year later in 1906 (Smoluchowski

 1 906). Interesting to us are his work around 1915 and two papers that appeared in 1 9 1 6
 (Smoluchowski 1916) and 1917 (Smoluchowski 1917). Those publications, together
 with the works of Paul Langevin (1872-1946), bear directly on the Christiansen-
 Kramers view of chemical reactions as diffusive processes.

 Smoluchowski examined the diffusion and coagulation dynamics of colloidal solu-
 tions. It is curious that the same Smoluchowski denounced the scientific community's

 lack of attention to this argument in the introduction of the 1916 paper, because the

 debate about atomic theory, confirmed by Einstein's theory and Perrin's experiments

 (Perrin 1913), nearly monopolized the scientific debate in that period. What exactly
 did Smoluchowski intend?

 He referred (Smoluchowski 1916) to the part of Einstein's paper that in his opinion

 was less well-reputed: the first successful attempt to reconcile thermodynamics with

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 statistical mechanics for a general system that is relevant in practice: a fluid where
 Brownian motion is observable. As mentioned above, Boltzmann's reconciliation with

 a statistical system, which is well-known today, was too abstract and theoretical. As
 we will see, Smoluchowski built a more representative example with a specific real

 400 S. Zambelli

 system.

 Smoluchowski associated Einstein's probability distribution of displacements with

 the mean free path in the kinetic theory of gases. Then he introduced the simplest
 model of Brownian motion: a one-dimensional random walker.

 Subramaniam Chandrashekhar (1910-1995) was to take up this simple model again
 in his 1943 review of Kramers's problem and its first applications (Chandrashekhar

 1943). It consists of an object that moves indifferently, by discrete, random steps,

 to the right or left along a straight line. The probability that the object reach a def-

 inite position after a certain number of steps, if the distance of the final position is

 small compared with the total number of steps times the step width, is a result that is

 equivalent to Einstein's distribution of the displacements of a Brownian particle.

 There is a nice practical realization of that model: a marble that rolls down an
 inclined plane bouncing on a lattice of nails. If we let several marbles start from
 the same point we will observe a Gaussian distribution at the bottom of the plane.
 Using this simple apparatus, the Galton Box, Smoluchowski evaluated what would

 happen when the system possessed a definite initial configuration. He imagined the
 marbles rolling free from different initial positions, as in the case of real diffusion.

 Smoluchowski found that the real cause of diffusion and of osmotic pressure is the
 Brownian motion of the suspended particles and the temporal evolution of their dis-

 tribution. There are, however, some discrepancies between the expressions obtained

 via Brownian motion and those deduced from the diffusion equation. The diffusion
 equation gives a mean value of the position of single particles, while the Brownian
 motion of a single particle is described by deviations from that mean value. Smolu-

 chowski argued that a theory about fluctuations ("Schwankungen") of concentration

 would be necessary for the investigations of these statistical deviations. Such a theory
 would be based on the observation of a fixed microscopic volume inside a solution
 while diffusion occurred. Studying the amplitude and frequency of these fluctuations

 Smoluchowski obtained a microscopic theory of equilibrium, and this theory pro-
 duced interesting results for their similarities with actual theories of non-equilibrium

 processes, in particular for the definition of the boundary conditions imposed on the
 intensive variables of a sample in a non-equilibrium state and the definition of the so

 called thermodynamics forces. Although such theoretical efforts had not been made in

 that period some interesting approaches by the Swedish chemist Theodore Svedberg

 (1884-1971) in this direction were made. Svedberg confronted the results of the theory

 of probabilities with the observed counting of gold colloidal particles in a microscopic
 sample volume of a homogeneous suspension in a given time (Svedberg 1912). He

 found that the fluctuations of the number of particles depend only on their average

 number, but not on the physical nature of the system. We now know that, according to
 statistical mechanics, this independence is a general property of fluctuations, and the

 resulting distribution law results independent of the considered mechanical system.
 This independence is the theoretical justification for the phenomenological similarities
 mentioned above.

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 401

 Smoluchowski also investigated another essential aspect of diffusion processes:

 while the distribution law and the entity of fluctuations do not depend on the particular

 system this is not strictly true for the frequencies of the fluctuations. Svedberg had

 observed this fact experimentally, and Smoluchowski examined it from a quantitative

 point of view, considering one of the simplest physical variables of the system, the
 volume.

 Smoluchowski calculated the fluctuation of the number of particles inside a given

 volume given the displacement distribution for the particles in solution. In other words,

 he found the variation of the concentration in a given volume of the sample. He found an

 important discrepancy in Einstein's formula for the mean square displacement because

 in Einstein's theory it was assumed that a displacement is statistically independent of

 previous movements of the particle. In Smoluchowski's case the number of particles

 that occupies a given volume in a given time will not vary drastically. The actual num-
 ber of molecules partially determines the subsequent number and the microscopic
 events and therefore the number of particles at one point is not statistically indepen-

 dent of its prehistory. Smoluchowski developed a theoretical description for this case

 and discussed practical examples of that description. This consideration determines a
 limit between macroscopic samples, which obey thermodynamic irreversibility, and
 microscopic samples, described by mechanical and dynamically reversible models.
 Smoluchowski posed the question in terms of times of recurrence, taking up an ear-
 lier debate by Ernst Friedrich Ferdinand Zermelo (1871-1973), Jules Henri Poincaré
 ( 1 854-1 9 1 2), and Boltzmann. He considered the time that would elapse between recur-

 rences of a certain configuration, the number of particles in a given volume in this

 case, for larger and larger systems. If the size of the volume of the system, and so the
 number of its constituents, increases the reoccurrence of a determinate configuration

 is more and more improbable, or alternatively longer and longer times elapse between
 the occurrence of the same state of affairs.

 Smoluchowsi (1967) took up Boltzmann's justification of the apparent irreversibil-

 ity of macroscopic systems, but he considered a specific physical example. Considering

 different samples of air (in cubes of side length /) he calculated the recurrence time

 r of the following event: the variation, caused only by fluctuations of air density, of

 exceeding the mean oxygen density in one half of the container by 1%. The results

 found by Smoluchowski are represented in the following table:

 / (cm)

 1

 5 X IO-5 IO68
 3 X IO-5 IO6
 2.5 X IO"5 1

 10~5

 From these results we can see that for microscopic samples (around 0, 1 д) the

 recurrence is extremely fast, so the dynamics of the system is completely reversible
 in accordance with statistical mechanics. At this level, the Brownian motion begins to

 be observable, too.

 Smoluchowski generalized the role of fluctuations also in other fields. For example
 he assumed that the diffusion of heat depends on energy fluctuations. Smoluchowski

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 also paid particular attention to the experimental works on colloids, conducted by
 important researchers like Perrin, Louis Marcel Brillouin (1854-1948), Svedberg and
 others. He was particularly interested in those systems because he wanted to gener-
 alize diffusion theory for the case where forces, like gravitation or inter-molecular

 interactions, are present. From the papers of 1916 and 1917 the famous expression
 for generalized diffusion that bears his name was deduced (the case presented is for a
 single particle):

 402 S. Zambelli

 dP(x,XQ,t) d2P(x,xo,t) 9 'F(x) ]

 where P is the probability density function, t the time, D the diffusion constant, x

 the position, with xo the initial configuration, F(x) a generic force, and £ the viscos-

 ity coefficient. If we consider only the first term on the right side of the equation it
 corresponds to the common diffusion equation. The second term represents the case

 in which a field of force F(x) is present. This expression is strictly valid only in the

 case of large viscosity £ and differs from the Fokker-Planck equation by being inde-
 pendent from velocity which is supposed to follow from a Maxwell distribution. It

 is important to mention briefly another important formula that Smoluchowski intro-

 duced in 1916 (Smoluchowski 1916), an integrodifferential equation describing the
 coagulation dynamics of colloid solutions:

 d fík 1 v ^ л v ^

 = 2 ßijninj л ~~ ßikni • (3.2)

 i+j=k /=1

 This relation expresses the concentration dynamics of coagulated particles к by means

 of the balancing between the formation (first term on right) and disappearance (second

 term on right) of these particles, ßij represents the probability of collision between
 the ith and jth particles.

 Smoluchowski 's conclusions in this case are very interesting for chemistry because
 they describe also the dynamics of diffusion-controlled reactions. In those reactions,

 the diffusion of approaching reactants is the long stage with respect to the reactive
 interaction itself. We can extend an analogy between coagulation and diffusion con-
 trolled reaction phenomenologies, for example.

 4 The Christiansen-Kramers collaboration

 From the main biography of Kramers (Dresden 1987), we know that Kramers arrived

 in Copenhagen during the middle of the First World War, in August 1916. Soon after
 his arrival, he became a close collaborator of Niels Bohr (1885-1962), some years
 before the official foundation of the Institute of Theoretical Physics, today Bohr Insti-
 tute, in March 1921. In the subsequent years, Kramers often acted as a spokesman
 for Bohr's ideas: he gave lectures around Europe to present and explain Bohr's ideas
 and he also introduced these concepts to new students and assistants of Bohr's. It is

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 403

 possible that Kramers encountered Christiansen thanks to this mediating role in the

 Copenhagen institute. Christiansen visited the Bohr Institute around 1922 after his

 PhD graduation for a period of nearly 1 year (Bak 1974). It is possible that he already
 came to Copenhagen with the hope of finding some mathematical-physical assistance
 for his studies of chemical reactions.

 Christiansen's PhD thesis treated the dynamics of specific chemical reactions: in
 this work he introduced for the first time the term chain reactions ( ketten reaction in

 Danish). Christiansen tried to apply the description and the model of chain reactions
 to different mechanisms of chemical reaction. He was particularly interested in the

 problem of activation, as can be seen in a paper of August 1922 (Christiansen 1922).
 In this work he confronted the two mechanisms of activation by radiation and by col-

 lisions, in particular for uni-molecular reactions. He anticipated Kramers interest; this

 will happen again 15 years later for the diffusive approach to chemical kinetics. Today
 we know that pure uni-molecular reactions, where a stable isolated molecule trans-
 forms itself spontaneously, do not exist: there is always a contribution due to thermal
 collisions. Kinetic expressions of reaction rates of some chemical processes, mainly
 dissociations, induced chemical physicists between 1920 and 1930 to elaborate the
 so-called radiative hypothesis (King and Laidler 1984), in which energy activations
 and relaxations of molecules are entirely or mainly due to radiations exchange. Perrin

 was the main promoter of this school (Perrin 1922). In the work of 1922 Christiansen
 examined the works of Dusham and Trautz (Dusham 1921; Trautz 1920) in the light

 of Einstein's coefficients of emission and absorption. He showed a mild scepticism
 about radiation mechanisms. In a supplement to the paper Christiansen thanked Bohr

 for his help on the interpretation of Einstein's radiative coefficients from a molecular

 point of view and for the observations Bohr made relative to the underestimation of
 collisions factors.

 A year later Christiansen wrote another paper on this subject, this time together with

 Kramers. Bohr may also have contributed to the ideas of this publication because the

 authors again thanked him at the end of the paper (Christiansen and Kramers 1923).

 Probably Bohr assigned Kramers the task to help Christiansen due to Kramers exten-
 sive interest in atomic and molecular spectroscopy, as we can see from the number of

 papers and works in this field that he published in that period (Mehra and Rechenberg
 1982, p. 490).

 In their joint paper, " Über die Geschwindigkeit chemischer Reactionen " (Chris-
 tiansen and Kramers 1923), the dynamics of a general uni-molecular gaseous reaction

 is treated first purely on the basis of a collision activation mechanism and the results
 are then confronted again with an analysis of a mechanism of activation by radia-
 tion, as in Perrin's hypothesis. Christiansen and Kramers estimated the exponential
 factor obtained in the radiative and collision mechanisms and compared that estimate

 with experimental data. Kramers and Christiansen considered the gaseous dissocia-
 tion represented by the following reaction: n - > n' + n" , where n is the original
 gas molecule and n' n" the dissociated species. Christiansen took again the viewpoint
 of S vante August Arrhenius (1859-1927) where dissociation happens when activated
 molecules, which are in thermal equilibrium with reactants, spontaneously turn to

 products. The ratio between the concentration of activated molecules Ca and the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 concentration of reacting molecules Cn is given by the expression:

 404 S. Zambelli

 £l = Ele-^t (4.1)
 Cn Pn

 where s and p are the energy and the statistical weight of the considered species,
 R the gas constant and T the absolute temperature. If A is the probability of change
 per second, the rate of reaction is then obtained by the following expression:

 k = IdCn = APae-*tfL (42)

 Cn dt pn

 This expression, a kinetic rate in the Arrhenius form with the pre-exponential factor

 calculated as a function of the radiation-matter interactions is typical in the ambit of

 radiation hypothesis as discussed in the first part of this paragraph. The frequency
 of change per volume and per second according to Einstein's equations results in:

 Nrad = CnB%pv , where B£pv is the probability per second of a stimulated tran-
 sition n - ► a promoted by blackbody radiation of energy density pv (Einstein
 1917).

 It is important to note that in the original Einstein paper, Zur Quantentheorie der

 Strahlung , published in 1917, there is only an allusion to molecular transition or in

 general to chemistry. Einstein's work of 1917 mainly concerns the nature of radiation.

 The use of the transition coefficients, basic for spectroscopy, in chemical kinetics,

 was introduced later by Perrin in the context of his radiation hypothesis (Perrin 1919),
 a theory that Einstein considered with mild scepticism as we can see from a let-

 ter between the two scientists around 1920 (Einstein 1972). Considering Einstein's
 coefficients Kramers and Christiansen found in the radiative case a pre-exponen-

 tial factor for the rate constant: £rad ^ 10V~$' where Q = ea - en represents
 the heat of activation. The calculations in the collision case give a greater constant:

 &COLL ^ 1010^~^ , supposing the collisions happen between reactive molecules. So

 Kramers and Christiansen demonstrated that a simple activation by radiation (with-

 out considering more complex mechanisms like the contributions of multiple photons

 or different frequencies of activation and so on), has negligible results in compari-
 son to a pure collision activation. The problem is also that a simple mechanism by
 collision is not sufficient to justify the much greater experimental value for uni-molec-

 ular gaseous reactions: k^xp ^ 1014e~$' Christiansen and Kramers, excluding the
 mechanism by radiation, had to consider other possible collisions inside the sys-
 tem. In particular, they supposed that rich energy products, called a' collide with

 the molecules of reactants n, promoting them to the activated state a. In stationary
 conditions the concentrations of energized products and activated complexes do not
 change: d Ca /dt = àCa> /dt = 0. Taking into account all the processes that increase
 or decrease the concentrations of the considered species the authors introduced the
 following expression:

 d С

 = С2пК$ + <*C„Ca.ZÏ - ACa - CnCaZan (4.3)

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 405

 and, assuming stationarity for a' the following rate constant is obtained:

 fc 1 dC" л C"Z^ (44)

 C„ di CnZ"a+A(l-a)'

 where Z„, Z^', Z£ are the numbers of collisions per second between, respectively,
 two n molecules, n and a ' molecules, a and n molecules, £ and a are coefficients that

 determine the probability for the collisions to be activating, С is as usual the concen-

 tration and finally A is the probability per second of the spontaneous transformation:
 a - > a'. Kramers and Christiansen assumed equilibrium between reactants and the

 activated complex obtaining: Cj¡Z%¿; = CnCaZna. Combining this equation with the
 (4.4), and assuming that a = 1, they obtained again:

 k = A- e (4.5)

 Pn

 in accordance with Arrhenius' equation. So the lifetime of the activated state is related
 to A and is found to be of the order 10~14 s, but this lifetime is shorter than the esti-

 mated time between two successive collisions, 10" 13 s. This fact brought Christiansen
 and Kramers to suppose that the reaction arises solely from collisions among reac-

 tant molecules and energized products, and that these collision processes have to be
 seen as elementary. They supposed moreover a deactivation mechanism, introduc-
 ing a description that would later be found useful in the analysis of chain reactions.
 The assumption of a deactivation mechanism is very important because it excludes

 the necessity of a stable activated state, an improbable fact according to its too brief
 lifetime. Moreover this hypothesis would play a role in future works of the authors

 approximately 10 years later, where they did not need to consider a definite and dis-

 crete activated state, looking at a chemical reaction as a continuous series of stages of

 an interatomic diffusion process. Kramers and Christiansen, in any case, considered

 the possible existence of the activated state but thought that its exact description would

 be very complex because the briefness of its lifetime requires not only simple time-

 independent quantum mechanics but time-dependent quantum dynamics. The authors

 removed the problem of the discrepancy between the lifetime of the activated com-

 plex and the interval between consecutive collisions by the argument that the activation

 process itself needs a certain time to happen. With these considerations, Christiansen
 and Kramers reached the following conclusion about the a factor that appears in the

 previous expression for the rate constant. They argued that for uni-molecular mech-
 anisms this factor must be near one, but in most cases it is found almost zero. This,

 they reasoned, means that the majority of reactions follow a bi-molecular mechanism.
 In the case of chain reactions a would be greater than unity.

 The last part of the 1923 paper would be revisited by Cyril Norman Hinshelwood
 (1897-1987) and Nikolaj Nikolaevič Semenov (1896-1986) around 20 years later in
 their works about uni-molecular and chain reactions clearly explained in the lectures
 the two scientists held on occasion of receiving the Nobel Prize in 1956 (http://

 nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/ 1 956/hinshel wood- lecture.pdf ;

 http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1956/semenov-lecture.pdf).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 406 S. Zambelli

 But in spite of the fact that the radiation hypothesis was intensely debated in the theory

 of chemical kinetics during that period, their work did not receive much attention.

 The interesting idea that highly energized products may activate the reactants in

 a chain mechanism has, however, a major flaw. As a reaction advances, the mole-

 cules produced are more and more numerous and there is no reason why they cannot

 exchange energy among themselves. The assumption that they must exchange energy

 exclusively with reactants is arbitrary. In Kramers's and Christiansen's paper there are
 also some interesting remarks about reactions in solution and the role of collisions

 with solvent molecules. The treatment of reactions in condensed phase would become
 the main thrust of the work of Christiansen around 1935 and the basis for the famous

 paper of Kramers in 1940 that will be treated in the following section of this article.

 5 Christiansen's approach

 Christiansen developed the model of a chemical reaction as an intra-molecular dif-

 fusion process during the first half of the thirties. He published two papers in 1935
 (Christiansen 1935) and 1936 (Christiansen 1936) on this research. The paper of 1936

 is particularly significant, while the earlier one simply established the basic thermody-
 namic treatment necessary for the subsequent work. Christiansen confronted Arrhe-

 nius's theory of activated states (Arrhenius 1889) with a little known theory (Nernst
 1893b) of Walther Hermann Nernst (1864-1941). In Nernsťs theory, the reaction
 velocity is obtained, by analogy with Ohm's law, as the ratio between a chemical

 potential and a chemical resistance. Christiansen took the chemical force or potential
 (both Nernst and Christiansen present some ambiguity on this point) as the difference

 of the chemical activities of the beginning and the final states and the chemical resis-

 tance is represented by a particular integral depending on temperature and diffusion

 constant. The purpose of Christiansen was to demonstrate, extending Arrhenius's con-

 ception, that the methods of Nernst and Arrhenius are analogous. The generalization

 of Arrhenius's theory is obtained by supposing an open, possibly infinite, sequence
 of many consecutive steps, thus gaining an expression consistent with that of Nernst.

 Christiansen discretized a chemical reaction of the kind A' => Bnt considering not
 only one activated state, as in Arrhenius's model, but a series of consecutive n stages
 which result in reciprocal virtual equilibrium: A' => X' =» X2 ... =Ф Xn_i =>
 Bn . He also assumed that the elementary steps of this sequence were composed of
 uni-molecular reactions and obtained the following expression for the reciprocal rate
 of reaction:

 1111 1

 V a'w¡ *2^3 xn-'wn

 where a' is the reactant concentration, *,• the equilibrium concentration of activated

 complexes and w±¡ is the probability per unit time that reactants, products or inter-
 mediates transform into each other by the uni-molecular reactions ±i.

 The terms of the previous equation are of a purely thermodynamic nature, in the

 sense that they can be imagined as being derived from virtual equilibrium expressions

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 407

 between species with a lifetime too brief to get real equilibria. The equilibria between

 reactants, products and intermediates are supposed to be valid because Christiansen

 considered the quantity of intermediates constant during the slow stages of reaction, so

 the process is stationary or quasi-stationary. These are a group of assumptions similar

 to those made in the theory of diffusion. In fact, according to Christiansen's hypoth-

 esis, the equilibrium quantity of the activated complexes may be put in relationship
 to the concentrations of a diffusing substance along the sections of a column. From

 this diffusive description, he obtained an expression for the reciprocal reaction rate

 which was consistent with the previous one, obtained on a thermodynamic basis. He

 introduced the activity coefficients cpi relating them to single stage transition rates Wi

 to justify also the deviations from equilibrium or from a uniform distribution. Chris-
 tiansen considered a column in which a potential field is present, so that the diffusing

 molecules are influenced by forces. The concentrations of the diffusing substance at

 the ends of the column x = 0, x = / are constant and equal to co and cn. A stationary

 gradient of concentration will be achieved after a certain time, and Christiansen's task

 was to find the quantities of substance diffusing per unit time assuming stationarity.
 He divided the column in n + 1 cells separated by n slices, with the thickness of the

 ith cell equal to А/. The probability per unit time that a molecule in the i - 1th cell
 passes into the ith cell is denoted by w¡, and w-i indicates the reverse process, as
 before for activated complexes, reactants and products. Christiansen assumed that the

 products of the activity coefficients <p, and equilibrium concentrations are equal at

 different positions of the column and from this deduced:

 0 Ф0 * о Фп SSL
 Cj 0 - со - and * c¡ о = cn - SSL (5.2)

 (Pi (Pi

 n - 1

 v У ~~Г^ - = C0<P0 - Cn<Pn- (5-4)
 ^ A|U>i+i

 Since this expression, similar to an equivalent diffusion process, results independent

 from the size of the column cells, so it must be for their sum: J = Xo~' лД-н ' and'
 in the limit, this sum can be represented by the integral:

 J = lim V А *L_A= [ ï-dx D (5.5)

 n->OQ А Ш/4-1 J D

 0 0

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 for positive and negative reactions. From the expression (5.1) for reciprocal velocity
 he found:

 W0=y _JPi_ and c_nïl = Y_Vi_ (5.3)
 V+ ~ A/W/+1 V- ~ A ¡W-Í

 for direct and inverse processes. Taking the velocity of the net process to be v = v+ -v-
 Christiansen obtained:

 with D = Л2 w and q> as a continuous function of the position jt.

 Christiansen thus obtained the rate of diffusion as: v = (co<po - с n<pn)/ J. The

 expression for J is yet dependent on the length / of the column, so Christiansen con-

 sidered the passage only through a column section (in stationary conditions v must be
 constant in all the sections of the column):

 408 S. Zambelli

 v = ~Acv7+ÃI

 I Ddx

 X

 which in differential form turns into a diffusion law:

 D dew

 "-í-ãf D dew (5-7)

 This expression implies that the transport of molecules is produced by the concentra-
 tion gradient and possibly also by forces acting on the molecules (their contribution

 is represented by the activities (p ). Separating the activity contribution, Christiansen
 obtained the following expression:

 Эс ^ din (D

 v = -D^-Dc~^r- ^ <5'8)

 in which the first term on the right represents an ordinary diffusion without a field.

 The second term, if we call '¡r the potential energy in a given position and К the force,
 is equal to -J^cK, considering that К = - and RT In (p = ф from Boltzmann's
 principle. Equation 5.8 then becomes:

 dc D

 V = ~DÌ H + lfcK' <5-9)

 which is analogous to that obtained by Smoluchowski and Einstein, but Christian-

 sen was the first scholar who applied it to reaction kinetics, thus showing the close
 analogy that exists between the rate of reaction and the rate of diffusion. He inves-

 tigated also the possibility of dividing a chemical process into a continuous number

 of stages, citing the famous paper written in 1931 by Eyring and Polanyi, where, for
 the first time, a continuous description of chemical potential energy along reaction
 coordinates was found (Polanyi and Eyring 1931b). In particular Christiansen's work
 will be scarcely cited later in the mainstream researches on chemical kinetics and

 only about his contributions to catalysis as can be seen examining the most important

 publications of the sector, from the introductory one (Eyring and Eyring 1963; Laidler

 1997) to the more complex (Eyring 1975). The publication of 1963 (Eyring and Eyring

 1963) is emblematic: there is only an hint about Christiansen's method in the transport

 mechanism chapter, but Christiansen's work is not cited explicitly and used only for
 specific systems, not generalized for all chemical reactions; the work of Kramers was
 completely ignored.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 409

 Fig. 1 Bi-stable potential
 barrier, the figure is taken from

 Christiansen's 1936 paper
 (Christiansen 1936)

 . ö +1 -

 The generalization of the Arrhenius conception brings us naturally to consider the

 transformation of a molecule during a reaction as an intra-molecular diffusion. To

 demonstrate this generalization Christiansen made some fundamental assumptions.
 He considered the case of a simple potential barrier, a symmetrical bi-stable one as
 shown in Fig. 1.

 This case will be used again by Kramers in his work of 1940. There are other

 assertions, as we will see, that are similar in Christiansen's and Kramers's papers:

 Christiansen considered various events that occur in the function of the energy of the

 system. If the diffusing particle has an energy lower than '¡rm , without considering tun-

 nelling quantum effects, the rate of reaction will be zero. The particle simply cannot
 overcome the potential barrier. In the opposite case, when the particle has an energy

 greater then '¡rm , it will oscillate between the two potential minima indefinitely. So it

 is impossible to observe a definite transformation, because of the large frequency of
 oscillation. Half of the time, the molecule will have one form, the other half a different
 form. To observe a definite transformation Christiansen affirmed that it is senseless

 to assume a definite energy for the chemical system, and even that it is impossible
 to realize a similar case because the reacting molecules will always exchange energy
 directly with the medium or by radiation. Therefore only the case of definite tem-
 perature and fluctuating energy is realistic because of the external disturbances. If

 these disturbances are rare the rate will be defined mainly by the reacting molecules'
 interactions, and the reaction can be seen as a bi-molecular one. On the other hand,

 if the experiment shows a uni-molecular behaviour, the disturbances are frequent and
 influential.

 With the expression v = (co<po - cn<pn)/J, Christiansen quantified Nernst's qual-

 itative description. He obtained this expression by increasing the intermediate states

 of the Arrhenius conception in which only one intermediate or activated state is con-
 sidered. In this sense the Arrhenius conception is connected to that of Nernst. There

 are other interesting conclusions drawn by Christiansen that will be fundamental for
 future works in this field. The first conclusion is about the constant of inter-molecu-

 lar diffusion D . If this constant varies during the reaction the resulting equations are

 extremely difficult to solve. So we have to assume D to be a characteristic constant of
 the reaction. The related problem of viscosity change was re-examined by Kramers
 and remains an essential, unresolved issue today. The second conclusion is that the

 main problem is to find solutions of a second order partial differential equation for the

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 410 S. Zambelli

 determination of chemical activity as a function of space and time. The rate of reaction

 thus results as an intensity of current inside the molecule. Christiansen emphasized

 the fact that finding special solutions of this differential equation for a given potential

 is not so difficult: the difficulty is the search for a reasonable physical solution. We can

 clearly demonstrate the pioneering intuition of Christiansen by citing the last sentence
 of the 1936 paper (Christiansen 1936):

 This task is similar to that of quantum theory, and it would seem premature if at
 the present moment I could get some conclusion.

 The link between the mathematical structure of a diffusive stochastic description and

 a quantum mechanical description of a system has interesting and profound relations

 that we will briefly examine in the following sections of this paper.

 6 Klein's visit to Copenhagen

 The main biographers of Kramers, in particular Dirk ter Haar, claim that his interest

 in chemical kinetics is a simple mathematical exercise of style (ter Haar 1998, Chap.
 6). I am convinced that this is only partly true, and, in particular, I claim that Kra-
 mers's work would be impossible without Christiansen's previous contribution. We

 will argue for this claim more fully in Sects. 7 and 8 of this paper, where we will exam-

 ine the early work of Kramers and Klein, Kramers' paper of 1940 (Kramers 1940) and

 the quantitative applications of stochastic processes to chemical kinetics. Although
 Kramers is most known for his works in quantum mechanics and spectroscopy, he

 was a wide-ranging thinker and the range of his interests was impressive. The paper of
 1940 was a generalization and an application to chemical dynamics of some not very
 well known and appreciated works done by Kramers and Klein soon after Kramers
 arrival in Copenhagen. To clarify Klein's role in this phase we have to consider some

 biographical hints of this period. During the years from 1917 to 1921 Klein travelled

 many times back and forth between Copenhagen and Stockholm. He became a student

 of Svante Arrhenius at the Nobel Institute and later he was on his way to Jean Baptiste

 Perrin in France when First World War broke out and he was drafted into the military.
 His initial studies were on solubility. At the end of his military service in 1917 Klein

 received a fellowship to study abroad and arrived in Copenhagen for a longer stay in

 1918. Klein did work for both Arrhenius and Bohr in this period, spending the sum-

 mer of 1919 with Kramers, and finally returned to Stockholm. In the same year Bohr

 travelled to Stockholm to visit Klein and convinced him to return to Copenhagen and
 work with him at the institute for theoretical physics. Klein continued his studies on

 solutions turning his attention from solubility to ionic diffusion. This research led him

 to his PhD thesis in which he examined the forces between ions in strong electrolyte
 solutions using the statistical mechanics of Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839-1903). The
 result was a generalized description of liquid dynamics and the formulation of what
 we call today the Klein-Kramers equation in a paper of 1922 (Klein 1922).

 We will discuss in some detail Klein's paper: "Zwr statistischen Theorie der Sus-

 pensionen und Lösungen " (Klein 1922), a statistical theory about suspensions and
 solutions. This work was written in 1921, toward the end of Klein's doctorate, and

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 4 1 1

 represents a sum of the collaboration with Kramers during the two preceding years.
 This collaboration was very fruitful because this work gave the fundamental theoret-

 ical basis for a complete and general statistical-mechanical description of solutions.
 It introduced for the first time the Klein-Kramers equation. It is interesting to note

 that many experts in stochastic methods also today do not know the origins of this

 fundamental equation which they use. Its origins are hidden in one of the first works
 of a young graduate student and they are published in a minor journal with little
 international circulation outside of Scandinavia.

 Let us now focus on Klein's paper in its details to observe the discovery of the
 famous equation, but also its links with the work of Einstein and Smoluchowski
 described in the previous parts of this paper.

 7 The discovery of the Klein-Kramers equation

 In the work of 1921, Klein considered a statistical mechanical treatment of a sus-

 pension of tiny particles in a viscous fluid. He considered dilute solutions and strong
 electrolytes and assumed the presence of both external fields and internal forces. The

 important question for Klein was the interaction of the solvent medium with the sol-
 ute or suspended particles. In need of a mechanical model for the fluid he looked for
 analogies with the problem of the mean free path in the gaseous phase. This was a

 purely theoretical assumption, a real fluid is much more complex, as Klein very well
 knew, but approaching the problem by means of statistical methods and on the basis

 of experimental data on viscosity a theory based on a rough model that included the
 interactions inside liquids was possible.

 The action of the solvent on a solute or suspended particle depends on the velocity

 of the particle or ion and varies quickly and randomly according to the equiparti-

 tion principle at the temperature of the fluid under consideration. The same assump-
 tion is valid for the angular momentum. In fact, these hypotheses are really valid

 only for suspensions because of the great dimension of the particles, as Einstein and
 Smoluchowski had demonstrated. Klein wanted to correlate a theoretical mechani-

 cal-statistical description of the system to other phenomenological characteristics of
 the solutions or suspensions, such as the electric conductivity of electrolytes. Using

 Gibbs's description Klein's goal was to solve the differential equation that describes

 the system. But it was necessary to impose boundary conditions relating to the mechan-
 ical state of the fluid. Klein's innovative approach consists in making no preliminary

 assumptions at the outset, introducing further assumptions only in a second step, for
 the solution of cumbersome calculations. He used the conclusions of Hendrik Antoon

 Lorentz (1853-1928) about energy equipartition to assume the conservation of the

 mean square displacements of the particles due to Brownian interactions and linked
 them to the macroscopic properties of the fluid: viscosity and temperature. Thanks
 to Einstein's work this can be done with nearly any hypothesis on the nature of the

 system. The irregular thermal impulses determine a velocity distribution of the sus-

 pended particles, which generates a diffusion current that adds to that due to external
 forces. Klein introduced a phase space description for the treatment of this current and

 obtained a Gibbs equation that takes into account irregular impulses from the fluid.

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 412 S. Zambelli

 Klein obtained a general equation for the probability distribution of the suspension and
 studied its dynamics, generalizing and correcting Einstein and Smoluchowski works.
 For this goal Klein introduced some approximations to solve the difficult equations
 obtained and applied them to the problem of electrolytic conductivity. Klein's major

 contribution consists in finding a general integral that solves Gibbs equations for this
 system and takes into account the influences of external and internal forces.

 After Arrhenius had opened the way to the study of solutions with the theory of

 electrolytic dissociation, Klein wanted to comprehend and justify the deviations for

 strong electrolytes, taking into account the reciprocal action between ions due to their
 electrical charge and the physical characteristics of the solvent such as its viscos-

 ity. Klein, following some works (Hevesy 1914, 1916) of George Charles de Hevesy
 (1885-1966) about the ionic mobility, wanted to correlate the influence of the ionic

 charge to the characteristics of the solution. For this purpose, it is necessary to intro-
 duce some approximation from the beginning: the interaction of the medium with
 an ion is independent from the presence of other ions. The electrostatic interactions

 between strong electrolytes determine some deviation from the behaviour of an ideal

 solution: the properties that depend on the number of ions take on values that derive

 from a smaller number of ions than are actually present in the solution, such as for a
 weak electrolyte only partially dissociated. This deviation also affects the Arrhenius
 mass action law. Also Nernst (1893a), Joseph John Thomson (1856-1940) (Thomson

 1893) had studied, for example, the influence of the apparent low dissociation on the
 dielectric constant of the solution. But in the consideration of these deviations, it is

 not sufficient to introduce only a correction to the concentrations, it is necessary to

 introduce more than one correcting term that also depends on the respective devia-

 tion. Klein followed Bjerrum's work and introduced a coefficient for osmotic pressure
 /о and another one for conductivity /u that corresponds to the ratio of the real and

 ideal quantities for solutions with the same number of particles. He obtained an activ-
 ity coefficient /a from the osmotic pressure /о that characterizes the deviation from

 the ideal free energy. Klein generalized Bjerrum's empirical formula for the osmotic
 coefficient with the following expression:

 (7Л)

 where g is the valence of the ion, T the temperature, с the concentration, e the dielectric

 constant. <p cannot be a linear function of the argument, as Bjerrum thought, because
 then the potential energy would diverge for high temperatures. Klein found a similar
 result for electrolytic conductivity, generalizing Walden's results. He wanted to con-
 sider also the osmotic pressure with a similar description as Milner had done. In a

 very interesting note, in which he criticized some errors in Milner's expressions that
 would violate the virial theorem (Milner 1912), he cited the name of Kramers and
 promised a future paper written jointly with him. Such a work, however, would never

 be written, a work by Kramers and also Klein in this case, and we have here therefore
 another near missed discovery , as we will see at the end of this section. Klein also

 wanted to consider dipolar solutes, not only ions, but the extreme difficulties that he

 encountered in finding the basis for a generalization of Peter Debye's (1884-1966)

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 413

 theories (Debye 1912) led him to make only some qualitative considerations. At the
 end of the introduction Klein thanked Professor Arrhenius and Professor Bohr, who

 hosted him in Copenhagen in that period, Klein's best period in his own words (Klein
 1922).

 To achieve those goals, Klein considered a dilute solution of n suspended parti-
 cles. In this case deviations from an ideal solution are proportional to various powers

 of concentration and derive from the interactions of the particles with the glass wall
 and between themselves. The system is considered nearly adiabatic, and the parti-
 cles are assumed spherical and homogeneous. The translational and rotational degrees
 of freedom of the particles are independent, but Klein considered only translational
 motion. The positions of the particles are characterized by Cartesian coordinates of
 their mass centres in the fluid system of reference. The velocities of the particles are

 the simple time derivatives of the coordinates. The masses of the suspended particles
 mass are much greater than the mass of the molecules of the medium, so one can
 consider a time interval in which their motion is negligible compared to the motion of

 the solvent. There are three kinds of forces that act on particles: external forces, fluid-

 particle interactions or solvent forces, and interactions between particles, or reciprocal
 forces. Solvent forces consist in a succession of rapid irregular impulses that derive

 from configuration relaxations of the liquid. Particle motions determine configura-
 tion changes in the solvent. These facts are in accordance with the dependence of
 the shear stress on the velocity of a body inside a fluid. Solvent interactions thus

 depend on the temperature of the system and on the velocity of suspended particles
 but we have to consider also the influence of external and internal fields of force.

 For example, if a tiny particle carries a strong charge it exerts a strong action on
 the solvent and so the frictional force is altered significantly. To describe the influ-
 ences of the last two contribution we write the equation of motion of the particles

 with the resultants of the velocities along the Cartesian axis of internal and external
 fields:

 áu i dx¡

 at at

 tni -r~ - Xi H- KXi , Ui = -

 dv< v , „ _ dyi n ( 7 .2) лч
 m¡ ^ - Y¡ v -|- , Kyi „ , v¡ _ - ^ n ( 7 .2) лч

 dw, d Zi
 т,- = Z, + /Í,„u, = -

 where m, is the mass of the ith particle, X/, Y¡, Z¡ the components of the forces

 due to thermal collisions and Kx¡ , Ky¡ , KZi the terms introduced for external and
 internal fields. X, , У, and Z, vary so quickly and irregularly around their mean val-
 ues that we can consider a time r in which the velocities and field forces change

 negligibly. With these classical assumptions Klein discussed directly a Gibbsian
 statistical mechanics of the system. He considered a number of system copies in

 thermal equilibrium at temperature T that differs not so much for positions and
 velocities of the particles but mainly for the forces acting on them. As usual he
 introduced a 6 -n dimensional phase space and a system density that depends on the

 considered volume, its position and time. Initially, a current moves the particles, and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 X/, У/, Zi are discontinuous quantities. The integrals of these forces over time r,
 which are the linear momenta, turn out to be independent of each other and discon-
 tinuous:

 414 S. Zambelli

 пчШ= J X¡d t

 m¡g¡( r) = J Zjdt

 /+Г

 f+T

 /+Г

 t

 t

 t

 = J y¡dt (7.3)

 F7 л а' г

 F7 ft( r) л =

 rtii m¡

 çv(r) =

 m i m i

 rfi(z) = - - V¡T - - KyiT (7.4)

 m, m i

 ft , rji and çí have a Gaussian distribution for specific forms of the forces X/ , У, , Z; .

 Their mean values are local functions of the phase space:

 £,?(r) = 2x,r

 nf( т) = 2Я,г (7.5)

 çf(r) = 2щт

 The quantities Xi » ^ » fli had been calculated by Lorentz considering thermal equi-
 librium between particles and solvent and turn out to be independent from the
 particles' velocity (Lorentz 1916). Klein then defined the probability that the val-
 ues of ft(r), rç, (r), çí(t) would be found between ft and ft + dft, rj¡ and тц +
 drç/, çí and g¡ -h ág¡y for all i, and obtained the probability that a point in the

 phase space with initial position and velocity jtp . . . , w® after time r would have
 velocity components between the limits u' and u' + dwi, . . . , wn and wn + d wn
 as:

 W(£i, • • • , Çn, и?, • . . , w^áui . . .d wn. (7.6)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The quantities и/, и/, tu/, А*,, refer to the initial time í, B¡ is the friction
 coefficient of the / -particle and a¡ a constant that depends on the nature of the solvent

 and of the particles. We obtain also that the mean square values of the impulses result
 proportional to г :

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 415

 The number of phase space points with initial position between jcj* andjt^+clti, . . z®
 and -f dzi and velocity between u® and u® + d§i , . . w® and w® + dg' is given

 by:

 vf(x0{i . . . , zi к?, . . . , W°n, t)dx 1 . . . dzn^' ...dgn, (7.7)

 where v represents a number of system copies sufficient to fill the entire space of the

 recipient walls and the volume of the particles themselves, the element d%' . . . dgn is

 small compared with du' ... d wn . If we consider a volume element of the phase space
 dct) = dx' .. .dzndu ' . . . d wn, where x' = + u't, zn = z„ + w'x , so small that
 all points have passed through it from the initial volume after a time r, the number of

 these points will be:

 vf(x 1, . . . , wn, t + r)d CO. (7.8)

 / is obtained by integration over all possible velocities, considering и Ç, . . . , w® as
 functions of £i ... gn :

 + 00 +00

 f(xi,...,wn,t + T)= J J /(*?

 - OO -00

 X ...,u>°)d$i ...dçn (7.9)

 |(. = ui и® (7.10)

 m = v¡ - v? - -z

 Çi = w¡ -w¡

 m,

 m,-

 o Kz>

 mi

 Klein expanded the integral (7.9) into a power series to first order:

 i |/(*l , • • • , W„, t + r) - /(*?, . . . , w°, o]
 X-1 '( + d^(4i f)'
 ~ h Lv"^r э»? + э «,? )

 y dut dvj dwi J _ ' 3 Xi + 3 yi 3z//J

 žszA _ с„д 3 + „д 3 + „д)! 3z//J an>

 The solution of this equation determines the number of points that migrate from a
 volume in time r, and this represents a diffusion equation. Introducing the mean val-
 ues of £j(r), гц{ г) and g¡( г) previously obtained in (7.4), the Eq.7.1 1 turns into the
 differential form:

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 a, л ( Э2(Х./) I a2(À,/) . 32(W/)' , fl, /Э(«,-/) + , d(v¡f) + . 3(ui,/)'
 2l_ a, _ Y 9u? I 3u? dwf J m V Зи, + 3 Vi + 9wj )

 dt '=' _ +2Žjr (*" + H + Kli M ) ~~ ("' + Vi I« + Щ Ю _

 where a' and b' are constants independent from the velocity и '. However,
 the mean values of are: Xi = so ¿*iand b' must
 be zero. The presence of forces , KZn cannot change these values pro-
 vided that they have no influence on B¡. Klein then considered the presence of

 forces due to potential fields independent of time: (a,- - l)KXhyitZi = дхд ^ z. ,
 but dependent on the nature of the fluid and the temperature by virtue of
 the constant a, . The Klein-Kramers equation finally assumes the well-known
 form:

 416 S. Zambelli

 (7.12)

 This new equation determines the distribution function and represents the first form
 of the Klein-Kramers equation. Its validity is limited to times of the order of r,
 for arbitrary times we have to consider the general Gibbs equation but we would
 have to know also the exact mechanical properties of the liquid. Klein, by integra-
 tion of the preceding equation, obtained the quantities /,* , . . . , дп in the absence
 of active forces and with the assumption of a Maxwell distribution for the veloci-
 ties:

 kT Bi m'ïï.2

 Xi =

 mi

 n Г kTBj ( Э2/ Э2/ Э2Л Bi ( dim/) djvif ) d(Wjf)'
 2L _ у mi ' ãw, щ щ) m¡ ' dui dvi du>i )
 dt ' -U 1 (dV ÈL + J- dV <y_ + , dV dj_' - / . a/ + , Э/ + , df'
 L+^7 -U 'J)xidu¡ ÈL + J- 357ÏÏÏ7 <y_ + , - 'u4x¡ . + , v¡Wi + ,

 (7.14)

 Kle in wanted to apply the Klein-Kramers equation to different cases, once its gen-
 eral form had been obtained. He noted that Einstein and Smoluchowski had treated

 extensively the case without external forces. In those works, nevertheless, only the
 positions of the particles are considered, not their velocities. The simple assump-
 tion on the time allows him to obtain the Maxwell distribution for velocities. In any
 case, Klein's approach is very different from that of Einstein's (1905) and Smolu-

 chowski 's (1916). He tried to apply the dynamical equation of the distribution func-
 tion for any time even if this has no practical meaning. Maxwell's distribution is
 valid also in presence of external forces, as Smoluchowski had demonstrated. Klein,

 however, asserted that Smoluchowski in person had showed him that his theory was
 not valid for very short times. There are some problems also for longer times. To
 gain a description for all times, not only for r, Klein limited his treatment to one

 system of v particles with only one copy: n - 1. This limitation makes the phase
 space simply correspond to two three-dimensional spaces, one for positions and the

 other for velocities. The coordinate space corresponds to the volume occupied by

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 4 1 7

 the solution. In order to simplify the system Klein introduced the classical exam-
 ple of a thin, infinitely long cylinder. External forces act only along the cylinder
 axis, and the cylinder walls play no role in the considered example. The motion
 along the cylinder is free with any possible distribution of particles whereas the
 motion perpendicular to axis direction is negligible or considered in an equilib-
 rium state. So we are considering a one-dimensional system. For this case, Klein
 begins by applying the Klein-Kramers equation to the following distribution func-
 tion:

 _ 1 / tnip- . '/'

 f = e _ W'~T' )(p(x,u,t)t (7.15)

 where cp represents a measure of the deviations from equilibrium distribution. The

 Klein-Kramers equation for (p then becomes:

 d(p irTttd2<f> ~ ft d(p
 - dt = kTß-j ¿ ~ ßu~z ft

 dt ou ¿ ou m "ã- ox ä ou ox m

 Klein emphasized the great difficulties in the integration of this equation in the
 presence of external forces. He took up Smoluchowski's treatment of an harmonic

 potential: V = |jc2, a = mßy , where y is a positive constant much smaller
 than ß , a quantity related to the viscosity. Smoluchowski had used this treatment
 for a statistical proof of the second theorem of thermodynamics, as we have seen
 in the third section of this paper. Klein, beginning as usually from the particles'

 equation of motion, found the analytical solution of Eq. 7.16. It has the cumbersome
 form:

 m r'r2

 'J _ 'П-Г2)

 х}- , (7.17)

 f{x, u, t + r) = J j f (^0, И0, t)e-VT("2+ßYx2)<pdxoduo. (7.18)

 +00 4-00

 - 00 -00

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ^ 2пкТе~ят(и2+РУх2) i _ ( r'+rì' е-2щ

 where r' and гг are the solutions of the equation r2 - ßr + ßy = 0, p = x - ^
 and b - xo - This formula represents a valid solution of all statistical problems
 about solutions or suspensions if we consider times of a magnitude much greater

 than 1/ ß. Starting from an initial distribution / (*o> "о» 0 the current distribution
 results:

 If П =0 we are considering a system without external forces. For t -> oo we find

 the equilibrium distribution as excepted to be:

 418 S. Zambelli

 fix, u, oo) = (7.19)

 IttkT

 Klein then compared his results with that of Smoluchowski (3.1). Smoluchowski

 had studied only overdamped dynamics imposing an instantaneous equilibrium for
 the velocities. The interesting thing is that Klein not only confirmed Smoluchow-
 ski's equations and solutions but obtained general results that are applicable to dif-

 ferent cases. Klein found that Smoluchowski's expressions were correct only by

 virtue of imposing a particular distribution for initial velocities: uo/ß % 0, the ratio
 between initial velocity and friction must be nearly zero, but Smoluchowski had not

 imposed this assumption explicitly in his treatment. Klein found the solutions for the

 three-dimensional case from the simple one-dimensional cylinder system and again
 confronted his results with that of Smoluchowski. The expressions of the Polish sci-

 entist turn out to be valid in general if the variation of the acting forces on a sus-

 pended particle is small over a displacement ofü/ß. Klein's theoretical and more
 methodical approach to this kind of systems was necessary for the description of
 ionic solutions and processes like electrolysis, the precedent works being only valid
 for colloidal suspensions. Finding exact solutions for this kind of systems however
 presents, also today, insurmountable difficulties in most of the cases. So Klein intro-

 duced, qualitatively and quantitatively, the first necessary approximation needed to
 obtain some useful results: he considered only a single ion and the mean value of
 reciprocal actions of other ions by setting it constant. The mean action of other ions
 was in such a way considered together with the solvent's action. For ionic solutions,

 the description of Einstein and Smoluchowski is too simple because in this case the

 viscosity and its dependence on temperature are influenced also by Coulomb inter-
 actions. Klein considered ionic friction as a product of the macroscopic viscosity
 coefficient of the solvent multiplied by quantities dependent on the nature of the

 considered ion but independent from temperature. Temperature dependence remains
 included in the viscosity coefficient. In a similar way he rescaled the positions, time,

 and the concentration, and he demonstrated the validity of his expressions for solutions

 with different temperatures and concentrations. At the end of the paper, Klein found

 again the expression for the conductivity coefficient. The new expression is consistent

 with Bjerrum's. Bjerrum's formula was shown to be a special case of Klein's general
 expression. Thanks to Klein's work the study of bipolar solutions gained a formal

 basis. Klein's and Kramers's purely theoretical approach was necessary for a general
 description of solution dynamics. It allowed for the theoretical description of solution
 characteristics, varying the number of the solute particles, the solvent, the interaction

 between them, as well as external influences. This work established the general basis
 for the description of complex condensed phase phenomena like the deviation from
 the behaviour of ideal solutions, diffusion, electrolysis, and the kinetics of chemical
 reactions.

 Solutions and ionic reactions are suitable systems of charged particles to be studied

 by Boltzmann's statistical methods. Before the publication of Klein's paper of 1922,

 <0 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 419

 Kramers and Klein came also to the important result that the logarithm of the activity

 coefficient was proportional to the square root of the ionic strength. But they were

 unsatisfied with their formal derivation, Kramers in particular intended to obtain that

 result using Gibbs statistical mechanics more rigorously. However, both Klein and
 Kramers soon became occupied with others problems. Klein began his work on rel-

 ativity and Kramers returned to atomic physics, his main research subject during his
 Copenhagen years.

 In 1923, in a famous paper (Debye and Hückel 1923), Peter Debye and Erich
 Armand Arthur Joseph Hückel (1896-1980) obtained exactly the same law consid-
 ered earlier by Kramers and Klein:

 AG = - log Y± = Z+Z-A (7.20)

 1 + BasTl

 Four years later Kramers returned to this topic and published a paper on the statistical
 mechanics of ionic solutions, always using Gibbsian statistics. His work was more

 systematic than that of Debye and Hückel. In fact, Kramers introduced corrections to
 their law (Kramers 1927). But the impact and importance of that result was in any

 case much smaller than that of the original Debye-Hückel paper.

 The joint work of Kramers and Klein on the theory of strong electrolytes is a good

 example of what Max Dresden, one of the most famous students of Kramers and his
 major biographer, called the conundrum of the near misses (Dresden 1987, p. 446).
 Many times during his career Kramers was very near to conclusive theoretical concep-

 tions but he abandoned them without publishing his main results, or he published later

 only minor and misunderstood papers. As Dresden noted, this was due to Kramers
 personality, he was very timid and consequently cautious about his results. Another

 reason may be Kramers impressive eclecticism that led him to shift from one subject

 to another in quick and rapid succession.

 8 Kramers work in 1940

 This was Kramers's first approach to solution dynamics, and, after the brief collabo-
 ration with Christiansen, he returned to the study of chemical reactions only around
 1940.

 The little attention that Kramers paper of 1940 (Kramers 1940) received at the time

 has led many physicists and historians of science to consider this work as a simple
 exercise of style, a curious and interesting application of advanced statistical mechan-
 ics. Notable in this sense are the words spoken by Nicholas van Kampen, the most
 famous of Kramers's students, during the after-dinner speech to the 50 years after

 Kramers meeting in 1991 (Hanggi and Troe 1991) as reported in the excellent book of
 D. ter Haar (1998), another famous student and biographer of Kramers. Van Kampen

 suggested that although the apparent motivation of Kramers's paper was a discussion
 of chemical dissociation, and, possibly, nuclear fission, the real reason for this research
 was his fascination with the mathematical intricacies of the problem.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 420 S. Zambelli

 Van Kampen's statement may carry some truth but as we have seen in our

 reconstruction of the origins of the 1940 paper (Christiansen 1936), reaction kinet-

 ics and chemical dynamics were important fields of study that interested Kramers

 profoundly although he attended to it only irregularly. There are about six papers ded-

 icated directly to chemistry and another 20 related to that field in his whole oeuvre
 of 148 publications (ter Haar 1998). In the chemistry papers, Kramers shows good
 knowledge of chemical problems, and the bibliographical references demonstrate that

 he was aware of the debates and problems inside the physical chemistry community.

 The paper of 1940 presents what today we call the "Kramers problem": the dynam-

 ics of a particle moving in a bi-stable external field of force, subject to the irregular

 forces of a surrounding medium in thermal equilibrium. The particle, originally caught

 in a potential well, may escape by passing over a potential barrier. Constructing a dif-

 fusion equation for the density distribution of particles in phase space it is possible

 to calculate the probability and the escape rate as a function of the temperature and
 viscosity of the medium.

 It is important to note that also today one does not know a model for Kramers' s

 problem which is valid over the whole range of possible values for the viscosity.
 Approximations have to be made and, as van Kampen said: "it seems as if almost

 everything that can be done in that direction has been done by Kramers". Van Kam-
 pen's comments are precise and well-phrased and it is hard to say anything more
 significant, so I shall limit myself here to relate some of them.

 The 1940 paper is, as van Kampen puts it, "a typical Kramers paper, containing

 many gems, but as a whole somewhat confusing. It needs a careful perusal and that
 may well be the reason that it was not well known for many years" (ter Haar 1998,
 p. 95).

 Kramers considered the one dimensional motion of a particle of unit mass starting

 from a Langevin equation for the system:

 àv u ^ ч --Ai, dV(x)
 - àv = -{„ u + /(,) ^ ч --Ai, dV(x) (8.1)

 where V(jc) is the potential field, £ the friction and / (t) a time dependent stochastic

 force with the following statistical properties:

 (fit)) = 0, </«>)/(/)> = C8(t). (8.2)

 Kramers searched in particular for the distribution law of the particles in phase space
 on the basis of a given distribution of the random forces. He obtained the diffusion

 equation for the particle distribution from the statistical moments of the random force:

 dP(x,xo,v,vo,t)

 a dv(*) a a / a '

 r = "3î-- <8-4>

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where the operator Г is defined as:

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 421

 Fig. 2 Kramers's asymmetric potential, taken from Kramers's 1940 paper (Kramers 1940)

 This expression is generally known as the Kramers equation although it had been
 derived originally by Klein in 1922 as we have discussed above. Kramers looked for

 solutions of Eq. 8.4 for the cases of two different potentials, an asymmetric one with

 a smooth barrier (see Fig. 2) and a symmetric one with a sharp barrier. Taking up van

 Kampen's words, the first gem of the paper is the discovery that it is sufficient to inves-

 tigate the stationary case, even though one is interested in a decay rate (ter Haar 1 998, p.

 95). This fundamental assumption, at least for a symmetric potential, was really due to

 Christiansen (1936), as we have seen, albeit only in a qualitative way Kramers (1940).

 We remark that the stationarity condition is not strictly an approximation, but rather

 the simplest case of a non-equilibrium state of a system. However, we can approximate

 the distribution near A and B, the initial and final potential well, with an equilibrium

 distribution if the barrier is high compared to квТ and the diffusion will be slow.

 Kramers did not succeed in finding solutions for the whole range of values of the

 friction coefficient, but only considered the limiting cases of large and small values of

 £. He first considered the case of large viscosity, and, in van Kampen's words, this is a

 second gem : "in the limit of large friction the equation reduces to a diffusion equation
 in coordinate space alone" (ter Haar 1998, p. 96). This requires the elimination of
 the momentum of the particle, which Kramers achieved by means of an ingenious
 step. Assuming a Maxwell distribution for the velocities (the fast variables with large

 friction) we can write directly:

 where <j(jc, t)is the distribution over spatial coordinates. The diffusion equation may
 then be written as:

 P(xyv,t) - a(x,t)e 2кът , (8.5)

 - __v^_

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Э a(x,t) kBTd2a(x,t) Э f F(x) , J
 ~»Г a(x,t) = - ìx [Т'"1 f F(x) , "J J ' <8'6)

 where F(x ) is the force of the field and D the diffusion coefficient. This corresponds

 to the well-known Smoluchowski Eq.3.1 and is obtained from the Kramers equation

 of diffusion by an integration along a straight line x -f v/Ç = x' = const. One can see

 the similarities with Klein's discussion. The solution for the flux w in the stationary
 case is:

 One can now ask the question: what is the mean first passage time, or the probability
 of escape from A to B?

 We now have van Kampen's third gem : "having obtained the one-dimensional dif-

 fusion equation Kramers found the mean first passage time by deriving a formula for
 it, which is today common knowledge, although it is occasionally rediscovered (ter
 Haar 1998, p. 97)".

 The escape probability r turns out to be:

 422 S. Zambelli

 w = (8.7)

 r - w/ria ,

 where na is the number of particles near A. This method to obtain the rate r is today

 known as the flux over population method. Kramers estimated r also in another way
 which van Kampen takes to be the fourth gem : "He decomposed the range of the

 coordinate into one region around the top of the potential region, and another region

 covering the potential well. This has now become a standard trick of singular pertur-

 bation theory. It enables one to apply different expansions in both regions, provided

 one can fit them smoothly together so as to get an approximation that covers the whole

 range (ter Haar 1998, p. 97)" Assuming that the potential well near A can be approx-

 imated as a harmonic potential: V (*д) = ¿(Inco^x2, and that the potential near the
 top of the barrier of height Q at position С can similarly approximated by a quadratic
 potential:

 v C*c) = Q - ^(2W)2(x - xc )2. (8.8)

 Kramers finds, in the case of the asymmetrical potential:

 2jT(0(0f _ J2_

 r ^
 r'

 where rj is the viscosity. For the symmetric potential, he obtained:

 2л co2 I tcQ -JÉL

 • (8Л0)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 423

 In stationary conditions, by approximating a bi-stable asymmetric potential near the
 barrier with the preceding expression (8.8) for V(jtc), it is possible to solve Kra-

 mers diffusion equation exactly near the potential well for all values of viscosity. Van

 Kampen talks of the fifth real gem : "the very ingenious construction of a solution in

 the barrier region. It is true that this is only a special solution, but it is precisely the

 one he needs: no incident particles from infinity, and thermal equilibrium on the side

 of the well. Hence it can be attached smoothly to the equilibrium distribution inside
 the well (ter Haar 1998, p. 98)".

 In the case of medium-small viscosities (rj >> w>) we get:

 г ъ со • e'1**7 = rTR , (8.11)

 a result that is independent of viscosity. This is the transition state theory (TST) value
 of Henry Eyring (1935) and Michael Polanyi (Evans and Polanyi 1935), who did not
 consider the role of the. It may seem impressive to see that the results of TST, based

 on quantum mechanics (Polanyi and Eyring 1931a), come out as a particular case of
 Kramers' pure classical method. But there are precise limitations to the use of Kra-
 mers's method as we will see in the conclusions.

 Then Kramers examined the case of very small viscosity that also gave results
 different from the TST value. TST assumes a perfect thermodynamic equilibrium

 between reactants, (particles in A in our case), and products (particles in B). However,

 van Kampen notes: "Kramers also realised that for very small friction the fluctuations

 might not be able to maintain the equilibrium in the well; rather the leakage across
 the barrier would deplete the high energy tail of the distribution. For this case he

 introduced the sixth gem. In the limit of low friction the particle in the well oscillates

 roughly with a constant energy. It is therefore possible to average out the phase. This
 leads to a one-dimensional diffusion equation in the energy scale, from which it is

 easy to compute the average time needed to reach the energy of the top of the barrier".
 Kramers introduced the action 1(E) instead of the energy, which represents the

 area in phase space within a curve of constant energy:

 I{E)=j>vdx. (8.12)

 He thus found a diffusion equation for the ensemble density:

 Т,="Ь{" + к'т,ш)- <8I3)

 The motion of the particles in the potential wells will be oscillatory, with a period of
 oscillation a which satisfies the equation:

 - (8.14)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the stationary state, the solution of the ensemble density diffusion equation is:

 w = -r)kBTIe~&-^(ee1ŠT>j. (8.15)

 In the small viscosity case, the escape probability results as:

 424 S. Zambelli

 ГЪ1)0;е~1ЪГ- (8.16)

 Thus Kramers found solutions and the rate of the process for a great part of viscos-

 ity range: very small, small, and large. The intermediate region that would join the
 different regimes was not considered by Kramers because it is difficult to find useful

 approximation schemes. This problem remains a complex question, and even today
 no definite solution for the whole viscosity range is known, although the Russian
 physicists Sergey V. Meshkov and mainly Vladimir Ivanovich Mel'nikov found a
 description for the intermediate range in 1990 (Melnikov and Meshkov 1986).

 9 Conclusions

 The second section of this paper may appear as yet another discussion of Einstein

 well-known annus mirabilis paper, but it was included here to present again Einstein's

 work in the context of the application of stochastic methodologies to chemical kinet-
 ics, which has not received much consideration by historians of science until now. A
 similar observation holds for the third section about Smoluchowski's lesser known

 work, but again one may consider his work as the first quantitative description of

 diffusion-controlled reactions and therefore as a basis for a different way of seeing
 chemical processes.

 Christiansen's work of the years 1935-36 is largely misunderstood, known only for

 his research on chain reactions, and also in this field its significance is obscured by
 the Nobel Laureates Semenov and Hinshelwood. Christiansen left the description of
 chemical reaction as diffusion processes largely incomplete and only on a qualitative
 basis. But he made the right conjectures and introduced the necessary conditions for
 the formal approach that Kramers would develop in 1940.

 All of van Kampen's gems make a precious jewel for chemistry: a very basic

 model for the description of reactions in condensed phase. It is very important because

 the major deficiency of TST is that it treats the reactive event by considering only
 the interactions between single molecules of the reactant and not with the medium.

 The interaction with the medium may be included only via phenomenological fac-
 tors. To get an exact description of condensed phase reactions by TST one needs a
 quantum mechanical description of all molecules of the solvent involved in addition

 to the molecules directly involved in the reaction. This in turn results in an impractical
 complexity of the quantum mechanical description.

 Furthermore TST, imposing an equilibrium condition, treats a dynamical event
 as a static one. The reaction, from a microscopic point of view, is considered as a

 "big" molecule that comprises, configuration states, reactants, activated complex and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 425

 products. It is not a dynamical description of the process and this is another flaw

 of TST. In fact, the equilibrium condition, although useful, is the most questionable

 assumption of TST. Kramers, on the other hand, made a better assumption: the sta-
 tionarity condition. This is a more reasonable assumption because it is dynamical and
 it represents the simplest case of a non-equilibrium process, as a chemical reaction is

 when it takes place. As Max Dresden (1988) pointed out, Kramers was more familiar
 with non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and its subtleties than most other physi-
 cists. In classes, lectures, seminars and discussions, he pointed out the difficulties and

 also the inconsistencies that were present in many traditional treatments of the subject
 (Melnikov and Meshkov 1986). A possible link between Kramers and Eyring could
 have been the theory of plasticity that Eyring elaborated around 1955: Eyring used
 analogous premises to that of stochastic diffusion methods but did not generalize it,

 applying instead a modified application of transition state theory (Bak 1974).

 But, as we have seen, Christiansen had resumed his studies on kinetics before

 Kramers, in the first half of the thirties and published two papers in 1935 (Christiansen

 1 935) and 1 936 (Christiansen 1 936). The paper of 1 936 is of great importance because

 Christiansen introduced the basis of a purely diffusion treatment of chemical reaction

 in the condensed phase. Christiansen's description is formally weak and not so rigor-

 ous but he without doubt took the right way of the stationary state from a qualitative

 and intuitive point of view.

 The role of Christiansen is largely misunderstood even for scientists working on

 thermodynamics and stochastic or diffusion processes; so it is not surprising that his

 work is barely known by the majority of the scientific community. This fact may be
 observed at various stages, from scientific popularization to scholarly studies. It is
 not so surprising, on the side of popular science, that these concepts are not known.
 They treat profound questions that are not simply accessible to people outside the
 scientific community because of their theoretical and formal complexity. Inside the

 scientific community those concepts are obviously more known but only few special-
 ized researchers are deeply concerned directly with them. They are revolutionary as

 much as relativity and quantum mechanics although less spectacular and evident.

 The general difficulties about statistical mechanics are, however, not sufficient to

 comprehend completely the scant and delayed interest in the Christiansen-Kramers
 approach to activated processes. The problems of TST would lead one to think that
 the diffusive model is better, also because the TST expression results as a particular

 case of Kramers's treatment. So why has this approach not been considered for nearly

 thirty years and why is it even today underestimated? The causes are manifold, for
 historical and methodological reasons.

 Christiansen, timidly, tried to popularize his approach, as we can see from his
 own words spoken at the 67th general discussion of the Faraday Society in 1938
 (Guggenheim and Weiss 1938), titled Reaction Kinetics, during the debate of the
 lecture of Edward Armand Guggenheim (1901-1970) and J. Weiss.

 As to whether it is permissible to assume, in the neighbourhood of the critical state,

 anything like an equilibrium state density of representative points, I have sought to
 show that it is at least natural to consider a chemical reaction as an intramolecular

 diffusion process. According to this picture the velocity of reaction must be identified

 with the intensity of flow of representative points at that part of the reaction path which

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 426 S. Zambelli

 correspond to maximum potential energy. If we set out the differential equation for

 the diffusion process and, as a first approximation, solve it for the case of a stationary

 flow, we find that the density of points at the place of maximum potential is exactly
 half of the equilibrium value calculated from the number of systems in the original
 state, if we assume that, in the final state the reacting molecules are practically not
 existent (p. 73).

 Chistiansen received no response. Although he inherited the chair of Johannes

 Nicolaus Br0nsted (1879-1947) of physical chemistry in Copenhagen, he remained
 a relatively isolated scientific figure and did not write many papers. He gained some
 influence only in his own country, Denmark (Bak 1974).

 Kramers's paper of 1940 (Kramers 1940), on the other hand, seems to have come

 out of nowhere. He worked directly on chemical kinetics only once before with
 Christiansen in 1923 (Christiansen and Kramers 1923). We can assume that Kra-

 mers kept a particular interest in this theme and stayed in contact with Christiansen

 but only in private. Kramers's studies on this subject are eclipsed by his more relevant
 contributions to quantum mechanics.

 The great success of TST in a similar way eclipsed Christiansen's approach in the

 chemical ambit. This approach is purely classic and was born in a period in which

 the attention of scientific community was catalyzed by the first developments and the
 formalization of quantum mechanics. During and after the second world war these

 studies were almost totally forgotten, with the notable exception of Chandrashekhar's

 review of 1943 (Chandrashekhar 1943). That work is the only one explicitly cited by
 Eyring and collaborators for example and only for very specific cases of diffusion

 controlled reactions and processes in the condensed phase (Eyring et al 1980; Eyring
 and Eyring 1963; Laidler 1997; Eyring 1975).

 Methodologically, even if the diffusive stochastic approach has some theoretical

 advantages, it is more difficult to adapt and apply to the description of chemical reac-

 tions than TST. It requires notable mathematical knowledges and physical concepts
 that are not so familiar in chemistry. TST on the other hand, relying on the pow-
 erful means of quantum mechanics, produces more predictive results, although one
 has to apply phenomenological coefficients in some cases and make some arbitrary
 assumptions.

 Mathematically, the stochastic operators have the same structure as Hamiltonian

 operators, so one could think of applying the same approximation techniques that
 have brought about the extraordinary progress of quantum mechanics. Unfortunately,

 this is not possible because there are no analytical solutions for a complex phenom-
 enology such as the temporal evolution of a distribution of particles interacting with
 the medium, neither for the simplest cases (excluding the phenomenology with no
 potential present). On the contrary, in quantum mechanics there is a simple phenom-
 enology described analytically: the motion of an electron around a nucleus or the

 hydrogen atom. This is mainly the reason why stochastic methods were rediscovered

 during the sixties in chemistry and in physics. The introduction and the first develop-

 ments of computer science have allowed one to fill partially the gap of the deficiency

 of a fundamental analytical solution by means of computational methods. In this way,
 the Christiansen-Kramers theories have found today a new strength and are applied
 in various chemical problems, as we can see looking at the titles of the papers of a

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Chemical kinetics and diffusion approach 427

 congress dedicated to Kramers in 1990 Hanggi and Troe (1991). In particular, today
 the Christiansen-Kramers approach and the Eyring-Polanyi mainstream theory are

 treated together Berglung and Gents (2008). This is fortunate because the diffusion

 approach could also have been forgotten.

 Acknowledgements I am very grateful to Prof. Giorgio Moro and Prof. Giulio Peruzzi of the University

 of Padova, Italy, for the fruitful discussions and the essential advices they gave me on the draft of this paper.

 References

 Z Phys. Chem. 4:226.

 Arrhenius, S.A. 1889. Über die Reaktionsgeschwindikeit bei der Inversion von Rohrzucker durch Saiiren.

 Bäk, T.A. 1974. The History of Physical Chemistry in Denmark. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 25:1.
 Berglung, N., and Gents, B. 2008. The Ey ring-Kramers law for potentials with non quadratic saddles.

 arXiv:0807.1681vl [math.PRl.

 Brush, S.G. 1968. A History of Random Processes. Arch. Hist. Exact. Sci. 5: 1 ; see also The Kind of Motion

 We Call Heat. (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976) Chap. 15.

 Chandrashekhar, S. 1943. Stochastic Problems in Physics and Astronomy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 15:1.
 Christiansen, J. A. 1922. Über das Geschwindigkeitsgesetz monomolekularer Reactionen, Z. Phys. Chem.

 103:91

 Christiansen, J. A. 1935. Einige Bemerkungen zur Anwendung der Bodensteinschen Methode der stationären

 Konzentrationen der Zwischenstoffe in der Reakionskinetik. Z Phys. Chem. 28B:303.

 Christiansen, J.A. 1936. Über eine Erweiterung der Arrheniusschen Auffassung der chemischen Reaction.

 Christiansen, J.A., and Kramers, H.A. 1923. Über die Geschwindigkeit chemischer Reaktionen. Z. Phys.

 Z Phys. Chem. 33B:145.

 Chem. 104:451

 Debye, P. 1912. Einige Resultate einer kinetischen Theorie der Isolatoren. Phys. Z. 13:97.
 Debye, P., and Hückel, E. 1923. Zur Theorie der Elektrolyte. Physik. Z 24: 185.
 Delbrück, M. 1940. Statistical Fluctuations in Autocatalytic Reactions. J. Chem. Phys. 8:120.
 Dresden, M., 1987. H.A. Kramers between tradition and revolution. New York: Springer.
 Dresden, M. 1988. Kramers's Contributions to Statistical Mechanics. Phys. Today 41(9):26.
 Dusham, S. 1921. A Theory of chemical Reactivity. Calculations of rates of Reactions and equilibrium

 Constants. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 43:397.

 Einstein, A. 1903. Eine Theorie der Grundlagen der Thermodynamik. Ann. d. Phys. 1 1 :76.
 Einstein, A. 1904. Zur allgemeinen molekularen Theorie der Wärme. Ann. d. Phys. 14:98.
 Einstein, A. 1905. Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte Bewegung von in

 ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. Ann. d. Phys. 17:549.

 Einstein, A. 1917. Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Phys. Z. 18:121.
 Einstein, A., to J. Perrin, 5 November 1919, In: D. Kormos Buchwald et al. (eds), The Collected Papers

 of Albert Einstein, Vol. 9: The Berlin Years. Correspondence, January 19 19- April 1920, Princeton:
 Princeton University Press, 2004, Doc. 156; quoted by M.J. Nye in Molecular Reality: A Perspective on
 the Scientific Work of Jean Perrin. Science History Publications, New York: Neale Watson Academic
 Publications, 1972, p. 177.

 Evans, M.C., and Polanyi, M. 1935. Some Applications of the Transition State Method to the Calculation

 of Reaction Velocities. Especially in Solution, Trans. Faraday Soc. 31:875.

 Eyring, H. 1935. The activated complex in chemical reactions. J. Chem. Phys. 3:107.
 Eyring, H. 1975. Reaction in Condensed Phases. New York: Academic Press.

 Eyring, H., and Eyring, E.M. 1963. Modern Chemical Kinetics. New York: Reinhold.
 Eyring, H., and Ree, T. 1955. A Generalized Theory of Plasticity involving the Virial Theorem. Proc. Natl

 Acad. Sci. USA 41:118.

 Eyring, H., Lin, S.H., and Lin, S.M. 1980. Basic Chemical Kinetics. New York: Wiley.
 Guggenheim, E.A. and Weiss, J. (1938). The Application of Equilibrium Theory to Reaction Kinetics.

 Hanggi, P., and Troe, J. 1991. Rate Processes in Dissipative Systems: 50 Years after Kramers. Ber. Buns-

 Trans. Faraday Soc. 34:57.

 enges. Phys. Chem. 95(3):225.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hevesy, G.v. 1914. Ueber die Grosse und Beweglichkeit der Elektrizitätsträger in Flüssigkeiten, Jahrbuch

 428 S. Zambelli

 Hevesy, G.v. 1916. Ueber die Grösse und Beweglichkeit der Elektrizitätsträger in Flüssigkeiten, Jahrbuch

 King, M.C., and Laidler, K.J. 1984. Chemical Kinetics and the Radiation Hypothesis. Arch. Hist . Exact.

 d. Rad. u. Elektronik 1 1:419.

 d. Rad. u. Elektronik 13:271.

 Sci. 30:45.

 Kirchhoff, G. 1897. Vorlesungen über Mechanik, 26, Vorlesung §4. Leipzig: Teubner.
 Klein, O. 1922. Zur statistischen Theorie der Suspensionen und Lösungen. Arkiv Mat. Astr. Fys. 16(5): 1 .

 Kramers, H.A. 1927. Investigations on the Free Energy of a Mixture of Ions. In: Amsterdam Proceedings,

 Kramers, H.A. 1940. Brownian Motion in a Field of Force and the Diffusion Model of Chemical Reactions.

 Laidler, K.J. 1997. Chemical Kinetics. Ottawa: Prentice Hall.

 Laidler, K.J., and King, M.C. 1983. The development of Transition-State Theory. J. Phys. Chem. 87:2657.
 Lorentz, H.A. 1916. Les Théories statistiques en thermodynamique. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Markov, A.A. 1 906. Izvestiya Fiziko-matematicheskogo obschestva pri Kazanskom universitete. Tom 2: 1 5-

 vol. 30, p. 145.

 Physica 7:284.

 135.

 McQuarrie, D.A. 1967. Stochastic Approach to Chemical Kinetics. London: Methuen.

 Mehra, J., and Rechenberg, H. 1982. The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, vol. I, part 2. New

 Melnikov, V.l., and Meshkov, S.V. 1986. Theory of activated rate processes: exact solution of the Kramers

 Milner, S.R. 1912. The Virial of a Mixture of Ions. Philos. Mag. 23:551.
 Nernst, W. 1893a. Über die Beteiligung eines Lösungmittels an chemischen Reaktionen. Z. Phys. Chem.

 Zork: Springer, Chap. 4, p. 490.

 problem. / Chem. Phys. 85:1018.

 11:345.

 und Temperatur.

 Perrin, J.B. 1913. Les Atomes. Paris: Alean.
 Perrin, J.B. 1919. Matière et lumière. Ann. de Phys. 1 1:5.

 Nernst, W. 1893b. Theoretische Chemie, Thermochimie IV, 4 Kapitel. Stuttgart: Reaktiongeschwindigkeit

 Perrin, J.B. 1922. Radiation and Chemistry. Trans. Faraday Soc. 17:546.
 Polanyi, M., and Eyring, H. 1931a. On Simple Gas Reaction. Z Phys. Chem. 12B:279.
 Polanyi, M., and Eyring, H. 1931b. Über einfache Gasreaktionen. Z. Phys. Chem. 12B:279.

 Renn, J. 2005. Einstein's Invention of Brownian Motion. Ami. Phys. (Leipzig) 14(Suppl):23; see also Nott,

 M. Molecular reality: the contributions of Brown Einstein and Perrin. School Sci. Rev. 86:39.

 Skinner, J., and Wolynes, P.G. 1978. Relaxation Processes and Chemical Kinetics. J. Chem. Phys. 69:2143.
 Smoluchowski, M.v. 1906. Kinetische Theorie der Brownschen Bewegung und der Suspensionen. Ann.

 d. Phys. 21:756-780.

 Smoluchowski, M.v. 1916. Drei Vorträge über Diffusion, Brownsche Molekularbewegung und Koagulation

 von Kolloidteilchen. Physik. Zeit. 17:557.

 Smoluchowski, M.v. 1917. Versuch einer mathematischen Theorie der Koagulationskinetik kolloider Lösun-

 gen. Z. Phys. Chem. 92:129.

 Smoluchowski, M.v. 1914. Gültigkeitsgrenzen des Zweiten Hauptsatzes der Wärmetheorie. Vorätrge über

 die Kinetische Theorie der Materie und der Elektrizität (Leiozie: Teubner 1914Ì

 Svedberg, T. 1912. Die Existenz der Molecule, Leipzig: Akademische Verlag.
 ter Haar, D. 1998. Master of Modern Physics : The Scientific Contributions of H. A. Kramers. Princeton:

 Princeton University Press.

 Teske, A. 1977. Marian von Smoluchowski. Leben und Werk. Wroclaw: Zaklad Narodowy imienia Osso-

 linskich Wydawnictwo Polskiej Akademii Nauk.

 Thomson, J.J. 1893. On the effect of electrification and chemical action on a steam-jet, and of water-vapour

 on the discharge of electricity through eases. Philos. Мая. 36:313.

 Trautz, M. 1920. Die quantentheoretische Bedeutung der Geschwindigkeitskonstanten. Zeitschr. F. Physik

 2:117

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

