 

 

 

 

Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves: algorithms and the origins of

conservation planning, 1980–1995
Author(s): Sahotra Sarkar
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 4 (July 2012), pp. 397-426
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23251737
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:09 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2012) 66:397-426
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0097-6

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves:
 algorithms and the origins of conservation planning,
 1980-1995

 Sahotra Sarkar

 Received: 20 October 2011 / Published online: 15 May 2012
 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract This paper reconstructs the history of the introduction and use of iterative

 algorithms in conservation biology in the 1980s and early 1990s in order to prioritize

 areas for protection as nature reserves. The importance of these algorithms was that
 they led to greater economy in spatial extent ("efficiency") in the selection of areas
 to represent biological features adequately (that is, to a specified level) compared to
 older methods of scoring and ranking areas using criteria such as biotic "richness"
 (the number of features of interest). The development of these algorithms was critical

 to producing a research program for conservation biology that was distinct from ecol

 ogy and eventually led to what came to be called systematic conservation planning.
 Very similar algorithmic approaches were introduced independently in the 1980-1990

 period in Australia, South Africa, and (arguably) the United Kingdom. The key rules

 in these algorithms were the use of rarity and what came to be called complementar
 ity (the number of new or under-represented features in an area relative to those that
 had already been selected). Because these algorithms were heuristic, they were not
 guaranteed to produce optimal (most "efficient") solutions. However, complementar

 ity came to be seen as a principle rather than a rule in an algorithm and its use was also
 advocated for the former reason. Optimal solutions could be produced by reformu
 lating the reserve selection problem in a mathematical programming formalism and
 using exact algorithms developed in that context. A dispute over the relevance of full

 optimality arose and was never resolved. Moreover, exact algorithms could not easily

 incorporate criteria determining the spatial configuration of networks of selected areas,

 in contrast to heuristic algorithms. Meanwhile metaheuristic algorithms emerged in

 Communicated by : Manfred Laubichler.

 S. Sarkar (E3)

 Department of Philosophy and Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
 Austin, TX 78712, USA
 e-mail: sarkar@mail.utexas.edu

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 398 S. Sarkar

 the 1990s and came to be seen as a credible more effective alternative to the heuristic

 algorithms. Ultimately what was important about these developments was that the
 reserve selection problem came to be viewed a complex optimal decision problem
 under uncertainty, resource, and other constraints. It was a type of problem that had
 no antecedent in traditional ecology.

 Keywords Biodiversity • Complementarity • Conservation biology, history
 Reserve design • Reserve selection • Systematic conservation planning

 1 Introduction

 Theoretical work in the biological sciences typically consists of constructing models
 and more general theories guiding model building (Sarkar 2007c). The development
 of (scientific) ecology during the last two decades of the twentieth century exempli
 fies this pattern (Sarkar 2007b). During the same period, a discipline that was widely

 initially regarded either as a part of ecology, conservation biology, emerged as an insti
 tutionalized discipline, initially in north America, but subsequently elsewhere.' What
 was unique about conservation biology in the context of the biological sciences—
 and only slightly less generally in the context of all the empirical sciences—was that

 theoretical innovation in several important cases consisted in the design of better algo

 rithms, similar to innovation in computer science, operations research, and some of the

 decision sciences. This was particularly true in the sub-discipline within conservation
 biology that came to be known as systematic conservation planning (Margules and
 Pressey 2000). Even though there was little formal contact or collaboration between
 conservation biologists and operations researchers during the formative 1980-1995
 period when the framework of systematic conservation planning was established (for
 a contrary interpretation, see Kingsland 2002), what emerged was a discipline that
 drew as much from operations research and other areas outside biology as from within
 the biological sciences.

 This paper is a history of the introduction and elaboration of algorithms within
 conservation biology during the 1980-1995 period.2 The choice of the initial date is

 based on it being the year the first such algorithm was developed (Kirkpatrick et al.
 1980). The terminal date was selected as 1995 because a different class of algorithms
 (metaheuristic ones—see Sect. 6) began to be used starting 1996 (Ball 1996). What is
 interesting about the developments analyzed here—besides the formal issues which

 dominate the discussions of this paper—is the extent to which conservation biology,
 as it developed, departed from traditional ecology. This was also the period during

 which the term "biodiversity" was introduced and conservation biologists came to see

 their discipline as that which was devoted to the protection of biodiversity (Takacs
 1996).

 ' For brief histories of these developments, see Takacs (1996) and Sarkar (1998, 2004, 2005); a detailed

 history is yet to be written and would not go unnoticed.

 2 See Justus and Sarkar (2002), Kingsland (2002), and Pressey (2002).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 399

 Throughout this period, the preferred strategy for biodiversity conservation was

 through the designation of nature reserves, the number of which saw a dramatic growth
 between 1985 and 1995 (Brockington et al. 2008). The late 1980s saw the emergence
 of what has since become a standard protocol for the selection of networks of such
 reserves (Margules and Pressey 2000), though the popularity of strict protection of
 habitats in reserves through human exclusion became controversial.3 Much of this
 framework was initially developed in Australia. Even though conservation biology

 was at that time being institutionalized in the United States, perhaps surprisingly, the

 earlier framework used there, emerging mainly from island biogeography theory in
 the 1970s, was almost entirely rejected.

 The new framework envisioned solving what was variously called the "reserve
 design" or "reserve selection" problem.4 It was eventually conceptualized as a con
 strained optimization problem, the maximization of the representation of biological
 features (the term "biodiversity" was almost never used in this early period) in min
 imum area, that was supposed to be solved using formal algorithms and state-of-the
 art computational tools eventually typically based on a Geographic Information Sys
 tem (GIS) platform. Proponents of these methods criticized earlier strategies to select

 protected areas (see Sect. 3) as ad hoc on the ground of sub-optimality (Pressey 1990,
 1994; Pressey and Tully 1994). There was considerable argument over the algorithms
 to be used, a question that was never fully resolved.

 2 Background

 Two themes dominated earlier work on the design of nature reserve systems against

 which the new framework of conservation planning emerged: (i) that reserves should

 be viewed as islands surrounded by inhospitable "oceans" of developed lands; and (ii)

 that the conservation value of an area could be represented by a single score, typically,
 its species "richness," that is, the number of species in it. Both themes will be briefly
 explored in this section to clarify the sense in which the new framework marked an

 innovative departure from past work in ecology.

 2.1 Reserves as islands

 Though conservation biology was officially viewed as an inter-disciplinary enterprise,

 at least by the 1980s (Soule 1985), its immediate historical roots lie in the ecology of
 the 1970s (Takacs 1996). Consequently, it is not surprising that early efforts to solve
 the reserve design problem invoked work in island biogeography theory which had

 emerged in the late 1960s as one of the more innovative developments in theoretical
 ecology (MacArthur and Wilson 1967).That theory attempted to predict species

 3 The alternative was to allow multiple use of habitats, including compatible human use (Sarkar et al. 2006;
 Margules and Sarkar 2007; Brockington et al. 2008).

 4 For "reserve design" see, e.g., Diamond (1975, 1986), Higgs (1981), Margules et al. (1988), Simberloff
 (1988); for "reserve selection," see Cocks and Baird (1989), Nicholls and Margules (1993), Pressey (1994,
 2002), etc.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 400 S. Sarkar

 Fig. 1 Diamond's Rules for
 Reserve Design (from Diamond
 1975) These six rules were

 better worse

 supposed to have been derived
 from island biogeography
 theory. The organization is
 supposed to presume a
 homogeneous landscape.
 Otherwise, for instance, Rules B

 and C would not be applicable
 since several distant reserves

 would be needed to sample
 all species

 O * o

 B OO
 OO

 ^ ° o
 OO c
 OO o o

 o

 OO D ooo

 OOO E ooo

 O F c=>

 It was thus perhaps natural to conceptualize such reserves as potential islands of
 protected areas ("refugia") surrounded by terrain that was inhospitable to biota. This

 was the route taken by E. O. Wilson, one of the founders of island biogeography the
 ory. Wilson and Willis (1975) and Diamond (1975) proposed the use of the theory
 for the design of nature reserves (see, also, Diamond and May 1976). These rules
 were supposed to be based on community-level processes (that is, those that involved

 a suite of interacting species in the same geographical area) determining persistence
 (or extinction) of species. Diamond produced six geometrical rules (see Fig. 1 from
 Diamond 1975, p. 143):

 A Large reserves were preferable to smaller ones.

 B A single large reserve was preferable to several smaller ones adding up to the same

 C Reserves that were closer to each other were better than those that were not.

 D Equidistant reserves were better than those that were not.

 area.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 richness from ecological assumptions. It predicted the richness in an island assuming
 an equilibrium between immigration and extinction. Relevant parameters included the
 size (area) of an island and its distance from the mainland. The operative model for a
 reserve during this period was that of a U.S.-style national park, clearly demarcated
 from the surrounding landscape matrix and, ideally, divorced from all non-esthetic
 and non-scientific human use.

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 401

 E Reserves connected through corridors were better than those that were not.
 F A circular reserve was better than an elongated one.

 By 1980, these rules were endorsed by the World Conservation Strategy of the Inter
 national Union for the Conservation of Nature [IUCN] (1980); by 1985 they found
 their way into textbooks (e.g., Krebs 1985; and they even received endorsement from
 the World Bank Simberloff 1988).

 Yet, by the end of the 1980s these rules—and island biogeography theory, in
 general—had generally been abandoned as a guide to the design of nature reserves.5

 Two problems bedevilled attempts to use these rules from the beginning. The first was

 skepticism about the empirical status of island biogeography theory independent of
 conservation concerns, especially because any assumption of equilibrium in natural
 systems was almost never likely to be warranted (Gilbert 1980; Simberloff 1988). The

 second, and more important, problem was the relevance of islands to nature reserves

 which, according to critics, were not sufficiently analogous to islands. In particular,

 habitat between reserves was not typically as inhospitable to their biota as oceans were

 to terrestrial biota. The critics emphasized that the assumption of close analogy was an

 empirical claim that had not been established through appropriate experiments (Higgs
 1981; Margules et al. 1982; Zimmerman and Bierregaard 1986; Simberloff and Cox
 1987; Simberloff 1988). Moreover, they also pointed out that Diamond's geometric
 rules had not been tested in the field with any genuinely representative set of data.
 Meanwhile, the invocation of island biogeography theory generated a decade-long
 "Single Large or Several Small" (SLOSS) dispute which was finally acknowledged as
 having no resolution: island biogeography theory provided no unequivocal guidance
 (whether or not it was relevant to conservation), except for Diamond's trivial Rule A

 (a big protected area is better than a smaller one), and there was no non-contextual
 answer to the SLOSS question (Soule and Simberloff 1986; Simberloff 1988). The
 only claims that were beyond dispute were that a single large reserve is better than a
 small one and several large reserves were better than a single one. These were hardly

 surprising.

 2.2 Scoring and ranking

 Island biogeography theory presumed to answer how many species could survive in a

 given insular habitat. But what were the species (or other biota) that should be included

 in a particular protected area? If island biogeography theory was equally applicable to

 all species under all circumstances, as its proponents at least implicitly assumed and

 its critics explicitly denied (see, especially, Higgs 1981), and there was no constraint

 on the amount of land that could be put under protection, then the question of iden

 tifying such species was moot. But, after the use of island biogeography theory was
 abandoned, and the stalemate in the SLOSS debate led to a recognition that strategies

 to ensure the persistence of biota had to be context-dependent, the question of identi

 fying the relevant species became conceptually prior to that of devising strategies for

 5 Simberloff (1988) provided a comprehensive contemporary review.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 402 S. Sarkar

 their persistence. Management strategies would depend on what the biota were that
 were slated for protection (Margules et al. 1982).

 Perhaps even more importantly, once it was realized—by the late 1970s Interna

 tional Union for the Conservation of Nature [IUCN] (1980)—that not all biologically

 interesting areas would be protected as reserves (there were other powerful demands on

 land, in particular, for economic development, especially in the post-colonial tropics),
 it became critical to determine which areas deserved protection. Though terminolog
 ical usage is not entirely consistent during this period (the 1980s), there is a gradual

 shift from talk of "reserve design" to "reserve selection:" it mattered where reserves
 were to be geographically situated. Thus, the new framework of reserve selection
 algorithms arose from attempts to specify precise "conservation value" in the pres
 ence of an over-riding concern for what was called "efficiency" (Pressey and Nicholls

 1989b). The new framework was important not as much for its rejection of the use of
 island biogeography theory as for its focus on the conceptually antecedent problem of

 identifying conservation priorities in terms of both areas and biota.

 These attempts can be traced back to a paper by Ratcliffe (1971) which, for the

 first time, laid down explicit criteria for the selection of nature reserves. For Ratc

 liffe and others from that period, the goal was to make attributions of natural value

 less subjective; the hope was that, ultimately, if quantitative criteria could be devised,
 a scoring process would be repeatable. By 1977, Ratcliffe had identified ten such
 criteria: (i) size; (ii) diversity (interpreted as richness of communities and species);
 (iii) naturalness; (iv) rarity; (v) fragility; (vi) typicalness; (vii) recorded history; (viii)
 location in an ecological or geographical unit; (ix) potential value; and (x) intrinsic
 value. Between 1971 and 1978, at least seven other studies suggested richness or
 diversity (typically interpreted as richness); six suggested rarity; five suggested area;
 four suggested naturalness; and four suggested representativeness or typicalness.6
 Other proposed criteria included scientific, educational, or amenity value, recorded
 history, uniqueness, wildlife reservoir potential, and management considerations. In
 an influential early review (from 1981), Margules and Usher classified these criteria
 and clearly distinguished between those that were biological and those that were not
 (Margules and Usher 1981). The former were treated as more important but the latter
 were also considered relevant because the designation of reserves was recognized as
 ultimately being a political act.

 The aspect of all of these scoring approaches that became a matter of controversy—

 and ultimately a source of innovation—was that their use was envisioned as static
 (a one-off step): scores were to be computed once and then areas were ranked accord

 ing to these scores. The feature that was most commonly used was richness (or diversity

 interpreted as richness). In all such cases, as Kirkpatrick (1983, p. 128) pointed out:
 "A major drawback of a listing of priority areas on the basis of a single application

 of a formula is that there is no guarantee that the priority area second or third on the

 list might not duplicate the species, communities, or habitats that could successfully

 be preserved in the first priority area." For instance, the first and second areas may

 both have very high species richness; however, if they have many species in common,

 6 These developments are reconstructed in detail in Justus and Sarkar (2002).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 403

 selecting both of them may not lead to as many total species being represented as
 selecting the first and a more depauperate but sufficiently different third area. The

 problem was particularly severe if there was a constraint on how many areas could be
 prioritized for reservation as was always the case in practice.

 Kirkpatrick's response was to develop a dynamic method, dynamic in the sense
 that it invoked an iterative process that relied on scores being updated as each area
 is prioritized. It was, as Pressey (2002) has pointed out, the "first reserve selection
 algorithm." The history of these algorithms will occupy the rest of this paper. How

 ever, it should be noted that there were at least some conservation biologists from this

 period who did not embrace the algorithmic approach but yet identified one feature

 that would recur in the algorithms: that feature was endemism. In particular, Myers

 (1988) began a program of designating "hot spots" on the basis of endemism and threat.
 Even Diamond (1986), when he proposed a network of reserves for Indonesian New
 Guinea (then known as Irian Jaya), relied on endemism and representativeness (and

 barely invoked his geometrical rules of a decade earlier). Range restriction (including
 endemism) was also used by Thomas and Mallorie (1985) for an area prioritization
 exercise for butterflies in the Atlas mountains of Morocco.

 3 Iteration and the representation of diversity

 As noted earlier, the replacement of scoring and ranking methods by iterative pro
 cedures began as early as 1980 with the work of Kirkpatrick in Tasmania (Pressey
 2002). The crucial innovation of these procedures was that they were dynamic: the
 present conservation value of an area had to be updated relative to what areas were

 already selected. Variants of what is essentially the same strategy were independently

 introduced four times, twice in Australia, arguably once in the United Kingdom, and
 once in South Africa.7

 3.1 Endemic plants of Tasmania

 Kirkpatrick prioritized areas for 25 out of 60 endemic or endangered plant species of
 the central east coast region of Tasmania; the other 35 were deemed to be already ade

 quately protected in reserves. His algorithm is described in detail in Box 1.8 It was first

 published in an obscure report in 1980 (Kirkpatrick et al. 1980) but brought to a wider
 audience through republication in 1983 in what was then the easily the most influ
 ential and widely read journal devoted to conservation, Biological Conservation in

 1983 (Kirkpatrick 1983). The occurrence and abundance of the species were recorded
 on 460 1 x 1 km2 grid squares. In line with earlier scoring and ranking approaches,

 7 A preliminary analysis of some of these algorithms is to be found in Justus and Sarkar (2002); this paper

 updates that account, in particular, taking into cognizance the important contributions of Kirkpatrick et a!.
 (1980) and Margules and Nicholls (1987).

 8 Throughout this paper, algorithms will be reconstructed using the same notation as far as possible. The

 formalism will be restricted to what is necessary. When there is any divergence between the reconstruction

 and the (occasionally verbal) descriptions of the original sources, it will be explicitly noted.(Throughout
 "a" is being used for "such that.")

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirkpatrick classified the 25 species into four categories: (i) not in reserves and largely
 confined to the study area; (ii) poorly represented in reserves and largely confined to
 the study area; (iii) not in reserves and more common outside the study area; and
 (iv) poorly represented in reserves and more common outside the study area. He gave

 these four classes initial priority values (ttj in Box 1) of 100, 50, 25, and 10, respec
 tively. Now, if, for each grid each grid square, the priority values of the species are

 added up, a conservation value (k, ) is obtained for that square. However, Kirkpatrick

 noticed that many of the squares with high conservation value had the same species
 in them.

 404 S. Sarkar

 Box 1
 Box 1

 Kirkpatrick's 1980/1983 Algorithm
 Kirkpatrick's 1980/1983 Algorithm

 Let E be the set of areas (sites, landscape units), with 07 e E, i = 1
 being the individual areas. Let A be the set of species, with Xj e A, 7 =
 I,... ,m, being the individual species. Let the priority value of the / th species

 be 71 j. Let the conservation value of the i th area, 07 , be K,; let the minimal con
 servation value for a potential protected area be K. Let the conservation value

 of the j th species, Xj, in the (th area, 07, be 1/^7- Let r be the set of areas that
 have already been selected.

 Let X,j

 1 if Xj € CT;
 0 if Xj £ at '

 Set T equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of repeating the following four stages until Vct, € E\r,
 Ki < K:

 1. VXj e A, 07 e £\r,

 set x/rij =

 7tj if Xj occurs once in p (F)
 jiTj if Xj occurs twice in p (F)

 0 if Xj occurs more than twice in p (F)

 2. Vore E\r, set Ki = 27=1 Xijilfij.
 3. Select cr^ e E\F a- /Cjt = maxK| (E\F), that is, the remaining area in E\T

 with the highest conservation value.

 4. Update T to T U {ct^}.

 His response was to pick only the best of these squares (Stages 3 and 4 in Box 1).

 After that the conservation values of a species in a cell (i/r/y in Box 1; see Stage 1)
 was updated by downgrading depending on the number of squares in which it already
 occurred. Squares continued to be selected until no remaining area had a conser
 vation value less than a minimum (K in Box 1, set to 30 in Kirkpatrick's applica
 tion). The selected squares were grouped and surrounded by 0.5 km buffers to cre
 ate seven nominal reserves; they were all eventually legally protected though the

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 405

 process took almost 20 years. Thus, the results of the first reserve selection algorithm
 were fully implemented; it remains the only such case (Pressey 2002; Sarkar et al.
 2006). Subsequently, Kirkpatrick and Harwood (1983) used the same algorithm to
 prioritize Tasmanian wetlands as well as areas in Tasmania's alpine region (Kirkpatrick
 1986). A few years later, it was also used to prioritize areas for angiosperm conser
 vation for all of Tasmania on a 10 x 10 km2 grid with the additional constraint that

 each endemic species had to occur in at least two selected squares (Kirkpatrick et al.
 1991).

 3.2 Milkweed butterflies of the world

 In 1984, P. R. Ackery and R. I. Vane-Wright of the Butterfly Section of the Brit
 ish Museum (Natural History) published a comprehensive account of the milkweed
 butterflies (Danainae, subfamily of the Lepidoptera, Nymphalidae) (Ackery and Vane
 Wright 1984). The book was almost entirely about the cladistics and organismic biol
 ogy of danaine butterflies; however, one short (three pages, pp. 156-158) section

 broached the problem of conservation. It is sometimes interpreted to present an algo
 rithm for the prioritization of areas (e.g., Pressey et al. 1993; Justus and Sarkar 2002;

 Sarkar 2005) but this may well be only because Vane-Wright and collaborators were

 responsible for the introduction of the term, "complementarity" (Vane-Wright et al.
 1991) and most of these algorithms came to known as complementarity-based algo
 rithms (see Sect. 4).

 Box 2
 Box 2

 Ackery and Vane-Wright's 1984 Algorithm
 Ackery and Vane-Wright's 1984 Algorithm

 Let £ be the set of islands and biogeographic zones, with 07 e E, i = 1

 being the individual units. Let A be the set of species, with Xj e A, j —
 1,,m, being the individual species. Let V be the set of areas that have
 already been selected.

 Set X ■ — 1 if e ai
 set Aij - Q ,f ^ •
 Set T equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of the following two stages:

 1. V\j e A, repeat:

 If X"=i Xjj = 1, then update T to T U {cr^} if X^ = 1.

 2. Update T to T U Q. where Q C E 3

 SCT,6r %ij = m and |£2| is the minimum possible.

 To the extent that Ackery and Vane-Wright produced an algorithm, it is recon
 structed in Box 2. They divided the world into islands and biogeographic zones in

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 continental landmasses. Then they prioritized each of the units that had at least one
 endemic species (Stage 1 in Box 2). Then they required the prioritization of the min
 imum number of units that would ensure full coverage of all the species (Stage 2 in
 Box 2). The sense in which this description is not an algorithm is that the second
 stage is under-specified: it stated a problem to be solved (a constrained optimization
 problem) but did not provide step-by-step instructions to solve it (which is what an

 algorithm, by definition, is supposed to do).

 406 S. Sarkar

 3.3 Minimal sets in Australia

 Ackery and Vane-Wright's algorithm was an advance over Kirkpatrick's only in the
 very mitigated sense that it used no arbitrary scoring of species according to their
 presumed conservation value: all species were slated for representation at least once.
 However as an algorithm, it was a step backward, as noted earlier, because of under

 specification. The next advances in algorithm design came from Australia in work done

 by Chris Margules and several collaborators, mainly at the Commonwealth Scientific
 and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Division of Water and Land Resources

 in Canberra. Four different algorithms were developed by this group, along with two

 relatively minor variants. Unlike Kirkpatrick's analysis, in another important innova

 tion, these algorithms were encoded into computer programs (written in Fortran) by
 Nick Nicholls from CSIRO (Margules and Sarkar 2007) and were used to produce
 nominal reserve networks for further analysis.

 In retrospect the first algorithm, from 1987, appears to have been the most con
 ceptually innovative though it was not developed further. Unlike the later algorithms,
 it attempted to predict and use probabilities of occurrence of biota in habitat units
 (individual areas). In contrast, later algorithms assumed that a feature was definitely

 present at a site or that it was not: there was no option to incorporate uncertainty. The
 1987 algorithm was due to Margules and Nicholls and was part of a prioritization
 of 101 areas (mallee patches9) by conservation value in South Australia on the basis
 of vegetation assemblages. (Margules and Nicholls 1987). They used a hierarchical

 aggregation method to classify the vegetation into six "communities." Logistic regres

 sion was then used to estimate a probability of occurrence for each community on each

 habitat patch.

 Areas (patches) were then prioritized using the algorithm reconstructed in Box 3.

 This algorithm implicitly assumed that the probabilities of occurrence of communities

 in different areas were independent of each other. It tried to ensure a 95 % probability

 of occurrence of each community in at least one of the selected areas. In Stage 1, the

 six areas with each of the highest probabilities of occurrence for each community is

 selected (in Box 3, the cell with the highest zuij): it is presumed that these are unique
 in the sense that no area has the highest probability of occurrence for more than one

 community. In Stage 2, areas are selected to ensure the satisfaction of the 95 % target

 9 These are patches with any of a large class of eucalyptus species.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 407

 for each community.10 Patches are selected that contribute the highest probability for

 a community that is still represented at a level below the 95 % target; ties are broken

 using the area of the patch. The targets were all achieved with 12 patches. If the target
 was changed to 99%, 17 patches were required.

 Box 3
 Box 3

 Margules and Nicholls' 1987 Algorithm
 Margules and Nicholls' 1987 Algorithm

 Let £ be the set of areas (patches), with er, e E, z = 1,..., n, being the indi

 vidual units. Let A be the set of plant communities, with ^eA,; = l,...,m,
 being the individual plant communities. Let ujij be the probability of occur

 rence of the jth community, Xj, in the / th patch, 07. Let f be the set of patches
 that have already been selected.

 Set T equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of the following two stages:

 1. VXj e A:

 (a) Select e E e- uikj = maxOTi7(E).
 (b) If there are ties, select the or* with the largest area.
 (c) Update r to T U {cr*}.

 2. If 3kj e A B- PI (1 — uyjj) > 0.05, for each such Xf.

 Oi Gr

 (a) Select cr* € E\r e- mu = maxmj/(Z).
 (b) If there are ties, select the cr* with the largest area.
 (c) Update f to T U {07}.

 The following year, Margules, Nicholls, and Bob Pressey,11 presented two algo
 rithms in perhaps the single most influential paper on reserve selection from that
 period. While Margules and Nicholls (1987) seem to have been unaware of Kirkpa
 trick's work, this paper referred to it explicitly. The aim was to prioritize a set of
 wetlands from a total of 432 such areas in the Macleay Valley in coastal New South
 Wales in Australia.

 10 The reconstruction in Box 3 follows Margules and Nicholls' (1987, p. 97) numerical treatment rather

 than their verbal description which states that Stage 2 is carried out for all communities at each stage rather

 than only for those that have yet to meet the target in F. This is critical because, otherwise, the algorithm

 would reduce to a variant of maximizing richness which was clearly not their intention (p. 87). The verbal

 description also does not mention that ties in maximum probabilities were supposed to broken using the
 area of the patch in Stage 1.

 11 In contrast to Margules and Nicholls, Pressey was not form CSIRO but from the New South Wales
 National Parks and Wildlife Service.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 408 S. Sarkar

 Box 4
 Box 4

 Margules, Nicholls, and Pressey's 1988 Algorithm I
 Margules, Nicholls, and Pressey's 1988 Algorithm I

 Let X be the set of wetlands, with a,- € E, i = I,... ,n, being the individual

 units. Let A be the set of plant species, with Xj e A, j = I,... ,m, being the
 individual plant species. Let T be the set of wetlands that have already been
 selected. Let A' be the set of species represented in T.
 I et X- ■ — ^ ^ cr'
 AlJ ~ 0 if Xj i Oi '

 Let pj = 1 v , which measures the rarity of A.,-.

 Let (p ; = '' , which measures the frequency of X

 2-;=l xij

 y"_ x -

 2sj=\ 2-i=i xu

 Set T and A' equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of the following two stages:

 1. VXj e A, Vct; e E, if 3\ok 3- Xjy = 1, update T to F U {ak}.
 2. Repeat until A' = A:

 (a) Select Xp 3- pp = maxPy (A\A')
 (b) Select a* 3- X^p — 1.

 (c) If there is a tie, select aq e- Xa(<ea\a' %qj's lhe maximum; otherwise,

 Oq — Ok

 0> = Oq.

 (d) If there is a tie, select ar 3- X;.7eA\A' Xij^j is the minimum; otherwise,

 (e) If there is a tie, select ers by lexical order; otherwise, as = ar.
 (f) Update T toFUjffj}.

 (g) VXj e A\A', if Xa/sr %-ij > 0, update A' to A' U {A.7}.

 The first algorithm, reconstructed in Box 4, was designed to represent each of 118

 plant species at least once in a minimal set of wetlands. In the first stage (Stage 1 of
 Box 4), each wetland that contained at least one species unique to it was selected. In the

 second iterative stage, the algorithm first tried to select a wetland with the rarest species

 not yet represented (in F, with rarity parameterized by pj \ Steps 2(a)-(b) in Box 4). If
 there was a tie, the algorithm selected the wetland that contributed the highest number

 of unrepresented species (Step 2(c)). If a tie still remained, it selected the wetland with

 the least frequent group of species (with frequency measured by <pj in Box 4, Step
 2(d)). (In retrospect, this step is problematic: a unit with a very few common species
 would potentially be selected over one with many rare species. This step disappears

 or is replaced in all published later variants of this algorithm.) Remaining ties were
 broken using the first wetland in the list. The iteration terminated when all species
 were represented. Twenty wetlands were required for this purpose. Straightforward

 modifications allowed the required representation level to be increased to n > 1.

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 409

 Box 5
 Box 5

 Margules, Nicholls, and Pressey's 1988 Algorithm II
 Margules, Nicholls, and Pressey's 1988 Algorithm II

 Let £ be the set of wetlands, with 07 e E, / = 1being the individual
 units. Let A be the set of plant species, with Xj e A, j = 1,,m, being
 the individual plant species. Let S be the set of habitat types, with |/ e S,
 / = I,..., p, being individual habitat types. Now, S constitutes a partition
 of £: each habitat type is composed of a certain number of wetlands and no
 wetland belongs to more than one habitat type.
 Let T be the set of wetlands that have already been selected. Let A' be the set

 of species represented in F.
 Let X ■ — ^ ^ (J'
 Let a,j _{o if Xj i oi ■

 Set T and A' equal to the null set, 0.

 Repeat the following procedure until f = T:

 1. Vf/ e S, select o> e a- XJ=i %kj is the maximum.
 2. Vf, e S, if 3aj 3Xj e A\A' with X,7 = 1:

 (a) Select ak a- ak = maxCT,.6f;n(£\r) Z^€a\a' *i;
 (b) Update f to T U {rr^.}; update A'.

 The second algorithm, reconstructed in Box 5, was designed to ensure the represen
 tation of all habitat types besides species. The wetlands were classified into nine types

 (£/ in Box 5). In the first stage, the algorithm selected the wetland from each type with

 the highest species richness (Stage 1 of Box 5). (In retrospect this stage is problematic
 because it did not assay wetlands for the number of shared species, which it should
 have even though the similarity was likely to be small because of the difference in
 type.) In the second stage, until all species were represented, the algorithm continued
 to select one wetland from each type which maximized the number of new species
 (Step 2(a) of Box 5).

 The first of these two algorithms (hereafter, the "MNP" algorithm, with the acronym

 interpreted as the algorithm without Step 2(d)) became the basis for further develop

 ment by this group. In 1989, Margules (1989b) used an algorithm that replaced the
 problematic Step 2(d) of the MNP algorithm by a second use of rarity; it also allowed

 ties to be broken in favor of larger areas before invoking lexical order. Variable required

 levels of representation were allowed from the beginning. The algorithm was used to
 select reserves to include vegetation alliances in natural vegetation remnants in the
 mallee lands of South Australia. Because of its publication in a somewhat obscure

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 book Bradstock and Noble (1989), this algorithm went unnoticed even though it cor

 rected a fairly obvious flaw of the MNP algorithm (viz., Step 2(d)). Pressey and Nicholls

 (1989a) modified the MNP algorithm in a different way: before invoking lexical order,

 their algorithm encoded a preference for the smallest unit among which there was a tie.
 They prioritized pastoral properties in part of western New South Wales to represent

 all land systems. The results were interesting but what is even more important was

 that, by then, devising the correct algorithm had become a theoretical problem in its

 own right as, especially, the work of Cocks and Baird (1989), discussed below in Sect.
 5, shows.

 410 S. Sarkar

 The final, much more elaborate, algorithm that emerged from these efforts was

 published by Nicholls and Margules (1993). Two criticisms motivated the elabora
 tion: that there should be a premium on having less distance between reserves, and

 that invoking lexical order to break ties made selected sets far too dependent on the
 order of presentation of the data.12 This algorithm is reconstructed in Box 6. It began

 with an option for the initialization of the set of reserves with some specified units
 (in set I in Box 6); this allowed the inclusion of existing reserves. The first stage
 (Stage 1 of Box 6) was identical to the MNP algorithm as were the first three steps
 (Steps 2(a)-(c)) of the second stage. If a tie still remained, the unit to be selected

 was the one that was closest (by dij to one of the already selected units (in T; Step
 2(d) in Box 6)). The next step (Step 2(e)) again tries to break any remaining tie by
 maximizing the representation of features which were yet to achieve their targeted
 levels.

 Further ties were to be broken with two successive appeals to the representation of

 rarest surrogates (Steps 2(f)-(g)).13 If there was still a tie, the algorithm selected the

 unit with the least area provided that it would enable the feature to achieve its targeted
 level; otherwise, it selected the unit with the largest area (Step 2(h)). Nicholls and
 Margules offered no justification for this rule (and, in retrospect, it is far from clear
 that any could be forthcoming). If there remained a tie, the unit with the largest area
 was selected (Step 2(i)). Further ties were resolved by lexical order (Step 2(j)).

 12 As Nicholls and Margules correctly argued, a third criticism, that the data used by the algorithms were
 inadequate, was irrelevant to the question of the performance of the algorithms.

 13 The reconstruction in Box 6 differs from the verbal description of Nicholls and Margules (p. 160) which

 makes Step 2(g) identical to Step 2(f), instead of Step 2(g) using the next rarest feature after the execution
 of Step 2(f) as in Box 6. Otherwise, Step 2(g) becomes redundant.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 411

 Box 6
 Box 6

 Nicholls and Margules' 1993 Algorithm
 Nicholls and Margules' 1993 Algorithm

 Let £ be the set of units, with cr; e E, i — 1,...,«, being the individual
 units. Let a,- be the area of the unit a,. Let A be the set of biological features,

 with Xj € A, j — I,... ,m, being the individual features. Let T be the set of
 representation levels for these features, with xj e T, j = 1,..., m, being the
 individual features

 Let / be the initial set of selected reserves which may be equal to 0. Let F be
 the set of units that have already been selected. Let A' be the set of features

 represented in F.

 Let X ■ — 1 if € ai
 Let x.j - Q ,f ^ ^ .
 Let drs be the distance between units ar and as.
 Let p: — 1 the rarity of A,-.

 2-;=i XU

 Set T equal to I and A' equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of the following two steps:

 1. WXj e A, Vct, e E, if 3!ct^ 5- Xy = 1, update F to T U {o^}.
 2. Repeat until r" = T:

 (a) Select Xp a- pp = maxPy.(A').
 (b) Select er* B- Xkp = 1.

 (c) If there is a tie, select aq 2^eA\A' Xqj is the maximum; otherwise,

 (d) If there is a tie, select ar 3- e r, Voy e E\T, def has dek as the

 minimum; otherwise o> = oq.

 (e) If there is a tie, select as Xa sa.\a■ Xsj is the maximum; otherwise

 ffg = <?k

 <7j = Or.

 (f) If there is a tie, select a, a- pk = mmPj (A\A') and S^ru^,} X'k >

 ric; otherwise at = as.

 (g) If there is a tie, select au e- pi = minPy (A\(A' U {X*})) and

 SCT,eru{CT„} xf > rf, otherwise cr„ = er,.

 (h) If there is a tie, select ov 3- p* = minPj (A\A') A (av is the minimum
 if Z^en^} xik > Tk or av is the maximum if Zai6ru{<T„} x'ik < Tk\
 otherwise av — au;

 (i) If there is a tie, select aw e E\T e- aw is the minimum; otherwise

 = &v

 (j) If there is a tie, select az by lexical order; otherwise, as — aw.
 (k) Update T to T U {<r,}.

 (1) VXj e A\A', if XtT,er X'j > Tj' update A' to A' U fAj}.

 Nicholls and Margules presented an example (from south-eastern New South Wales,

 divided into 371 regular 3 x 3 km2 grid cells with 31 forest tree communities). But

 the focus of the work was the algorithm itself. In particular, they emphasized the

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 412 S. Sarkar

 contrast between results obtained with spatial distance was incorporated (Step 2(d)
 of Box 6) versus when it was not. Even earlier, Pressey and Nicholls (1989b) had
 introduced a measure for the "efficiency" of a reserve network: e = 1 — where x
 is the size of the units selected to represent biological features adequately and t is the

 total size of all the units.14 By this measure, any of the iterative algorithms developed

 by this group outperformed the use of static scores to select units. Nevertheless, these

 algorithms were heuristic and not guaranteed to produce the most efficient solutions.

 Attempts to produce optimal (most "efficient" in this terminology) solutions would
 lead to another set of developments, also initiated at CSIRO's Division of Wildlife and
 Ecology (Sect. 5).

 3.4 Fynbos vegetation in South Africa

 Iterative algorithms were also independently introduced in South Africa in 1990 to
 prioritize areas to protect Fynbos vegetation15 in the Cape Floristic Region. (The
 algorithm is reconstructed in Box 7.) A. G. Rebelo and W. R. Siegfried, at the Percy
 Fitzpatrick Institute of African Ornithology of the University of Cape Town, used a
 12 x 12 km2 grid to map 326 taxa (species and distinct subspecies). They first dis
 tributed four intersecting transects across the study area based on richness (Rebelo
 and Siegfried 1990). On each transect, a grid cell (the "primary core square"; p. 20)
 was selected using the highest richness (Stage 1 in Box 7). At the next stage, cells
 ("secondary core squares") were iteratively selected along the transect provided that

 they shared less than half their species with those already in the selected squares and
 added at least a quarter new species (Stage 2 in Box 7). Finally, cells were selected
 from the rest of the study area on the basis of new species that they contained (Step
 3(a)); ties were broken using richness (Step 3(b)); remaining ties were broken using
 the amount of Fynbos vegetation in a cell (Step 3(c)). It was assumed that there would

 be no further ties. They found that 95 % of the species could be accommodated in 16 %

 of the study area. Even more importantly, they pointed out that <17 % of the existing
 and <50 % of the proposed protected areas were in cells with high species endemism.

 For this group, too, algorithms immediately became the focus of research. In

 1992, they produced two algorithms based on two rules used in the MNP algorithm
 (Rebelo and Siegfried 1992): (i) which cells added the most new species; and (ii)
 which cells added the rarest species. Their first algorithm used Rule (i) first and Rule

 (ii) to break ties. The second algorithm reversed this order. In both cases remaining ties

 were broken by a random selection of a cell. With respect to efficiency (sensu Pressey

 and Nicholls 1989b), both algorithms performed almost equally well. Strangely, they

 interpreted Rule (i) as being richness and explicitly, but mistakenly, disagreed with

 Margules et al.'s (1982) criticism of the use of richness to prioritize areas. They seemed

 14 Size was to be interpreted either as the number of units or their total area.

 15 This consists of natural shrubland or heathland vegetation which occurs in a small belt of the Western
 Cape of South Africa.

 "21 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 413

 to have been unaware that this rule now had a name: "complementarity," which is the
 focus of the next section.

 Box 7
 Box 7

 Rebelo and Siegfried's 1990 Algorithm
 Rebelo and Siegfried's 1990 Algorithm

 Let E be the set of areas, with cr,- e E ,i — 1being the individual units;
 let </>,- be the amount of Fynbos vegetation in each cr,. Let A be the set of plant
 species, with Xj e A, j = 1,,m, being the individual plant species. Let
 T be the set of richness transects, with r;, Z = 1,..., p being the individual
 transects. Let V be the set of areas that have already been selected. Let A' be

 the set of species represented in F.

 i et X - — ^ ^ ^ ^ a'

 AlJ ~ 0 if Xj i ai '

 Set T and A' equal to the null set, 0.

 The algorithm consists of the following stages:

 1. Vti e T :

 2. Vzr, e T,

 (a) Select U( s r/ ^ 2a ea ^kj is the maximum.
 (b) Update T to T U {a>}; update A'.

 .... ... 2j.,Ern{<7i.) xkj Yjl:e:ru\ak)Xkj
 (a) V<?k e x,, if crken> J [A,* < 0.5 V ' |A>* > 0.25.
 (b) Update T to T U {er*}; update A'.

 3. Order the remaining areas according to the rule:

 (a) Select Ok e E\r a- 2A,eA\A' ^jk is the maximum.

 (b) If there is a tie, select ap 5- 2xy eA %jk is the maximum; otherwise

 &p = G/c

 (c) If there is a tie, select oq B- (pi is the maximum; otherwise oq = ap.
 (d) Update r to V U {aq)\ update A'.

 4 Complementarity as principle

 One theme ran through the thinking of all four of these groups (from Sect. 3): that
 selecting reserves was best accomplished iteratively by using as one of the rules the

 prioritization of an area that added the most features that were not yet included in the
 selected set up to the required level of representation. Second, they all emphasized

 rarity and endemism to some extent, with the MNP algorithm and its derivatives giving

 rarity precedence over all other rules. By 1989, Margules had stated the constrained
 optimization problem that was being solved explicitly: "what is the minimum set of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 414 S. Sarkar

 sites in an ecological domain which represents all species (or other units of diversity)
 at least once? (Margules 1989a, p. 7)." He had gone on to note: "This minimum set

 .. .is the smallest set of sites that are required for a reserve network if all species are to

 be represented. It is the bottom line; the bare minimum. Anything less would constitute
 an inadequate representation of biological diversity (p. 7)." Meanwhile, Pressey and
 Nicholls (1989b) had introduced their notion of "efficiency" to provide a quantitative

 measure of this optimality. In retrospect, given that they were working in the context
 of algorithm design, it was not the happiest of terms to use: in computer science,

 efficiency referred to the speed of an algorithm. But the term came to be widely used

 during this period.

 What remained to be explicitly named was the first theme mentioned above. Vane

 Wright et al. (1991) proposed a term that eventually came to be adopted by the entire
 community. They noted that:

 "procedures [from Sects. 3.1-3.3] are based on a guiding principle—which we
 call complementarity.

 In carrying out a simple critical faunas analysis (that is, representation of critical
 fauna in notional reserves), once the first choice has been made, all further con

 siderations of species included with that region are eliminated. The second area

 is then drawn from the taxonomic complement of the first—the remaining fauna
 with the highest number of endemics, and all additional non-endemics that the

 area happens to contain. Once the first two faunas have been added, the reduced

 complement is then searched for the third area. This algorithmic procedure is
 repeated until all species are accounted for (the total complement) (pp. 244-245;
 italics in the original)."

 The choice of term was concordant with the use of "complement" in set theory. It
 came to dominate the field, with any algorithm that used a complementarity calcu
 lation coming to be called complementarity-based even if it not only used but gave
 precedence to some other rule (for instance, rarity in the case of the MNP algorithm)
 (Justus and Sarkar 2002).

 But, was complementarity an algorithm or a principle? Vane-Wright et al. wanted it

 both ways. There was no obvious inconsistency there: a principle could embedded as a

 rule in an algorithmic procedure. However, if it is the algorithm that mattered, it would

 have to be judged against other algorithms designed to solve the same (class of) prob
 lems; however, a principle was immune to such criticism because its value depended

 on something beyond algorithmic efficiency—these questions will occupy Sect. 5. In
 the early 1990s, apparently all those who were involved in the development of the
 iterated procedures of Sect. 3 viewed complementarity as a principle (Pressey et al.
 1993; Justus and Sarkar 2002). As they increasingly demonstrated through system
 atic data analyses, existing reserve networks were not "efficient" but ad hoc (Pressey
 1990,1994; Pressey and Tully 1994) because they had been selected opportunistically

 (Pressey et al. 1993). Their alternative was to invoke complementarity as the goal of
 new reserves: intuitively, it captured the sense that, when it came to diversity, it is
 differences that matter (Vane-Wright 1996).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 415

 5 Heuristics and optimality

 What happened if complementarity was viewed as an algorithm? It was what was
 known in computer science as a "greedy algorithm:" at each iteration, the best solu
 tion at that iteration is selected. Vane-Wright et al.16 (1991) were aware of this and

 also that it did not guarantee optimal solutions but went on to argue, incorrectly, that

 no exact (optimal) solution may be available for large data sets:

 "[These] methods proceed by choosing a single site, ideally with a maximum

 score, at each step. Once a step has been taken, the site is fixed, and only the
 distribution of the remaining ...complement is considered at the subsequent
 step. However, a more optimal strategy for obtaining higher average diversity
 scores per site is possible if multiple-site choices are considered. At the limit
 this involves selection in one step of a set that contains the entire complement

 in the smallest possible number of sites. Such multiple site-sets are much more

 difficult to calculate (indeed, exact methods may not be available for large data

 matrices, this task being a variant of the 'traveling salesman' problem).

 What they should have said that the problem was NP-hard with some large data sets
 possibly being computationally intractable by exact methods.'7 More importantly, in
 the passage quoted in Sect. 4, Vane-Wright et al. were not thinking of the greedy
 algorithm when they defined complementarity: they were concerned with including

 both endemic species and new species, and not just the latter (as the greedy algorithm

 required). What they described had the same effect as a use of the greedy algorithm

 but that was not the expressed intent.

 Exact algorithms (those guaranteed to produce optimal solutions) had already been
 brought into the discussion at CSIRO by Cocks and Baird (1989) who noted that the
 problem could be formulated and solved as a mathematical programming problem.

 They first showed that a relatively simple linear programming problem was relevant to
 reserve design. Let V be the aggregate value of a reserve system; V was then the objec
 tive function to be maximized. Let the individual sites (areas) that could be included
 in reserves be indexed by j e {1,2,..., J}. Let R(j) be the reservation value of the
 y th site, and let x(j) be the fraction of it which would be included in the reserve sys
 tem. Then, J = l R(j)x(j)- Let the attributes that were to be represented in the
 reserve system be indexed by j e {1,2,...,/}, and let b(i) be a level for this attribute
 that must not be exceeded. Let the contribution of the y th site to the conservation of

 the (-attribute be a{i, j). Then the reserve selection problem becomes:

 16 This was first pointed out by Underhill (1994) which will be discussed further later in this section.

 17 The allusion to the traveling salesman problem was also misleading; the optimization problem was the
 set cover problem—see below, in the text. For a discussion of complexity concepts such as NP-hardness
 tailored to this context, see Sarkar et al. (2006).

 0} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 416 S. Sarkar

 Maximize J = ^ R(j)x(j)

 J

 7=1

 subject toX«('. ■/')■*(•/') — &0') with (jc(;) > 0).18

 J

 7=1

 Cocks and Baird noted, this problem was easy to solve because the x(j) could
 take continuous values between 0 and 1 and was not restricted to either 0 (the site

 was excluded) or 1 (the site is included). This made it a linear programming problem

 rather than an integer programming problem and Karmakar (1984) had already shown

 that the former belonged in P.19

 Once jc(i') was restricted to integer values, the were faced with what they called an
 "integer goal programming (IGP) formulation (p. 117)" and what was usually called

 an integer programming problem (Underhill 1994). They provided a complex formula

 tion of the problem to ensure flexibility so that the objective function could incorporate

 a wide variety of natural values relevant to conservation. All that was required was
 that some quantitative function (such as J) could be devised which would measure

 all the natural values that were deemed worthy of protection. This formulation will

 not be reconstructed here because they did not provide an explicit objective function

 for the reserve selection problem which is the one they solved for the same data set
 used by Margules and Nicholls (1987, Sect. 3.3). Let x(j) be restricted to 0 or 1 as
 indicated earlier, with j e 1,2,...,/*, where J* sites were selected. Let p(i, j) be
 the probability of the presence of the ith community in the jth site. Cocks and Baird
 now conceptualized the problem to be one of minimizing the number of sites subject
 to the constraint.

 Vi, ^ 1 p(i, j) + 0(1 - p(i, j)) > 2.

 J"

 7 = 1

 In this somewhat unnecessarily elaborate formulation, the values for the x(j) have

 been filled in and the required level of expected representation has been set to 2. Cocks

 and Baird observed that commercial software packages encoding exact algorithms for

 integer programming problems were available. When they used one of these packages

 to solve Margules and Nicholls' original problem, they found 11 sites to satisfy the
 constraints; recall that Margules and Nicholls had found 12 (Sect. 3.3). The move to

 exact algorithms had not led to any spectacular improvement of optimality. But what

 Cocks and Baird were more interested in was the flexibility of their framework to

 incorporate all natural values, not only the representation of biological features.

 18 If, as was true for all cases discussed in Sect. 3, the level is a minimum to be achieved, the inequality
 in the constraint would just have to be reversed. The formula given above corrects an error on Cocks and
 Baird (p. 116) where the summation in the constraint relation was incorrectly taken to be over i.

 " Roughly, this means that, as the size of the problem grows, the time taken to solve the problem (by an
 exact algorithm) would only grow as a polynomial function of the size.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 417

 Four years later, Hugh Possingham and three collaborators, also in Australia (at
 the University of Adelaide) provided the standard integer programming formulation
 of the reserve selection problem (Possingham et al. 1983). Let i e 1,2,..., m be an
 index running over sites and j e 1, 2,..., n be the index running over species. Two
 control variables were introduced. Let:

 a,-;

 1 if species j is present at site i
 and
 0 otherwise

 1 if site i is included in the reserve network

 v -

 0 otherwise

 Then the "minimum set problem (p. 538)" becomes:

 Minimize ^ x/

 i=i

 ,. z anxi > 1

 subject to ,t~j
 Xi € 0, 1

 j = 1,2,... ,n.

 Possingham and his collaborators showed that the use of complementarity alone or
 of rarity followed by complementarity did not necessarily lead to optimal solutions
 even with small data sets. However, instead of urging the use of exact algorithms,
 they explored using heuristic rules repeatedly implicitly acknowledging the power of

 metaheuristic algorithms (Sect. 6).

 However, strong criticism of the use of heuristic algorithms came from Underhill

 (1994) of the University of Cape Town who noted that complementarity, interpreted

 as an algorithm was what computer scientists called a greedy algorithm. He, too, pro
 duced a simple example in which the use of complementarity did not lead to the optimal
 solution and urged the use of exact algorithms (more specifically, the "branch-and
 bound" algorithm) but, because he did not analyze a single data set with field (rather
 than artificial) data, there was no progress on the question whether exact algorithms
 would prove tractable in practice. The tone of the paper was hostile, especially to
 Vane-Wright et al.'s (1991) elevation of complementarity to a principle. More valu
 ably, Underhill urged a different reserve selection problem to be solved: "maximize

 the number of species that can be conserved within a fixed financial budget or total area

 (p. 86)." The importance of this problem—what should be preserved in the presence

 of ubiquitous budget constraints—would not be recognized in the period before 2000.

 Underhill also called for conservation biologists to make more use of techniques devel

 oped by decision theorists, in particular, multi-criteria analysis. Once again, this idea

 was not embraced at the time. Underhill had little influence, probably partly because

 of the hostile tone of his remarks, but more likely because he did not analyze a single
 field-based data set.

 UnderhilFs intervention provoked a response from Pressey, Possingham, and Mar

 gules whose data showed that the sub-optimality of a variety of heuristic procedures

 was minimal while exact algorithms became intractable quite easily (Pressey et al.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 418 S. Sarkar

 1996). Several other studies from the same period produced similar results though
 the extent of the intractability of exact algorithms remained inadequately delineated
 (Csuti et al. 1997; Pressey et al. 1997). There was no resolution of the dispute that
 satisfied both sides though a consensus set in that, given the complexities of reser
 vation decisions in the field, the apparently slight loss of optimality by the use of
 fast heuristic algorithms was more than compensated by the flexibility of creating
 and exploring many scenarios. Moreover, the complexities of the factors influencing
 "real-world" implementation of the minimum sets produced by the algorithms made

 worries about limited sub-optimality seem baroque (Pressey 1998). Some of these new

 studies came from the United States, marking the maturation of personal and collab
 orative contacts that would eventually lead to a consensus framework for systematic
 conservation planning (Sarkar 2002).

 Probably the chief factor in exact algorithms not making any headway during this

 period is the failure of their advocates to analyze sufficiently many "realistically com

 plex" data sets to convince critics of their tractability. In retrospect, what is also ironic

 is that the proponents of the exact algorithms do not seem to have been aware that
 the reserve selection algorithm was one of the most-studied mathematical program

 ming problems and was dubbed the "set covering problem" as early as 1971 (Toregas
 et al. 1971). Consequently, it was known exactly how sub-optimal the use of a greedy
 algorithm could be (Chvatal 1979): if m is the maximum richness of one of the sites

 in the data set, then the size of the solution produced by the greedy algorithm could
 potentially be more than that of the optimal solution by a multiplicative factor of

 H(m) = XH=i J- By the time m reaches 5, that is, some unit could have as many
 as 5 species (or whatever biological feature is of interest), the solution produced by
 complementarity could potentially have twice as many units as the optimal solution.
 This is speculative but, had the proponents of the exact algorithms been more cogni

 zant of ongoing research in operations research, some of the differences between them

 and proponents of heuristic algorithms may have been clarified and, perhaps, partially
 resolved.

 6 Denouement

 The next decade saw the development of a wide array of software tools implementing

 algorithms for reserve selection. There was also a widespread belief that the spatial
 configuration of reserves should be incorporated into their selection, as Nicholls and

 Margules (1993) had already begun to do—this point will merit further discussion in
 Sect. 7.2. The most important conceptual innovation was the introduction of meta
 heuristic algorithms which were designed to achieve a higher degree of optimality

 than heuristic algorithms but without sacrificing speed (as in the case of exact algo
 rithms). Metaheuristic algorithms repeatedly applied a one-step heuristic rule (such

 as the greedy algorithm) to improve performance until an independent exit condition
 was satisfied.

 In 1996, Ian Ball at the University of Adelaide produced a program called SPEX
 AN (which was supposed to stand for "spatially explicit annealing") as part of a

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 419

 doctoral dissertation (Ball 1996).20 It used simulated annealing to solve the repre
 sentation problem while optimizing for compact shape. This was the first published
 use of a metaheuristic algorithm for the reserve selection problem.21 The significance
 of simulated annealing was that it allowed for much greater control over the spatial

 configuration of reserves than what heuristic algorithms, such as those of Nicholls and

 Margules (1993), could achieve. It also remained tractable when faced with the largest
 data sets analyzed in the 1990s. Starting in 1997, another metaheuristic algorithm,
 tabu search, began to be used (Okin 1997) though, initially, without considerations of

 spatial design.22

 Around the same time or shortly afterward, a variety of software tools for the reserve

 selection problem began to be developed which continued to use heuristic algorithms.
 These included WorldMap (which had been developed by 1991) (Vane-Wright et al.
 1991), C-Plan (Pressey 1998), Target(which included cost trade-offs in a new definition

 of complementarity) (Walker and Faith 1998), ResNet (Kelley et al. 2002; Sarkar et al.
 2002) (based on the original MNP algorithm), and Zonation (Moilanen et al. 2005).
 Exact algorithms continued to have advocates (Rodrigues et al. 2000; Revelle et al.
 2002; Rodrigues and Gaston 2002) but it became clear that complex spatial problems
 with large data sets could not be solved in reasonable time using exact algorithms.23

 To the extent that issues of spatial configuration mattered, for the decade after 1995,

 metaheuristic algorithms had come to stay. Shape was not the only criterion used in

 algorithm design; connectivity and dispersion, alignment (with habitat types or even

 with political units), and a variety of other spatial criteria began to be explored (Sarkar
 et al. 2006).

 7 Discussion and conclusions

 How important was the development of these algorithms? As far as practical conserva
 tion decisions are concerned, at least up to 2000, they were of little significance (Justus

 and Sarkar 2002). The only result of the algorithms that was fully implemented by on
 ground protection of areas was that produced by Kirkpatrick (1983) in Tasmania
 with the very first use of such an algorithm as discussed earlier in this paper
 (Sect. 3.1). Moreover, successful implementation was a result of the political con
 text of Tasmania—and Kirkpatrick's personal and institutional relations—rather than
 any recognition of the innovativeness of the method (Pressey 2002). There were
 some initial partial implementation in New South Wales in the mid-1990s but these

 efforts were subsequently abandoned (Finkel 1998a,b; Justus and Sarkar 2002). That

 SPEXAN eventually morphed into MARXAN, a widely used software package for the selection of

 reserve networks—see Ball et al. (2009) for this history.

 21 Even though the term "metaheuristic" was introduced as early as 1986 in the context of tabu search
 (Glover 1986), and simulated annealing is a metaheuristic algorithm, it was not used in this context until
 2006 (Sarkar et al. 2006).

 22 For recent extensions, see Ciarleglio (2008); Ciarleglio et al. (2009).

 For a historically sophisticated scientific review of this problem, which is only slightly more optimistic

 about exact algorithms, see Williams et al. (2005).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 420 S. Sarkar

 situation began to change somewhat after 2000 but that story is beyond the scope of
 this paper (Margules and Sarkar 2007).

 However, what was really important about the algorithmic turn is that it led to con

 servation biology embracing a distinctive set of formal theories and technical practices

 that were not in vogue in the ecology of that period. By the time Cocks and Baird (1989)

 introduced mathematical programming into the discussion, algorithms had become a
 focus of research, a development then unknown to ecology. This focus was made pos
 sible by Margules, et al.'s (1988) clear distinction between the "representativeness"
 problem and the "persistence" problem. The first algorithms, before spatial configu
 ration became an issue, were only supposed to solve the former problem. The earlier

 attempts to use island biogeography to design reserves (recall the discussion of Sect.

 2.1) were restricted to the latter. 24 The critical point is that the representation problem

 did not require biological solution: it was a formal problem to be solved using math

 ematical tools (albeit those from the type of applied mathematics typically studied in

 computer science and operations research).

 However, it was not true that ecology had no theoretical tool with which repre

 sentativeness could be analyzed. As Magurran (2003) has claimed, complementarity
 was a measure of what ecologists had long explored as -diversity. Yet, /3-diversity
 finds no mention in the developments discussed in this paper (though Rebelo and
 Siegfried (1990, p. 15) and Vane-Wright et al. (1991, p. 237) do mention it)—this
 issue is discussed in Sect. 7.1. What is more interesting is that the move to incorporate

 considerations of spatial configuration at least seems as if it is a return to the geometric
 rules of island biogeography theory. This issue is briefly discussed in Sect. 7.2 though

 a full discussion is beyond the scope of this paper because most of the relevant work
 comes from a later period.

 7.1 Why Not /J-Diversity?

 As early as 1960, Whittaker (1960) had distinguished between three concepts of diver
 sity: a-diversity, /3-diversity, and y -diversity. A region was supposed to be divided

 24 Margules et al. (1988, p. 64) explicitly note this difference in the motivations of the work in conservation
 biology in the late 1980s and the earlier work of the ecologists. A strangely obtuse misinterpretation of
 these developments has recently been provided by Linquist (2008) who criticizes these algorithms (and
 Margules and his collaborators explicitly) for not incorporating persistence into the original reserve selec
 tion algorithms (and, more specifically, the MNP algorithm). The criticism is bizarre: "the persistence of

 biological diversity in perpetuity (Margules et al. 1988, p. 64)" was supposed to be ensured through proper
 management of reserves after the algorithms were used to ensure that the set of reserves represented the
 biological features adequately; adequate representation was a "prerequisite" for measures to ensure persis
 tence (p. 64). Rebello and Siegfried (1990, p. 24) also make this point explicitly. Linquist also seems to
 be entirely oblivious of the fact that what was guiding the design of these algorithms was a concern for
 cost, as Kirkpatrick (1983) explicitly noted, and what Pressey and others (e.g., Pressey and Nicholls 1989b;
 Vane-Wright et al. 1991; Rebelo and Siegfried 1992) called "efficiency" starting in the late 1980s. Island

 biogeography theory and reserve selection algorithms were intended by their proponents to solve different
 problems. Diamond explicitly noted that his rules would sometimes have to be violated to sample (that is,
 represent) all species adequately, for instance, on a heterogeneous landscape (Diamond 1975, p. 144). For
 a recent reappraisal of the relations between the two research programs, see Williams et al. (2005) which
 Linquist ignores.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 421

 into a set of units (areas), a-diversity was supposed to measure the diversity within a
 unit. Over the years, a large variety of measures were proposed for it; most of these
 focused on species richness and evenness.25 In the 1960s and 1970s, a central claim of

 ecology was that higher a-diversity led to greater stability of ecosystems. By the 1980s
 attempts to establish or disprove this claim had reached an empirical and theoretical
 impasse (from which it is yet to recover).

 In contrast, ^-diversity was supposed to represent the diversity between units—
 a measure of the extent to which they were different, y -diversity was supposed to

 measure the total diversity of a region. The former had a clear connection to comple

 mentarity: a standard measure of ^-diversity was the ratio of shared to the total species

 in two units. If a set of already selected areas is taken as one unit, the new unit which

 would maximize this measure of /i-diversity would be the one with the highest com

 plementarity (as calculated, for instance, in the MNP algorithm). Yet, though Rebelo
 and Siegfried (1990) and Vane-Wright et al. (1991) mentioned ^-diversity in passing,
 and explicitly used complementarity, they did not make that connection. Neither did

 anyone else throughout the 1990s.

 Sarkar (2007a) has speculated that the general impasse in the diversity-stability
 debate led to conservation biologists ignoring all diversity measures from ecology.
 However, there could also have been two conceptual reasons in play: (i) ^-diversity
 was usually not conceptualized as a dynamic measure to be updated iteratively. As a
 result, those who were developing complementarity-based algorithms did not think

 of complementarity as /^-diversity, (ii) Complementarity was typically computed for

 a large number of small units (individual cells), and relativized to one large unit (the
 set of already selected cells). In contrast, /(-diversity was thought of as more "sym
 metric" in the sense of quantifying a relation (of dissimilarity) between two similar

 units, usually with the same area. Consequently, it did not seem obvious to anyone to
 interpret complementarity as -diversity.

 7.2 Spatial configuration

 Nicholls and Margules (1993) introduced closeness as a criterion for the selection of
 reserves into a network. The metaheuristic algorithms of the 1990s used shape as a
 criterion (Sect. 6); more recent such algorithms have introduced connectivity (and a
 variety of other spatial criteria) (Ciarleglio et al. 2009). Was this a return to the geo

 metric rules produced by Diamond and others in the 1970s (Sect. 2.1) which Margules

 and those who followed the algorithmic tradition had once vehemently rejected?

 The answer to this question is not straightforward for the period covered by this
 paper (and has become even less straightforward since).26 In one sense, the answer

 is obviously "yes:" spatial criteria were being invoked to incorporate concerns about
 persistence as was the case in the use of island biogeography theory in the 1970s.

 Moreover, this was typically done with no more concern for empirical validation than

 with island biogeography theory in the 1970s.

 25 For a history of these developments, see Sarkar (2007a).

 26 For a recent scientific review, which has been cited earlier several times, see Williams et al. (2005).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 422 S. Sarkar

 But, in a more interesting sense, the answer is "no." Nicholls and Margules (1993)

 had clearly recognized that their spatial closeness criterion was "optional." All algo
 rithms since (including those based on simulated annealing and other metaheuristics)
 have similarly left issues of spatial configuration to be decided by contextual consid
 erations. There was no claim of universal principles of reserve design, nothing along
 the lines of Diamond's (1975) Rules A-F (Fig. 1). The focus was on flexibility in the

 face of uncertainty. But the irony remains that, on the critical issue of persistence, the

 algorithms made no progress from the 1970s.

 7.3 Concluding remarks

 What is perhaps more important is that conservation biologists taking the algorith
 mic turn were motivated by three assumptions. The first was explicitly recognized
 as uncontroversial from the moment it was introduced—by Kirkpatrick (1983): that
 richness (or any other static measure) would not lead to "efficient" reserve network
 design. The influence of this recognition on the development of the field would be

 difficult to over-estimate. Even when optimal and metaheuristic algorithms began to
 compete with the complementarity-based heuristic algorithms of Sect. 3, there was no
 return to static measures.27

 The second was the realization that conservation decisions must be made immedi

 ately with limited data. In the words of Margules and Nicholls (1987, p. 89):

 "identifying suitable reserves ...should be based on information from experi
 ments and correlational analyses but such information is rarely available, espe
 cially in the detail desired. If the problem is ignored until sufficient experimental
 results are available, conservation options will be severely reduced. The urgency
 for decisions makes it necessary to generate some minimum set of ...options."

 Rebelo and Siegfried were equally explicit, claiming that their "approach [was] more
 than justified by the paucity of information ...and an urgent need for a strategy for

 maximizing the protection of Fynbos floral diversity (Rebelo and Siegfried 1990, p.
 16)." This realization led to many critically important decisions, especially that of
 basing conservation decisions on presumed (and rarely proven) surrogates for biodi
 versity (Sarkar and Margules 2002). This was open—and subjected—to criticism on

 the ground that Margules et al. (1982) used to criticize the use of island biogeography

 theory, that rules were being used without regard to their empirical status. Eventually,
 methods were developed to test the adequacy of surrogates.28 In the context of this

 paper, the assumption of urgency led to the demand that reserve selection methods be

 fast and flexible.29 Flexibility required speed so that a variety of alternatives could be

 rapidly explored. This, in turn, led to computer-aided design and thus, inexorably, to
 algorithms.

 27 Optimal and metaheuristic algorithms necessarily work by updating some function, typically an objective
 function. These technical issues are beyond the scope of this paper.

 This work came mainly after 2000 and is reviewed by Margules and Sarkar (2007).

 29 Recall the emphasis that Cocks and Baird (1989) put on flexibility (Sect. 5).

 vi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 423

 The third and, in retrospect, most important assumption was that cost was impor
 tant and policies should be assayed for their economy. Richness was a poor criterion
 for selecting reserves because there was a limit on how many reserves a region could

 afford. The reserve selection problem, from the very beginning (Kirkpatrick 1983),
 was conceptualized as a constrained optimization problem with cost being a criti

 cally important constraint. Efforts to incorporate costs into reserve selection protocols

 using standard economic measures were already under way by the mid-1990s (Faith

 1995). Multi-criteria analyses based on methods from the decision sciences eventually

 became routine (and were reviewed by Moffett and Sarkar 2006).

 Ultimately, the use of algorithmic methods came to be definitive of what Mar
 gules and Pressey (2000) dubbed "systematic conservation planning" in 2000. It was
 a strategy to prioritize areas for conservation, designate "conservation areas"—which

 replaced "reserves"30—and then focus on questions of persistence. Systematic con
 servation planning eventually came to be widely embraced, particularly by Western
 based large non-governmental organizations with financial resources that dominated
 the economies of many of the regions in which they chose to work (Dowie 2009).
 What—and how much—these methods contribute to the persistence of the natural
 features of the world remains to be seen.

 Acknowledgments This study was supported by the United States NSF Grant No. SES-0645884, 2007
 2010. Several students have contributed to the development of these ideas: thanks are particularly due (in
 alphabetical order) to Anshu Aggarwal, Michael Ciarleglio, Trevon Fuller, Justin Garson, Alex Moffett,
 and Chris Pappas. For collaboration and discussions, now spanning more than a decade, thanks are due to
 Chris Margules. For discussions (in 1999) on the development of the early algorithms, thanks are due to
 Nick Nicholls.

 References

 University Press.

 Ackery, P.R., and R.I. Vane-Wright. 1984. Milkweed butterflies: Their cladistics and biology. Ithaca: Cornell

 Ball, I.R. 1996. Mathematical applications for conservation ecology: The dynamics of tree hollows and the

 design of nature reserves. PhD dissertation, University of Adelaide

 Bail, I.R., H.P. Possingham, and M.E. Watts. 2009. Marxan and relatives: Software for spatial conservation
 prioritization. In Spatial Conservation prioritization: Quantitative methods and computational tools, ed.
 A. Moilanen, K.A. Wilson, and H.P. Possingham, 185-195. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Bradstock, R., and J.C. Noble. 1989. Mallee ecosystems and their management. Melbourne: Commonwealth

 Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation.

 Brockington, D., R. Duffy, and J. Igoe. 2008. Nature unbound: Conservation, capitalism, and the future of

 Chvatal, V. 1979. A greedy heuristic for the set-covering problem. Mathematics of Operations Research 4:

 protected areas. London: Earthscan.

 233-235.

 Ciarleglio, M. 2008. Modular abstract self-learning tabu search (MASTS): Metaheuristic search theory
 and practice. PhD dissertation, University of Texas at Austin, Graduate Program in Computational and
 Applied Mathematics

 Ciarleglio M., J.W. Barnes, and S. Sarkar. 2009. ConsNet: New software for the selection of conservation

 area networks with spatial and multi-criteria analyses. Ecography 32: 205-209.

 Cocks, K.D., and I.A. Baird. 1989. Using mathematical programming to address the multiple reserve
 selection problem: An example from the Eyre peninsula, South Australia. Biological Conservation 49:
 113-130

 See Sarkar (2003) for the political and ethical considerations behind this move.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Csuti, B., S. Polasky, P.H. Williams, R.L. Pressey, J.D. Camm, M. Kershaw, A.R. Kiester, B. Downs, R.

 Hamilton, M. Huso, and K. Sahr. 1997. A comparison of reserve selection algorithms using data on
 terrestrial vertebrates of Oregon. Biological Conservation 80: 83-97.

 Diamond, J.M. 1975. The island dilemma: Lessons of modern biogeographic studies for the design of nature

 reserves. Biological Conservation 7: 129-146.

 Diamond, J.M. 1986. The design of a nature reserve system for Indonesian New Guinea. In Conservation

 biology: The science of scarcity and diversity, ed. M.E. Soule, 485-503. Sunderland: Sinauer.

 Diamond, J.M., and R.M. May. 1976. Island biogeography and the design of nature reserves. In Theoretical

 ecology: Principles arid applications, ed. R.M. May, 163-186. Oxford: Blackwell.

 Dowie, M. 2009. Conservation refugees: The hundred-year conflict between global conservation and native

 peoples. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 Faith, D.P. 1995. Biodiversity and regional sustainability analysis. Tech. Rep. Lyneham: Commonwealth

 Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation.

 Finkel, E. 1998a. Forest pact bypasses computer model. Science 282: 1968-1969.
 Finkel, E. 1998b. Software helps Australia manage forest debate. Science 281: 1789-1791.
 Gilbert, F.S. 1980. The equilibrium theory of island biogeography: Fact or fiction? Journal of Biogeography

 424 S. Sarkar

 Glover, F. 1986. Future paths for integer programming and links to Artificial Intelligence. Computers and

 7:209-235.

 Operations Research 13(5): 533-549.

 Higgs, A.J. 1981. Island biogeography and nature reserve design. Journal of Biogeography 8: 117-124.
 International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 1980. World conservation strategy.
 Justus, J., S. Sarkar. 2002. The principle of complementarity in the design of reserve networks to conserve

 biodiversity: A preliminary history. Journal of Biosciences 27(S2): 421 —435.

 Karmakar, N. 1984. A new polynomial time algorithm for linear programming. Combinatorica 4: 375-395.
 Kelley, C., J. Garson, A. Aggarwal, and S. Sarkar. 2002. Place prioritization for biodiversity reserve network

 design: A comparison of the SITES and ResNet software packages for coverage and efficiency. Diversity
 and Distributions 8: 297-306.

 Kingsland, S.E. 2002. Designing nature reserves: Adapting ecology to real-world problems. Endeavour 26:

 9-14.

 Kirkpatrick, J.B. 1983. An iterative method for establishing priorities for the selection of nature reserves:

 An example from Tasmania. Biological Conservation 25: 127-134.

 Kirkpatrick, J.B. 1986. Conservation of plant species, alliances abd associations of the treeless high country

 of Tasmania, Australia. Biological Conservation 25: 43-57.

 Kirkpatrick, J.B., and C.E. Harwood. 1983. Conservation of Tasmanian macrophytic wetland vegetation.

 Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania 117: 5-20.

 Kirkpatrick, J.B., M.J. Brown, and A. Moscal. 1980. Threatened plants of the Tasmanian Central East

 Coast. Hobart: Tasmanian Conservation Trust.

 Kirkpatrick, J.B., L. Gilfedder, F.D. Duncan, and S. Harris. 1991. Reservation status and priorities for Tas
 manian plants. 1. Angiospermae (Dicotyldonae). In Aspects of Tasmanian botany, ed. M.R. Banks, S.J.
 Smith, A.E. Orchard, and G. Kantvilas, 163-172. Hobart: Royal Society of Tasmania.

 Krebs, C.J. 1985. Ecology: The experimental analysis of distribution and abundance, 3rd edn. New York:

 Linquist, S. 2008. But is it progress? on the alleged advances of conservation biology over ecology. Biology

 MacArthur, R.H., and E.O. Wilson. 1967. The theory of island biogeography. Princeton: Princeton Univer

 Magurran, A.E. 2003. Measuring biological diversity. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Margules, C.R. 1989a. Introduction to some Australian developments in conservation evaluation. Biological

 Harper & Row.

 and Philosophy 23: 529-544

 sity Press.

 Conservation 50: 1-11.

 Margules, C.R. 1989b. Selecting nature reserves in the South Australian mallee. In Mallee ecosystems and

 their management, ed. R. Bradstock, J.C. Noble, 398^105. Melbourne: Commonwealth Scientific and
 Industrial Research Organisation.

 Margules, C.R., and A.O. Nicholls. 1987. Assessing the conservation value of remnant habitat 'islands':
 Mallee patches on the Western Eyre peninsula, South Australia. In Nature conservation: The role of
 remnants of native vegetation, ed. D.A. Saunders, G.W. Arnold, A.A. Burbridge, and A.J.M. Hopkins,
 89-102. Chipping Norton: Surrey Beatty and Sons.

 Margules, C.R., and R.L. Pressey. 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405: 245-253.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Margules, C.R., and S. Sarkar. 2007. Systematic Conservation Planning. Cambridge: Cambridge University

 Complementarity and the selection of nature reserves 425

 Margules, C.R., M.B. Usher. 1981. Criteria used in assessing wildlife conservation potential: A review.

 Press.

 Biological Conservation 21: 79-109.

 Margules, C.R., A.J. Higgs, and R.W. Rafe. 1982. Modern biogeographic thoery: Are there any lessons for

 reserve design? Biological Conservation 24: 115-128.

 Margules, C.R., A.O. Nicholls, and R.L. Pressey. 1988. Selecting networks of reserves to maximize bio

 logical diversity. Biological Conservation 43: 63-76.

 Moffett, A., S. Sarkar. 2006. Incorporating multiple criteria into the design of conservation area networks:

 A minireview with recommendations. Diversity and Distributions 12: 125-137.

 Moilanen, A., A.M.A. Franco, R.I. Early, R. Fox, B. Wintle, and C.D. Thomas. 2005. Prioritizing multiple

 use landscapes for conservation: Methods for large multi-species planning problems. Proceedings of the
 Royal Society (London) B 272: 1885-1891

 Myers, N. 1988. Threatened biotas: "Hot spots" in tropical forests. Environmentalist 8: 187-208
 Nicholls, A.O., C.R. Margules. 1993. An updated reserve selection algorithm. Biological Conservation 64:

 Okin, W.J. 1997. The biodiversity management area selection model: Constructing a solution approach.

 Master's thesis, Univesity of California, Santa Barbara

 Possingham, H.P., J. Day, M. Goldfinch, and F. Salzborn. 1983. The mathematics of designing a network of
 protected areas for conservation. In Decision sciences: Tools for today, ed. D. Sutton, E. Cousins, and
 C. Pierce, 536-545. Proceedings of the 12th Australian Operations Research Conference, Australian
 Society for Operations Research, Adelaide, Australia

 Pressey, R.L. 1990. Reserve selection in New South Wales: Where to from here? Australian Zoologist 26:

 165-169

 70-75.

 Pressey, R.L. 1994. Ad Hoc reservations: Forward or backward steps in developing representative reserve

 systems. Conservation Biology 8: 662-668.

 Pressey, R.L. 1998. Algorithms, politics, and timber: An example of the role of science in a public, polit
 ical negotiation process over new conservation areas in production forests. In Ecology for everyone:
 Communicating ecology to scientists, the public and the politicians, ed. R. Wills and R. Hobbs, 73-87.

 Sydney: Surrey Beatty.

 Pressey, R.L. 2002. The first reserve selection algorithm: A retrospective on Jamie Kirkpatrick's 1983 paper.

 Progress in Physical Geography 26: 434-441.

 Pressey, R.L., and A.O. Nicholls. 1989a. Application of numerical algorithm to the selection of reserves in

 semi-arid New South Wales. Biological Conservation 50: 263-278.

 Pressey, R.L., and A.O. Nicholls. 1989b. Efficiency in conservation evaluation: Scoring versus iterative

 approaches. Biological Conservation 50: 199—218.

 Pressey, R.L., and S.L. Tully. 1994. The cost of ad hoc reservation: A case study in New South Wales.

 Australian Journal of Ecology 19: 375-384.

 Pressey, R.L., C.J. Humphries, C.R. Margules, R.I. Vane-Wright, and P.H. Williams. 1993. Beyond oppor
 tunism: Key principles for systematic reserve selection. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 8: 124-128.
 Pressey, R.L., H.P. Possingham, and C.R. Margules. 1996. Optimality in reserve selection algorithms: When

 does it matter and how much? Biological Conservation 76: 259-267.

 Pressey, R.L., H.P. Possingham, and J.R. Day. 1997. Effectiveness of alternative heuristic algorithms for
 identifying indicative minimum requirements for conseravtion reserves. Biological Conservation 80:
 207-219.

 Ratcliffe, D. 1971. Criteria for the selection of nature reserves. Advances in Science 27: 294-296.

 Rebelo, A.G., W.R. Siegfried. 1990. Protection of Fynbos vegetation: Ideal and real-world options. Biolog

 ical Conservation 54: 15-31.

 Rebelo, A.G., W.R. Siegfried. 1992. Where should nature reserves be located in the cape floristic region,

 south africa? Conservation Biology 6: 243-252.

 Revelle, C.S., J.C. Williams, and J.J. Boland. 2002. Counterpart models in facility location science and

 reserve selection science. Environmental Modeling and Assessment 7: 71-80.

 Rodrigues, A.S., K.J. Gaston. 2002. Optimisation in reserve selection procedures—Why not? Biological

 Conservation 107: 123-129.

 Rodrigues, A.S., J.O. Cerdeira, and K.J. Gaston. 2000. Flexibility, efficiency, and accountability: Adapting

 reserve selection algorithms to more complex conservation problems. Ecography 23: 565-574.

 Sarkar, S. 1998. Restoring wilderness or reclaiming forests? Terra Nova 3(3): 35-52.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 426 S. Sarkar

 Sarkar, S. 2002. Preface: Conservation biology: The new consensus. Journal of Biosciences 27(S2): i-iv.
 Sarkar, S. 2003. Conservation area networks. Conservation and Society I: v-vii.
 Sarkar, S. 2004. Conservation biology. In The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, ed. E.N. Zalta. Stanford:

 Stanford University, http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2004/entries/conservation-biology/.

 Sarkar, S. 2005. Biodiversity and environmental philosophy: An introduction to the issues. Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press.

 Sarkar, S. 2007a. Doubting Darwin? Creationist designs on evolution. Oxford: Blackwell Press.
 Sarkar, S. 2007b. From ecological diversity to biodiversity. In The Cambridge companion to the philosophy

 of biology, ed. D.L. Hull and M. Ruse, 388^4-09. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Sarkar, S. 2007c. Haldane and the emergence of modem evolutionary theory. In Handbook of the philosophy

 of biology, ed. M. Matthen and C. Stephens, 49-86. New York: Elsevier.

 Sarkar, S., and C.R. Margules. 2002. Operationalizing biodiversity for conservation planning. Journal of

 Biosciences 27(S2): 299-308.

 Sarkar, S., A. Aggarwal, J. Garson, C.R. Margules, and J. Zeidler. 2002. Place prioritization for biodiveristy

 content. Journal of Biosciences 27(S2): 339-346.

 Sarkar, S., R.L. Pressey, D.P. Faith, C.R. Margules, T. Fuller, D.M. Stoms, A. Moffett, K. Wilson, K.J. Wil

 liams, P.H. Williams, and S. Andelman. 2006. Biodiversity conservation planning tools: Present status
 and challenges for the future. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 31: 123-159.

 Simberloff, D. 1988. The contribution of population and community biology to conservation science. Annual

 Review of Ecology and Systematics 19: 473-511.

 Simberloff, D„ J. Cox. 1987. Consequences and costs of conservation corridors. Conservation Biology 1:

 Soule, M.E. 1985. What is conservation biology? Bioscience 35: 727-734.
 Soule, M.E., and D. Simberloff. 1986. What do genetics and ecology tell us about the design of nature

 reserves? Biological Conservation 35: 19-40.

 Takacs, D. 1996. The idea of biodiversity: Philosophies of paradise. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

 Thomas, C.D., and H.C. Mallorie. 1985. Rarity, species richness and conservation: Butterflies in the Atlas

 mountains of morocco. Biological Conservation 33: 95-117.

 Toregas, C., R. Swain, C. ReVelle, and L. Bergman 1971. The location of emergency service facilities.

 Operations Research 19: 1363-1373.

 Underhill, L.G. 1994. Optimal and suboptimal reserve selection algorithms. Biological Conservation 70:

 63-71.

 Press.

 85-87.

 Vane-Wright, R.I. 1996. Identifying priorities for the conservation of biodiversity: Systematic biological
 criteria within a socio-political framework. In Biodiversity: A biology of numbers and difference, ed.
 K.J. Gaston, 309-344. Oxford: Blackwell.

 Vane-Wright, R.I., C.J. Humphries, and P.H. Williams. 1991. What to protect? Systematics and the agony

 Walker, P.A., and D.P. Faith. 1998. TARGET software package. Tech. Rep. Canberra: Commonwealth

 of choice. Biological Conservation 55: 235-254.

 Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation.

 Whittaker, R.H. 1960. Vegetation of the Siskiyou Mountains, Oregon and California. Ecological Mono

 graphs 30: 279-338.

 Williams, J.C., C.S. ReVelle, and S.A. Levin. 2005. Spatial attributes and reserve design models: A review.

 Environmental Modeling and Assessment 10: 163-181.

 Wilson, E.O., and E.O. Willis. 1975. Applied biogeography. In Ecology and the evolution of communities,

 ed. M.L. Cody and J.M. Diamond, 522-534. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

 Zimmerman, B.L., and R.O. Bierregaard. 1986. Relevance of the equilibrium theory of biogeography and

 species-area relations to conservation with a case from Amazonia. Journal of Biogeography 13: 133-143

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

