 

 

 

 

Complementarity before uncertainty
Author(s): Sandro Petruccioli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 6 (November 2011), pp. 591-624
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41287710
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:17 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (201 1) 65:591-624
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-0 11-0087-0

 Complementarity before uncertainty

 Sandro Petruccioli

 Received: 30 March 201 1 / Published online: 10 August 201 1

 © Springer- Verlag 201 1

 Abstract This article argues that a manuscript dated to the summer of 1927 by the
 editors of Bohr's Collected Works was written a year earlier. The re-dating allows
 the conclusion that Bohr was well on his way to complementarity before his famous

 fight with Heisenberg over the uncertainty principle early in 1927. The literature that

 assumes that complementarity was Bohr's response to Heisenberg is therefore in error.

 The editors of the Collected Works assigned the document the date of 1927 because it

 refers to electron-diffraction experiments by Davisson and Germer, which were pub-

 lished in 1927. But as the article points out, Bohr and other leading physicists such as
 Max Born met Davisson in Britain in 1926 and discussed the experiments with him
 then. That demolished the basis of the earlier dating. Finally, the article argues that
 when the document takes its place between the Bohr-Kramers-Slater theory (1924)

 and the 1927 drafts of complementarity, everything falls neatly into place.

 1 Introduction

 Volume 6 of Niels Bohr's Collected Works , entitled "Foundations of quantum physics
 I (1926-1930)" is entirely devoted to the genesis, statement, and affirmation of the
 'principle' of complementarity.1 By this concept, Bohr believed he was providing a
 consistent interpretation of the foundations of atomic physics, thus recomposing the
 serious break created with the formulation of two formally equivalent theories con-
 veying two quite different images of reality: Heisenberg, Born and Jordan's quantum

 1 Bohr (1985) [henceforth CW6].

 Communicated by : Jed Buchwald.

 S. Petruccioli (E3)
 Universita dell'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy
 e-mail: sandropetruccioli @ gmail.com

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 592 S. Petruccioli

 mechanics and de Broglie and Schrodinger's wave theory. In addition to some articles
 and a selection of Bohr's scientific correspondence, J0rgen Kalckar, the editor of the

 book, offers readers and scholars some manuscripts that document with remarkable

 accuracy the path that led the Danish physicist to develop his interpretative hypoth-
 esis. There are four texts, all of them unpublished, accounting for 31 of the 195

 pages contained in the "Como Lecture II", 1927 folder of the Niels Bohr Archive in
 Copenhagen.2

 Only one manuscript, entitled "Philosophical foundations of the quantum theory"

 is undated, but its drafting can be placed with certainty in the weeks following the end

 of May 1927.3 The first of the three documents carrying a date is an eight-page man-

 uscript entitled "Fundamental problems of the quantum theory" dated September 13,

 probably the notes for the conference that Bohr held a few days later at Como for the
 celebrations of the 100th anniversary of the death of Alessandro Volta.4 The second

 one is a comprehensive text composed of twelve typewritten pages, dated 12 and 13
 October, written by Bohr5 just before going to Brussels to attend the Fifth Solvay

 Council, where he had the opportunity to present his theory to the most authoritative

 group of physicists of the time and-more importantly-to discuss his ideas directly
 with Albert Einstein.6 The title of the manuscript, "The quantum postulate and the

 2 Many of the texts collected in this folder are dated and with a single exception, they were all written
 between July 2 and 13 September 1927. Here's how Kalckar describes the contents of the folder: "The
 folder "Como Lecture II", 1927, contains a large number of drafts and notes, comprising 181 sheets, a few

 of which have notes on the reverse, making a total of 195 written pages. Most of them are handwritten, in

 pencil or ink, Klein's, Bohr's, Mrs Margrethe Bohr's and an unidentified hand. There are few typed pages
 and carbon copies. The languages are English, Danish and German. Many sheets are dated, carrying dates
 between 2 July 1927 and 13 September 1927 (except for 2 pages, dated 1926, apparently by mistake). The
 main titles are: "Atomteori og B0lgemekanik" ("Atomic Theory and Wave Mechanics"), "Philosophical
 Foundations of the Quantum Theory", "Fundamental Problems of the Quantum Theory", "Uber die Wel-
 lentheorie des Lichts und der Materie" ("On the Wave Theory of Light and Matter"), and "Zur Frage des

 begrifflichen Aufbaus der Quantentheorie" ("On the Question of the Conceptual Structure of the Quantum
 Theory")", CW6 58.

 3 CW6 69-7 1 . The text was actually written by Oskar Klein, Bohr's assistant at Institute for Theoretical

 Physics in Copenhagen at the time, and it has a few corrections by Bohr. Nature in the number of 28 May
 1927 had published a note from the British physicist and philosopher of science Norman R. Campbell
 (1927) and accepted a brief reply by Pascual Jordan. Evidently stimulated by this discussion, Bohr decided

 to intervene with a paper that opens with these words: "In connection with the discussion between Drs. Nor-
 man R. Campbell and P. Jordan, published under this headline in the issue of Nature May 29, 1 should be
 glad to get space in these columns for the following general remarks" CW6 69. The note was never sent to
 Nature. See Interview to Oskar Klein by John L. Heilbron and L. Rosenfeld on 28 February 1963, AIP.

 4 Manuscript and transcription in CW6 75-88. The Como Conference, organized in memory of the work
 of Alessandro Volta on the centenary of his death, was held from 1 1 to 20 September 1927. Bohr presented

 his report, in which he introduced the notion of complementarity, on 1 6 September. The extensively revised
 text of the conference was published in Bohr (1928a). Also speaking at the debate were Max Born, Hendrik
 Kramers, Werner Heisenberg, Enrico Fermi, and Wolfgang Pauli, ibid., pp. 589-598.

 5 CW6 9 1 -98. Bohr sent the manuscript to Charles G. Darwin, his friend since the years spent in Manchester,
 with a letter dated 16 October 1927.

 6 The Fifth Solvay Conference was held in Brussels from 23 to 29 October 1927 and the theme chosen
 by Lorentz for the meeting was 'electrons and photons'. The level of participants was extraordinarily high,

 perhaps unparalleled in the history of twentieth century physics.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 593

 recent development of atomic theory", is the same of the paper that a few weeks later
 Bohr was to send to Nature ?

 The last dated document, which Kalckar himself defines as "extremely interest-

 ing",8 is completely different from the previous ones, a set of notes lacking an explicit

 logical-conceptual path. A text "evidently written with great haste"9 which probably

 arose from the need to put the complex steps of an argument on paper, to be developed

 further at a later stage. The manuscript reproduced in the Collected Works volume10

 (henceforth referred to as mss26) has no title and is 'composed' of three sheets; only
 the first two are numbered (in Roman) and carry the date 7.10.1926 (10 July 1926)

 that the editor corrects into 1927, adding a brief footnote explaining that "on the man-

 uscript the year is erroneously given as 1926". 11 According to Kalckar the evidence
 of the error that Bohr would have perpetrated twice with his own hand, lies in the

 fact that in the second sheet of mss26 the name of the American physicist Davisson
 is mentioned as a "confirmation" of the de Broglie wave theory of matter. In fact,
 on 3 March, 1927 Clinton Davisson had sent a letter to Nature containing the first

 results of "a series of experiments now in progress", carried out together with Lester
 Germer at Bell Laboratories, on electron diffraction by crystals that represented a

 strong empirical evidence in favor of the wave interpretation of material particles.12

 Hence his - I think rather hasty - decision to shift the dating of mss26 up by one year
 because, according to Kalckar, this manuscript was undoubtedly subsequent to the
 publication of Davisson's letter.

 In this article I will demonstrate the following theses:

 (a) According to an analysis of content and to some remarks of formal nature it can

 be accurately stated that the third page of the document is not an organic part of

 mss26 and was written by Bohr at a later date.

 (b) The fact that the Davisson's name appears in mss26 cannot be used as evidence

 of the document not having been written in July 1926. On the contrary, some
 historical data allow us to say that it would be entirely plausible that in July

 1926 Bohr was referring to the results of Davisson's experimental investigations,

 which he had started in 1919, as a confirmation of the de Broglie theory.

 (c) The point above is further supported by the results of a comparative analysis of the

 conceptual and theoretical framework of mss26 and of the other three documents

 published by Kalckar written by Bohr between June and October 1927.

 7 Bohr (1928b). The article was also published in German and Danish; for a comparison between the
 different versions of the text please refer to the notes by J0rgen Kalckar in CW6.

 8 CW6 27.

 9 Ibid., p. 58.

 10 Manuscript, transcription and translation, ibid., pp. 59-65.

 1 1 Ibid., p. 27, n. 20. Below, in illustrating this document, Kalckar reaffirms: "The first two pages are
 numbered and are dated 10 July 1926 [1927, as is clear, i.a., from the reference to Davisson]", ibid., p. 58.

 12 Davisson and Germer (1927a). In particular, the letter reads: "These results are highly suggestive, of
 course, of the ideas underlying the theory of wave mechanics, and we naturally inquire if the wave-length
 of the X-ray beam which we thus associate with a beam of electrons is in fact the h/mv of L. de Broglie",
 ibid., p. 559.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 594 S. Petruccioli

 So it would be quite possible to argue that Kalckar's decision to change the date

 on mss26 was not only hasty, but quite likely also wrong; Bohr's notes actually date
 back to the summer of 1926, before he invited Erwin Schrodinger to Copenhagen to

 discuss his wave theory,13 and above all many months before Werner Heisenberg sent

 his famous article on uncertainty relations to Zeitschrift fiir Physik.

 This is much more than an archival nicety since, as we shall see, were my theses

 to prove correct it would change the interpretative perspective making it possible to
 achieve the historically correct reconstruction of one of the most troubled periods of

 early twentieth century physics. It would in fact constitute documentary evidence to

 the hypothesis that Bohr had already grasped the concept of complementarity when he
 started that intense, lively and sometimes harsh exchange of ideas with Schrodinger

 and Heisenberg during the fall and winter of 1926-1927. We could also then, finally,

 get rid of the established interpretative hypothesis that relegates Bohr's contribution

 to the foundation of quantum mechanics to a cunning ploy aimed at rebuilding a shat-

 tered philosophical-theoretical framework and as a means for a come-back after his

 resounding defeat in 1924. 14

 But there's more. The second page of mss26 ends with a statement regarding the

 outcome of the measurement of energy and momentum, which surprisingly contains

 the core of the reasoning underlying the Heisenberg uncertainty paper, or, more pre-

 cisely, the way in which Bohr would have interpreted the 'discovery' of Heisenberg

 in his paper on complementarity.

 2 The historical context

 2.1 The Addendum

 The issue of the Zeitschrift fur Physik containing Werner Heisenberg's article „Uber
 den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik" was

 published on 31 May 1927. 15 Heisenberg had sent his paper to the journal in mid-
 March from the Teoretisk Institut for Fysik in Copenhagen, where he was professor
 Niels Bohr's assistant since spring 1926. The publication put an end to a long and
 sometimes dramatic contrast between Bohr and his young co-worker about the con-

 tents of the article. Eventually, it was published without any substantial change to the
 text sent in March, but with a short addendum by Heisenberg on the draft ( Nachtrag

 1 3 Also as a result of the report made by Heisenberg, who had attended the conferences held by Schrodinger

 in Munich on July 21st and 23rd, with a letter dated 1 1 September 1926 Bohr had invited Schrodinger to
 Copenhagen to discuss the open questions of atomic theory in detail. Schrodinger, who met Bohr for the
 first time on this occasion, arrived at the Copenhagen train station on 1 October.

 14 See for example the well-known and influential view of Lakatos (1970, p. 145): "In the new theory
 Bohr's notorious 'complementarity principle' enthroned [weak] inconsistency as a basic ultimate feature
 of nature, and merged subjectivist positivism and antilogical dialectic and even ordinary language of the

 philosophy into one unholy alliance".

 15 Heisenberg (1927).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 595

 bei der Korrektur) containing some corrections that the author attributes directly to

 Bohr and what had emerged "in the course of several discussions on this paper".16

 Fortunately, the accuracy standards of scientific journals at the time had not pre-
 vented the diffusion of an article in which the author himself drew the reader's attention

 to the errors it contained; this allowed science to acquire one of its most important laws

 for understanding the microscopic world. Even historians have reason to rejoice that

 those standards were far removed from the criteria used by today's referees, gaining

 an opportunity to learn from the protagonists themselves what was, in those months,

 the nature and extent of the conflict behind the definition of conceptual and epistemo-

 logical foundations of quantum theory.

 The addendum ends with the author's formal thanks to professor Bohr and the

 announcement of a forthcoming article in which the results of the more recent inves-

 tigations on the conceptual structure of quantum theory are to be presented. In fact,

 Heisenberg refers the reader to a future article of Bohr's for a final clarification on the

 controversial and not fully exhaustive topics of his work. As we shall see in detail later,

 Heisenberg believed that in quantum theory discontinuities and particles were the only

 essential items. Furthermore, he believed that Schrodinger's sole merit consisted in

 the introduction of a mathematical model for quantum physics that made calculations

 particularly easy compared to the more complex matrix algebra; on that fact alone
 Schrodinger's theory had found favor with the majority of physicists. Bohr, on the
 other hand, was convinced that it was not possible to dispense with waves; only by
 assigning the same validity to the experiments that can be explained consistently by
 corpuscular theory or by wave theory could the real significance of the discovery of

 Heisenberg on the unavoidable uncertainty of physical quantities during measurement
 be grasped.

 "Bohr and I tried from different angles and therefore it was difficult to agree.

 Whenever Bohr could give an example in which I couldn't find the answer, then it was
 clear that we had understood what the actual situation was. [...] in the end, shortly
 after Christmas, we both were in a kind of despair. In some way we couldn't agree
 and so we were a bit angry about it. So Bohr went away to Norway to ski. [...] So

 I was alone in Copenhagen and then within a few days I thought that this thing with

 the uncertainty relations would be the right answer".17 In this way, during the inter-
 view granted to Thomas Kuhn on 23 February 1963 at the Max Planck Institute in
 Munich, Heisenberg was to reconstruct one of the crucial moments of the affair, at

 the peak of despair, to use his own words. Left alone in Copenhagen, Heisenberg had

 thus found the right climate and the concentration he needed to organize his ideas and
 shape his ambitious project. Already 1 week after Bohr's departure on 23 February,
 he sent Wolfgang Pauli a 14-pages long letter containing the core of his uncertainty

 paper.18 asking for his opinion before Bohr's return to Copenhagen, expected for mid-
 March.19 We know there was a letter Bohr sent to Heisenberg from Norway, which

 16 Ibid., p. 197.

 17 Interview of Werner Heisenberg by Thomas S. Kuhn on 25 February, 1963, AIP

 18 Heisenberg to Pauli, 23 February 1927, in Pauli (1970, pp. 376-381) [henceforth WB].

 19 There are no sure data about Bohr's return to Copenhagen. At the end of a letter sent to Pauli on 14
 March, Heisenberg commented thus: "Bohr should (dicitur!) return tonight", WB 387-388.

 © Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 596 S. Petruccioli

 would probably have helped to clarify the real terms of their disagreement, but it has
 been lost. In his reply, dated March 10, Heisenberg only informed Bohr in general

 terms that "I managed to deal with the case where both p and q are determined with

 some degree of accuracy" and that he had sent a text to Pauli asking for his opinion.20

 Actually, Heisenberg already knew Pauli's judgment, since in a letter dated March 9

 he wrote thanking him for his lenient criticism (nachsichtigen Kritik).21

 Since in the printed article the date on which Zeitschrift fiir Physik received the

 manuscript is reported as 23 March, it seems quite likely that Heisenberg sent his

 work without waiting for Bohr's influential endorsement, just returned from Norway.

 "One may venture the guess - claims in this regard J0rgen Kalckar-that after the many

 months of preceding discussions, and knowing as he did Bohr's thorough method of

 working, Heisenberg was eager to get the manuscript off before every paragraph of it

 would be overhauled by Bohr".22 Thus Heisenberg meant to avoid further discussion

 with Bohr or rather, he did not want the publication of his work to depend on comments

 and criticism that he knew full well and which sprung from a point of view he did

 not share. It was enough for him to have received Pauli's support, who enjoyed undis-

 puted prestige among the main schools of theoretical physics of the time - Munich,
 Copenhagen, Gottingen and Berlin - and whose opinion had proven crucial on many
 occasions.23 In fact, as Heisenberg himself noted, he sought to know "Pauli's reaction

 before Bohr was back because I felt again that when Bohr comes back he will be angry

 about my interpretation"; besides, Pauli's reaction was"extremely enthusiastic".24

 Heisenberg's concerns were well founded. Not only Bohr "found some trouble

 in my paper", but as soon as they had the opportunity to speak about the article, in

 the presence of Oskar Klein, there was a very lively discussion that"ended with the

 general impression that now Bohr again has shown that my interpretation is not cor-
 rect".25 If the discussion had left Heisenberg "a bit furious", Bohr was "rather angry"

 and over the next days he was to try to explain to his young assistant the reasons for

 20 Heisenberg to Bohr, 10 March 1927.

 21 Heisenberg to Pauli, 9 March, WB 383-384. In fact, at the end of his letter/article of 23 February, Hei-
 senberg had requested a severe critique (unnachsichtige Kritik). On 2 March, with a postcard Heisenberg

 again asked for a response from Pauli, and demonstrating all his apprehension, advanced even the possibility
 of his not having received "my letter of 14 pages". Soon Heisenberg was to receive Pauli's overall positive
 judgment, along with some observations that he took into account when drafting the final manuscript. See
 in this regard Heisenberg to Pauli, 14 March 1927.
 22 CW6 16.

 23 Due to his undisputed authority Pauli was the negative protagonist of an episode involving the young
 American physicist Ralph Kronig, who had formulated the concept of electron spin, well before this
 hypothesis was published on Nature in 1926 by Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit. When Kronig had submitted
 to Pauli the hypothesis of the magnetic moment of the electron, he "ridiculed the idea", arguing that it had

 nothing to do with reality. In a letter to Kramers, Kronig observed: "To my distinct surprise and my greatest
 amusement I noticed in Nature of Feb. 20 than the electron with magnetic moment has found favor among

 the theoretical physicists"; concluding with a bitter comment: "In future I shall trust my own judgment more

 and that of others less", Kronig to Kramers, 26 March. Bohr later expressed his consternation and deep regret

 to Kronig "that you have not only, more than a year ago, had the same ideas as those published in autumn by

 Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck, but that you also from the beginning understood their bearing on the puzzle of the

 relativity doublets", Bohr to Kronig, 26 March 1926, in Bohr (1984, pp. 234-236:235) [henceforth CW5].

 24 Interview of Werner Heisenberg by Thomas S. Kuhn on 25 February, 1963, AIP.

 25 Ibid.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 597

 his disapproval, exercising such a strong pressure over him that, Heisenberg recalls,

 "I shouldn't publish the paper": this situation of great tension "ended with my break-

 ing out in tears".26 Thirty-five years later, however, Heisenberg managed to soften his

 recollection of the episode and, more importantly, to narrow it in time. In his mem-

 oirs he says it took a few days before "we could settle everything" and for them to

 agree to publish the article following some improvements that Heisenberg himself had
 acknowledged as "quite important" And prodded by Kuhn he stated: "I should say
 that by March in '27 we had already reached complete agreement. So there was only a

 short period of perhaps ten days or so in which we really disagreed rather strongly".27

 But things did not go exactly like that as shown by the documentation and by some
 historical reconstructions. On the one hand, Bohr thought of asking Pauli 's direct

 intervention to help him out of an increasingly embarrassing situation28; on the other,

 Heisenberg involved Pauli too by informing him, on April 4, that they had reached

 a stalemate regarding the attribution of the origin of the uncertainty relations to the

 discontinuous or wave aspects of quantum mechanics. "I argue[d] with Bohr over the
 extent to which the relation p'q' ~ h has its origin in the wave- or the disconti-
 nuity-aspects of qu[antum] mechanics]. Bohr emphasize[d] that, e.g., in the y-ray

 microscope the diffraction of the wave is essential; I emphasize[d]-Heisenberg wrote
 - that the theory of light quanta and even the Geiger-Bothe experiment are essential.

 By exaggerating to one side as well as to the other one may argue at length without

 saying anything new".29

 The divergences between the two physicists were bridged in mid-May following
 a new set of long discussions that begun when Heisenberg returned from Easter hol-
 idays. In fact, a compromise solution had been found. Heisenberg recognized, inter
 alia, the error in his y- ray microscope gedankenexperiments , which could have been

 used to illustrate the validity of the uncertainty relations only when taking into account

 light diffraction and therefore applying the concepts of wave theory. The discovery

 of indeterminacy was saved, but Heisenberg acknowledged, "not quite in the manner
 I thought", and in general he admitted to Bohr that "certain points could be better
 expressed and discussed in every detail, if only one begins a quantitative discussion
 directly with the waves".30 Heisenberg obtained not having to amend the text submit-

 ted to the journal and especially not having to delay its publication.31 The result of the

 26 Ibid.

 27 Ibid.

 28 "I am sending you quickly a couple of lines to ask if you would care to take a short trip to Copenhagen
 in early April". Bohr did not explain the reasons of the invitation, even if the urgency was betrayed by the
 offer of providing for travel expenses (Bohr to Pauli, 25 March 1927, WB 388). Perhaps perceiving the real
 reasons, Pauli declined Bohr's invitation politely informing him that he had already "arranged a pleasure
 trip of fourteen days with a friend (and I really am in great need of rest), at the moment I truly need to relax

 and make some order among my thoughts. So do not take offense, please, if I propose of defer my visit to
 Copenhagen. Maybe I could come in the week of Pentecost, or even in September or October?" (Pauli to
 Bohr, 29 March 1927, WB 389).

 29 Heisenberg to Pauli, 4 April 1927, WB 390-391.

 30 Heisenberg to Pauli, 16 May 1927, WB 394-396.

 31 In his monumental biography of Heisenberg, Cassidy (1992) argues that the academic events of those

 months and the choices made by the faculty committees in choosing the candidates for vacant professorships

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 598 S. Petruccioli

 long debate was to be summarized in an addendum, which among other things would

 point towards the forthcoming publication by Bohr of "a general treatise on the 'con-

 ceptual constitution' of quantum theory from the point of view: There exist waves

 and corpuscles'". In this regard, Heisenberg pointed out that "if one starts right away

 with this, one can of course also make everything consistent".32 A sarcastic comment
 that made it clear that for him this was an armed truce, not least because, he confided

 to Pauli, despite the outlined mistakes "my opinion is of course just as beforehand that

 in the quantum theory only the discontinuities are interesting and that one can never
 emphasize them enough".33

 The drafts of Heisenberg's article arrived at the Institute for theoretical physics in

 Easter week and Bohr sent a copy to Albert Einstein, as Heisenberg had asked him

 to do before leaving for the Bavarian mountains. In the cover letter, a large text of
 about 1,200 words, Bohr, after presenting Heisenberg's work as "a very important
 contribution to the discussion of the general problems of quantum theory", entered
 directly into the merits of the matter, almost as if meaning to suggest an alternative

 interpretation to that of the author.34

 2.2 Two paths to uncertainty

 Heisenberg's reasoning started from the acknowledgment of quantum mechanics' cri-

 sis and in the introduction to his work he drew very clearly the route that he thought

 should be followed to eradicate those contradictions (Widerspruch) that had hitherto

 prevented a consistent physical interpretation from being found. First, it must be noted

 that no significant step in this direction was possible as long as the continuity/discon-
 tinuity and wave/particle dualism persisted. Too long had the coexistence with the
 paradoxes of dualism been accepted, in the hope of coming up with a theory that
 would include them within a single coherent conceptual and mathematical scheme;

 a scheme that could, for example, reconcile the idea of Einstein's light quanta with the
 wave image of radiation. Dualism and its paradoxical results had revealed unbridge-

 Footnote 3 1 continued

 at various German universities, Heisenberg's attitude in his dispute with Bohr had a non-negligible influence.
 The failure to publish another good article could have diminished Heisenberg's academic expectations, who
 after a complex situation, in October 1927, accepted the chair of theoretical physics in Leipzig. Not surpris-
 ingly, perhaps, in the same letter that announced the closure of the 'case', he hastened to ask Pauli: "Did
 you hear something on the chair of Halle? Write me, please, if you know something! I am very interested in
 all the rumors on the employment of professorships Berlin-Leipzig-Halle-(possibly Munich?)-Zurich, and
 so forth". Finishing with a quote from Horace's ode "Omnes eodem cogimur...". Heisenberg to Pauli, 16
 May 1927, WB 395-396.

 32 Ibid., p. 395. And to witness the state of tension that prevailed in those days in Copenhagen, Heisenberg
 continued as follows: "Unfortunately, discussions of the last times have created personal gross misunder-

 standing between Bohr-Klein and me, of which of course I have my share of guilt. Obviously I do not want

 to write anything about it, but I would ask you to send me the letter [. . .] that I wrote before 31.1 .27, where

 I spoke of the work of Klein. In fact, Klein believes that I have systematically talked badly with you, Hund
 and others of his works and that of Bohr. [. . .] But now let us put aside these petty and unpleasant matters
 and concern ourselves with yours and Dirac's electrodynamics!".

 34 Bohr to Einstein, 13 April 1927, CW6 21-24.

 33 Ibid.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 599

 able inconsistencies and contradictions that demanded an ultimate choice, opting for

 one of two competing research programs. It is quite clear that Heisenberg considered

 only discontinuity and particles as truly essential, and that the only theoretical frame-

 work that he took into account was the matrix mechanics developed by the Gottingen

 school of physics. But if this was the first necessary step towards the definition of the

 theory's conceptual foundation, a further condition was dictated by the certainty that it

 was impossible to be content with the classical concepts of mechanics and kinematics
 of 'position', 'velocity', 'energy', and 'time'.

 Heisenberg returned thus to the origins of quantum mechanics, to the summer of

 2 years earlier when with a fortunate intuition he had made a synthesis of the Bohr
 correspondence principle and of Kramers' work on the quantum theory of disper-

 sion, coming up with an original quantum-theoretical interpretation of the quantities

 of ordinary kinematics and mechanics.35 But after almost two years, Heisenberg no

 longer considered observability as the criterion for an a priori selection of the quan-

 tities with which the mathematical structure of the theory would be able to describe
 microscopic physical processes. In short, he did not ask how we can describe nature
 by mathematical schemes. Rather, he thought the reasoning needed to be reversed.
 Thus, we have a mathematical scheme of quantum mechanics that works, satisfying

 for instance, conservation laws and Bohr's frequency condition, of significant success

 in explaining many experimental results (the Balmer series for hydrogen, the spin, the

 anomalous Zeeman effect, the helium spectrum, the allotropic forms of hydrogen36)
 and above all that needs no revision. This scheme was to indicate which quantities
 can be defined, if it is true that in nature we can "only find situations which can be
 described by quantum mechanics". This was an undoubtedly challenging assumption

 but, as Heisenberg was to recall later, he had simply put to good use the lesson learned

 from Einstein's theory of relativity.37 It was precisely from Einstein's authority that

 he drew a formidable epistemological certainty, one that allowed him to see at once

 the need of "a revision of kinematical and mechanical concepts"38 in those very same
 fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. He only had to consider what Max
 Born called the 'stronger quantum condition', the first fundamental law of quantum
 mechanics: pq -qp = h/{2iri). While from a classical point of view or in "everyday
 physics" there is no ambiguity when we speak of the 'position' and 'velocity' of a
 'mass' ra, in quantum mechanics these words are associated with the symbols p and q

 that satisfy Born's quantum formula, so the dynamical variables do not obey the com-
 mutative law of multiplication. According to Heisenberg, this is enough to make us
 "suspicious every time uncritical use is made of the words 'position' and 'velocity'".39
 In fact, it was not a very surprising result. For nearly three decades, since Planck's

 famous black-body radiation law and his discovery of the quantum of action, atomic
 physics had grown without being able to resolve the conflict between empirical

 35 Heisenberg (1925). Cf. Beller (1999).

 36 The Nobel Prize in Physics 1932 was awarded to Werner Heisenberg "for the creation of quantum
 mechanics, the application of which has, inter alia, led to the discovery of the allotropic forms of hydrogen".

 37 Interview of Werner Heisenberg by Thomas S. Kuhn, cit.

 38 Heisenberg (1927, p. 173).

 39 Ibid.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 600 S. Petruccioli

 evidence and the classical laws of mechanics and electrodynamics. The reality of the

 microscopic world had shown that elementary physical processes are characterized by

 an element of discontinuity completely extraneous to the traditional description and

 representation model: atoms are stable and the interaction between radiation and mat-

 ter is governed by so-called quantum jumps. Therefore, it was entirely possible that
 in areas where physical processes are characterized by an unavoidable discontinuity
 (Versagen) the ordinary concepts of 'position' and 'velocity' could fail. According to

 Heisenberg, however, in this context it was legitimate to ask whether a more detailed

 analysis of said concepts would put an end to those contradictions that had hitherto

 prevented any kind of interpretation of the new mechanics, finally yielding a visual
 comprehension (anschaulichen) of quantum formulae.

 At this point, Heisenberg introduced a criterion setting out the conditions under

 which those words or concepts take on some significance. There is no need to renounce

 the use of terms such as 'position' or 'velocity' and to elaborate, as he had previously
 thought, a theory that deals only with observable physical quantities; we can cer-

 tainly talk about the 'position' of an electron provided that the "definite experiments"

 that allow us to measure the position of the electron are specified. It is therefore the

 experimental apparatus set up to measure a given physical quantity to determine the
 conditions which may or may not assign an unambiguous meaning to the concept

 corresponding to that quantity. Beyond this specific experimental situation it is mean-

 ingless to use a given concept and therefore it is not possible to speak in general terms

 of the 'position of an electron', both before and after a measurement process.

 However, that which appeared as a simple operational definition of the concepts

 resulting from radical empiricism, on further analysis of the experimental conditions

 was to reveal a fundamental discovery, a glimpse of the path that would finally bring

 freedom from the contradictions of dualism. If one considers actual experimental situ-

 ations, it is clear that there are pairs of quantities that cannot be measured with the same

 accuracy, 'position' and 'velocity', 'energy' and 'time'. It is possible, for example,
 to measure the position of a particle with as much accuracy as one desires, but then

 its velocity remains completely undetermined. If we assign a meaning to the concept
 of 'position' of a particle at a given time, we are obliged to recognize that we can
 never say that particle, placed at a given point in space-time, has also a given velocity:
 on the basis of the criterion introduced by Heisenberg, the concept of 'velocity' is
 meaningless. All of this is expressed in symbols in the expression p'q' ~ h, where
 p' and q' represent respectively the precision with which the momentum and position

 of a particle can be determined.

 In the formalism used in the article p'q' ~ h was the well-known uncertainty rela-

 tion between position and momentum that Heisenberg had obtained by developing the
 formalism of Dirac and Jordan's transformation theory.40 The most striking aspect of

 the whole Heisenberg procedure was that the formula in question expressed exactly the
 same limitations faced by the quantities p and q when measured with a given exper-
 imental apparatus. At this point his famous thought experiment was summoned, the

 40 With this theory, in late 1926, Dirac (1927) and Jordan (1927), without providing any significant contri-
 bution to their physical interpretation, had shown that matrix mechanics and wave mechanics represented
 special cases of a more abstract formulation of quantum mechanics.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 601

 oft quoted gamma-ray microscope. Heisenberg's reasoning was as follows: in order to

 determine the position of an electron we must illuminate and observe it with a micro-

 scope; it is evident that, given the small size of the observed object, the accuracy of

 the measurement of its position will depend on the wave-length of light used. Hence,

 the smaller the wave-length of light illuminating the electron the greater the accuracy

 of the measurement will be; by using a gamma-quantum41 the electron's position can

 be determined as accurately as desired.

 One had, however, to bear in mind that this kind of interactions are subject to the

 photon-electron scattering that the American physicist Arthur H. Compton had stud-

 ied years before and published in the Physical Review in May 1923. 42 In the so-called

 Compton effect, the interaction produces a quantum of light that is scattered at an
 angle 6 from the direction of the incident radiation, as well as the diffusion (with
 an angle (p) of the electron subjected to a discontinuous change of momentum. The
 simple laws found by Compton, as an application of the theorems of conservation,

 allowed to affirm, in rigorously quantitative terms, that the smaller the wave-length of

 incident radiation - so if highly energetic quanta are used - the greater the momentum

 transferred to the electron. Hence Heisenberg drew the conclusion that "at the instant

 at which the position of the electron is known, its momentum can therefore be known

 up to magnitudes which correspond to the discontinuous change" 43 Now it was only

 left to translate the results of the thought experiment into the symbols corresponding
 to the various quantities under consideration. If q' is the uncertainty with which a

 quantity q can be determined, it must be exactly equal to the wave-length of incident

 gamma radiation Ao; p' is but the discontinuous change of momentum of the recoiling

 electron. From the basic laws of Compton's effect it then turns out, quite trivially, that

 the product between p' and q' is equal to Planck's constant h, ignoring a numerically

 negligible term, which indicates the momentum associated with the scattered quantum

 of wave-length Xq, greater than A.o.

 Once it was shown that p'q' ~ h was "a straightforward mathematical conse-

 quence".44 of Born's quantum condition pq - qp = h/(2ni) via the transformation

 theory, Heisenberg also obtained confirmation of the assumption that was at the basis

 of his reasoning, namely that it was the mathematical scheme that would reveal which

 situations existing in nature one can describe. He was so convinced of this that he went

 as far as to claim that "if there existed experiments which allowed simultaneously a
 'sharper' determination of p and q than the equation [p'q' ~ h] permits, then quan-
 tum mechanics would be impossible" 45 From Heisenberg's point of view it really
 seemed that his 'law' enjoyed within quantum mechanics the same epistemological
 status as the constancy of the speed of light within the theory of relativity. Contrary
 to what was somewhere suggested, the mathematical formalism of quantum mechan-
 ics did not require any change to the physical sense (Sinn Physikalische) of dynamic

 41 With wave-length of the order of picometers.

 42 Compton (1923).

 43 Heisenberg (1927, p. 175).

 44 Ibid.

 45 Ibid., pp. 179-180.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 602 S. Petruccioli

 quantities p and q , because "a// concepts which can be used in classical theory for

 the description of a mechanical system can be defined exactly for atomic processes in

 analogy to classical concepts " 46 For Heisenberg it was a very surprising result: one

 had only to abstain from applying those concepts in experimental situations in which

 their meaning was not defined with exactitude, and above all to respect the constraints

 imposed by the uncertainty relations. Once again we were faced with a situation not

 very different from relativity, in which, Heisenberg emphasized, "the word 'simulta-

 neous' cannot be defined except through experiments in which the velocity of light

 enters in an essential way".47

 Heisenberg had therefore good reason to be pleased with his achievements,

 especially for being able to show the way towards the long-awaited transition from
 microphysics to macro-physics within the framework of matrix mechanics, retain-

 ing the concepts of particle and discontinuity. Heisenberg's satisfaction was certainly

 increased by the fact that in his theory there were no waves, nor was there any mention
 of Schrodinger's 'popular' wave mechanics, for which he had reserved a contemp-
 tuous comment in a footnote.48 But Heisenberg had not realized that the experiment

 contained a truly gross error that threatened to undermine the whole theoretical edifice;

 on this point he was to face a very strong challenge from Bohr.

 Bohr objected that what made it impossible to determine the momentum of the

 electron accurately did not depend upon the discontinuous change of said quantity
 in the Compton effect. In fact, if it were possible to measure the scattering angle q
 of the secondary photon with any degree of precision it would become quite easy to

 obtain, from Compton's laws, the exact value of the discrete change in momentum of

 the electron. Therefore if our microscope were to allow us to detect the exact direction

 of the photon produced in the scattering process a la Compton, i.e., if it were possible

 to establish the exact point in which the photon was to enter the microscope, then

 Heisenberg's thought experiment would not prove the impossibility of simultaneously

 measuring the position and momentum of the electron with a higher precision than
 the constraint imposed by the equation p'q' ~ h. Paradoxically, Heisenberg's exper-
 iment would show instead precisely those requisites that would necessarily lead to the
 conclusion that "quantum mechanics would be impossible".

 "As long as we only talk about particles and quantum jumps, it is difficult to find

 a simple presentation of the theory, which is based on a reference to the limitation in

 the possibilities of observation. This is because the uncertainty mentioned is not only
 connected to the presence of discontinuities but also to the very detailed description

 in accordance with those properties of material particles and light that find expression

 46 Ibid., p. 179.

 47 Ibid.

 4** "Schrodinger describes quantum mechanics as a formal theory of frightening, indeed repulsive, abstract-
 ness and lack of visualizability. Certainly one cannot overestimate the value of the mathematical (and that
 extent physical) mastery of the quantum-mechanical laws that Schrodinger's theory has made possible.
 However, as regards questions of physical interpretation and principle, the popular view of wave mechan-
 ics, as I see it, has actually deflected us from exactly those roads which were pointed out by the papers of
 Einstein and de Broglie on the one hand and by papers of Bohr and by quantum mechanics on the other
 hand", ibid., p. 196.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 603

 in the wave theory".49 This very severe comment was contained in a letter from Bohr

 to Einstein; surely of the same type were the remarks he was moving in those days to

 Heisenberg, in an attempt to persuade him that without the wave theory his result was

 nothing but a brilliant albeit sterile mathematical exercise.

 In his experiment, Heisenberg did not take into account that the finite opening of

 the microscope limits its resolving power and therefore its capacity to exactly localize

 an object such as an electron. His argument was also flawed in that it ignored the wave

 properties of scattered quantum which, according to Bohr, were however essential to

 carry out a proper analysis of the thought experiment. Rather than a criticism, it was
 a veritable step back because, as revealed in his letter to Einstein, the simultaneous

 uncertainties of conjugate variables found by Heisenberg could be obtained by another

 path and precisely by looking at the wave properties of radiation and matter. He pointed

 out to Einstein that there is a perfect symmetry between them since "the representation
 of an electron by a group of de Broglie wave is of course closely analogous to the
 representation of a light quantum by group of electromagnetic waves".50 Heisenberg

 had chosen to regard photons and electrons as point-like particles, thinking that in the

 instant of collision the quantum would transfer a discrete and uncontrollable amount
 of momentum to the electron.

 According to the superposition principle a corpuscle of matter, as well as a quantum
 of light, can be adequately described by a train of monochromatic plane waves and

 the wave packet that represents it will be all the more localized the greater the variety

 of waves involved. The limitation of the extension of the wave field in space and time

 can always be seen as the result of the interference of a group of elementary harmonic

 waves. Then we can indicate with A v and A A, respectively, the differences between the

 frequencies and wave-lengths of the wave components by which we can assign a finite

 extension to our corpuscle in the direction of propagation. Due to this 'uncertainty',

 the geometrical description of waves-and hence the possibility of observing the light
 quantum - will be subject to the following space-time limitations: At = 1/Av and
 Ax = k2 / Ak. Taking into account the well-known quantum equations for energy,
 E = hv , and momentum, I = h/k, we find that the uncertainties concerning the
 space-time coordination stand in a peculiarly inverse relationship with the quantities

 £and I that symbolize conservation laws and ensure the claim of causality. Very simple

 algebraic derivations therefore result in A E At = h and A I A x = h , "all in harmony -
 Bohr remarked - with the general relation between the simultaneous uncertainties of

 conjugate variables, which according to Heisenberg is a direct consequence of the
 mathematical laws of quantum mechanics".51

 It follows that Heisenberg' s important result could have been reached by a theo-

 retically alternative path that did not need strong assumptions about the relationship
 between mathematics and physical reality, nor operational constraints on the use of
 physical concepts. From a theoretical point of view it was all written into the wave
 image of reality, generalized by de Broglie's idea of wave associated with moving

 49 Bohr to Einstein, 13 April 1927, CW6 23.

 50 Ibid.

 51 Ibid., p. 22.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 604 S. Petruccioli

 material particles, as well as in the Planckian expression of the quantization of energy.
 Therefore it was necessary to explore the potential of wave-particle duality thor-
 oughly and especially it needed to be understood, beyond any arising paradoxes, to
 what degree were the concepts of field theory essential. Yet, as he stressed in the

 article to Nature , everything was contained, according to Bohr, in the simple laws of

 quantum physics, where the Planck constant establishes a formal relationship between

 the concepts of energy and momentum - which symbolically express the corpuscular
 and discontinuous content of microscopic world - and the concepts of frequency and
 wave number - which are mainly connected with the continuous and wave image of

 that same world.52 The paradoxes of dualism were therefore written in the basic for-

 mulae of quantum theory and in the 'power' of h to establish a quantitatively defined

 relationship between concept systems representing contradictory images of reality.

 On the basis of the equation p = h/k we know that a single wave 'has' a defi-

 nite momentum even if, contrary to all intuitive evidence and to the laws of classical
 physics, this quantity is associated with a non-localized physical object of infinite
 extension in space. We also know, as mentioned earlier, that from the superposition of

 a group of waves of different wave-lengths we can represent a body of finite extension

 which, however, as clearly outlined by the A p = h/AX relation, cannot have a defined

 momentum. In fact, the more accurately is the momentum of a wave packet defined,

 i.e., the smaller the uncertainty A p, the lower will the number of its components be

 and, if AX is large, the greater the dispersion of the wave packet in space. The precise

 knowledge of the momentum increases the uncertainty of position.

 In his letter to Einstein, Bohr had therefore shown that the uncertainty relations

 could be obtained by a completely different way; but, in his view, Heisenberg had

 not even the right to propose an operational definition as a condition to use the clas-
 sical concepts in a quantum context. In a paragraph of the 1927 Solvay conference
 dedicated to the interpretation of Heisenberg's uncertainty relations, Bohr apparently
 pointed out what was the limit, even in philosophical terms, of a theory developed
 around the belief of a world populated by microscopic particles with their discontin-

 uous behavior. The idea that discontinuous changes of energy and momentum occur

 during an observation, argued Bohr, does "not prevent us from ascribing accurate val-
 ues to the space-time co-ordinate, as well as to the momentum-energy components
 before and after the process".53 In Heisenberg's view, apart from instruments and
 their unavoidable disturbance on the observed objects and discontinuous changes of
 dynamic variables, we could also imagine a world in which classical particles moved
 along defined trajectories and where the ordinary notion of causality is still valid.
 These would be legitimate curiosities dismissed however by Heisenberg as nothing
 but "fruitless and senseless" speculation. For Bohr this was instead the true core of

 52 "In these formulae [Ex = /A. =h] the two notions of light and also of matter enter in sharp contrast.
 While energy and momentum are associated with the concept of particles, and hence may be characterized
 according to the classical point of view by definite space-time co-ordinates, the period of vibration and
 the wave-length refer to a plane harmonic wave train of unlimited extent in space and time", Bohr 1928b,
 p. 581.

 53 Ibid., p. 583.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 605

 the problem of atomic physics, which he was to try to resolve with the notion of
 complementarity.

 2.3 A lesson from a failure

 'Anschaulichen'and 'Anchaulichkeit' are terms used often in the writings and discus-

 sions of those months. Anschaulichen was the requirement that Heisenberg intended

 to restore to quantum mechanics showing the limitations that mathematical formulae
 imposed on the use of 'classical' concepts. Moreover, said term of clear program-
 matic aim present in the title of the Zeitschrift fiir Physik paper, was a challenge to

 Schrodinger, who had built a large part of his scientific and academic success precisely

 on the "populare Anchaulichkeit" of his wave mechanics. Beyond familiar mathemati-

 cal concepts and computational tools that could be easily mastered by the vast majority

 of physicists, Heisenberg saw nothing physically interesting in Schrodinger's work.54

 On the other hand, Schrodinger was not to be outdone, stating proudly that his work

 had eliminated the irrationality of quantum jumps and wiped out matrix mechanics,
 a mathematical scheme that we saw he found alarming for his "Abstraktheit" and
 repulsive for his "Unanschaulichkeit". Always in relation to the word 'anschaulich'

 Heisenberg confided to Pauli that there still remained significant differences of taste

 (Geschmacksunterschiede) between him and Bohr, despite the agreement reached for

 the publication of the uncertainty paper.55 Bohr did not think it a matter of different

 philosophical inclination, but rather something deeper on the theoretical and concep-

 tual ground concerning the role that it was necessary to ascribe to Schrodinger's new

 theory; in fact he pointed out to Einstein that "... it seems to me instructive always to

 keep in mind how indispensable are the concepts of the continuous field theory in the
 present stage of science".56

 The letter written to Einstein on 13 April 1927 marked in some way the
 Danish physicist's return on the main scene of theoretical debate: ultimately he should

 be grateful to Heisenberg for having offered him, albeit indirectly, that opportunity.

 Bohr had been absent from said scene for over 2 years, ever since-as he had learned

 from Born-news started circulating about the results of the Bothe-Geiger experiment

 "which has apparently turned out in favor of light quanta" 57 That experiment proved,

 beyond any reasonable doubt, that in the scattering a la Compton there is a coupling
 (or time coincidence) between the recoiling electron and the diffused gamma ray.
 An experimental result that dramatically contradicted the hypothesis put forth a few

 months earlier by Bohr, Kramers and Slater on the purely statistical validity of the

 54 Schrodinger's wave mechanics had caused immediate interest within the scientific community. Arnold
 Sommerfeld and Wilhelm Wien invited him to hold two conferences in Munich at the end of July 1 926.
 Heisenberg would not miss the event and having listened to Schrodinger illustrating the new results of the
 wave mechanics intervened in the debate by declaring a deep skepticism for a theory that was not able to
 account for many experimental results. But in a letter a few days later (28 July) to Jordan he admitted that
 "the mathematics of Schrodinger represents great progress".

 55 Heisenberg to Pauli, 16 May 1927, cit.

 56 Bohr to Einstein, 13 April 1927, CW6 23.

 57 Born to Bohr, 15 January 1925, CW5 302-304.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 606 S. Petruccioli

 conservation laws, or rather the non-applicability of said laws to individual physical

 processes. And justifiably, wrote Born, "Einstein was triumphant".58

 In the article written in 1924 in collaboration with Kramers and the young Ameri-

 can physicist John Slater, Bohr had introduced a new quantum theory of radiation that

 would allow "to arrive at a consistent description of optical phenomena by connecting

 the discontinuous effects occurring in atoms with the continuous radiation field in a

 somewhat different manner from what is usually done".59 These few words contain the

 announcement of a breakthrough: the contrast between continuity and discontinuity

 was no longer an insurmountable obstacle to the formulation of a coherent theory and,

 most importantly, it seemed to open the way to finally getting "a picture as regards the

 time-spatial occurrence of the various transitions processes on which the observations

 of the optical phenomena ultimately depend".60 However Bohr thought it was neces-
 sary to overcome the previous model-like approach to the atom in order to consider

 the connection between radiation field and atomic system in a totally different way
 from the one followed hitherto. Here the correspondence principle came into play

 since, according to the new formulation contained in the conference held by Bohr in
 September 1923 at the British Association Meeting in Liverpool,61 it would allow
 "comparing the reaction of an atom on a field with the reaction on such a field which,

 according to the classical theory of electrodynamics, should be expected from a set of

 'virtual' harmonic oscillators with those [concerning] the various possible transitions
 between stationary states". 62

 This kind of comparison was contained in two new hypotheses. First, it was stated

 that an atom, even when in a stationary state, is able to "communicate continually with

 other atoms through a time-spatial mechanism which is virtually equivalent with the

 field of radiation which on the classical theory would originate from the virtual har-

 monic oscillators corresponding to the various possible transitions to other stationary

 states".63 Secondly, it was recognized that the transition processes in a given atom,
 as well as those that occur in atoms with which it is in mutual communication, are

 governed "by probability laws which are analogous to those which in Einstein's theory

 hold for the induced transitions between stationary states when illuminated by radia-

 tion".64 There are two keywords that shed some light on propositions clearly distant

 from the usual theoretical standards, 'correspondence' and 'probability'. In the first

 58 Ibid.

 59 Bohr et al. (1924, p. 786).

 60 Ibid., p. 791.

 61 In light of the correspondence principle Bohr took the opportunity to reformulate the second postulate

 of the theory, and where it had so far been impossible to ascribe the nature of the radiation to motions within

 the atom, he now argued that "a process of transition between two stationary states can be accompanied
 by the emission of electromagnetic radiation, which will have the same properties as that which would be

 send out according to the classical theory from an electrified particle executing a harmonic vibration with
 constant frequency" Bohr (1923).

 62 Bohret al. (1924, pp. 789-790).

 63 Ibid., p. 790.

 64 Ibid., p. 791 . The second assumption referred explicitly to those probabilistic considerations with which
 Einstein, in 1917, had obtained a new derivation of the Planckian formula of thermal radiation from the

 definition of the probabilities associated with possible quantum transitions, Einstein (1917).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 607

 case, the concept of correspondence provides some logical relationship between two

 theoretical terms that, although both essential for the understanding of atomic pro-

 cesses, are in striking contrast with each other: on one hand, the 'virtual' oscillators,

 the systems of electric charges vibrating at the frequencies characteristic of the pro-

 cesses of emission and absorption of radiation and, on the other, the stationary states

 endowed with a hypothetical stability in which the atom is located both before and

 after each radiation process. In the second case, the concept of probability implies the

 impossibility in the individual processes of some causal connection between radiation
 and motion of charges within the atom, so that illumination would only 'act' on an
 atomic event through a probabilistic mechanism.

 The model of virtual oscillators therefore contains the possibility of providing a

 'classical' description of the interaction between radiation and matter; in fact there

 are systems of virtual charges in it which oscillate at the frequencies of the permitted

 transitions from a given state and associated virtual fields that ensure communication
 between an atomic system and the other, 'intervening' on the probability of occur-

 rence of a given radiative process. But the price to be paid for this result is particularly
 high and likely to assail the very foundations of classical physics. The only way to
 reconcile this space-time description with the reality of individual processes governed
 by probability laws is in fact the abandonment of "any attempt at a causal connec-
 tion between the transition in distant atoms, and especially a direct application of the

 principles of conservation of energy and momentum, so characteristic for the classical

 theories".65 The validity of such principles, even while apparently supported by a very

 large experimental evidence, could only be, according to the authors, the outcome of

 a statistical average over a large number of individual events for each one of which,

 however, those principles are not strictly satisfied.

 The model therefore implied the violation of the conservation laws and undermined

 the concept of causality, but, the article concluded, this seems to be "the only consistent

 way of describing the interaction between radiation and atoms by a theory involving
 probability considerations".66 It was not an epistemological stretch, but the logical
 consequence of the unusual relationship of correspondence that Bohr had established
 between the new atomic model, founded on the virtual oscillator concept, and the
 observable properties of quantum objects. That model was based on the assumption
 that transitions, or, to use a more appropriate language to the model, the transition

 from a system of oscillators to another was a probabilistic process, and also that the
 fields generated by the oscillators were the ones that determined their probability;
 indeed, with such limitations, it is absolutely true that the model was able to provide
 a space-time picture of the interaction between radiation and matter.

 Bohr had abandoned the mechanical model of the atom and newly formulated the
 correspondence principle, no longer associating the occurrence of a radiative process
 to the existence of a given harmonic frequency of the electron motion.67 The concepts

 65 Bohr et al. ( 1 924, p. 79 1 ).

 66 Ibid., pp. 792-793.

 67 The correspondence principle is perhaps one of the least clear and therefore most controversial aspects
 of Bohr's theoretical production between 1913 and 1927. Historians have interpreted it in different and

 often conflicting ways, but rarely have they provided convincing versions and above all ones able to clarify

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 608 S. Petruccioli

 of virtual oscillator and virtual field were not accompanied by a new, more effective

 model, able to provide a viewable image of the atomic system. The objective that Bohr

 wished to pursue with this new theoretical hypothesis was of a completely different

 nature. In other words, his was not some odd ploy to salvage a continuous image of the

 radiation field in the presence of a phenomenal reality marked by an unavoidable quan-

 tum discontinuity. It was necessary to deal with the inherent weakness of the quantum

 theory, facing the fact that despite encouraging progress and experimental confirma-

 tions it was still burdened with severe interpretative limits. For example, the theory

 was unable to explain any part of the mechanism underlying the interaction between

 radiation and matter and moreover the meaning of the very concept of stationary state

 remained shrouded in the thickest of mysteries - a sort of 'waiting place' between one

 process of interaction and another, to use Bohr's own words. The new theory seemed

 to disclose an important perspective by allowing to state that if in reality there were
 a mechanism corresponding to an electromagnetic field, or in other words if it were

 possible to give a space-time description of the interaction between radiation and mat-

 ter, then the model of virtual oscillators and the principle of correspondence would

 show, even if in total ignorance of the nature of that mechanism, which principles of

 conservation must be violated and also that we should impose strong restrictions on

 the use of the category of causality. This is a scientific statement that had a clearly

 falsifiable content for Bohr and not just for him.

 Bohr was right to consider it thus, but perhaps at first he expected the results of the

 experiments not to be so ungenerous with his theory by showing, as both Bothe-Geiger
 and Compton-Simon had done, the absolute lack of grounds of the expected viola-
 tion of the conservation principles.68 The great majority of physicists read the results
 of those experiments as a final sentence against the continuous image of radiation,
 which Bohr would persist in defending even at the cost of renouncing the conserva-
 tion laws, also as strong evidence in support of Einstein's idea of light quanta. The
 undisputed authority of the Danish physicist within the international scientific com-

 munity seemed to be faltering under the weight of a sensational theoretical failure.

 But as it turned out, in his answer to Geiger Bohr preferred to emphasize that the aim

 of this work - certainly not a "completed theory" - was mainly an endeavor to attain
 the greatest possible applicability of classical concepts. To Geiger these words may
 likely have seemed as a humanly enough attempt to mitigate the extent of his defeat.
 And so must have thought those physicists who had gone through the frustration of

 trying to decipher the meaning of a theory speaking of virtual entities, of systems that

 exchange information without energy transport, of strange probabilistic mechanisms
 and of generic correspondence relationships.69

 Footnote 67 continued

 its fundamental role in the construction of quantum mechanics. A role, moreover, that was explicitly recog-
 nized by the protagonists of those events, Kramers. Heisenberg. Born and of course Bohr himself. To this
 subject I dedicated my essay on atoms, metaphors and paradoxes, with an interpretation of that principle
 that attempts to restore a comprehensible image of an otherwise unintelligible mosaic, Petruccioli (2006).

 68 Bothe and Geiger (1925) ;Compton and Simon (1925).

 69 Even Bohr's closest collaborators had been mystified by his theoretical turning point and by his use of
 completely unconventional concepts. Even before he had read the article Pauli wrote to Bohr: "I laughed a
 little (you will certainly forgive me for that) about your warm recommendation of the words 'communicate'

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 609

 Actually, with those words Bohr was disguising no embarrassment; indeed, he
 revealed with great intellectual honesty which lesson was to be learned from the

 results of that experiment. Nature had not expressed itself in favor of a corpuscular

 image of radiation. Rather, it showed the limits of applicability of classical concepts

 for the first time. In the microscopic world, characterized by discontinuous processes,

 the space-time description of events forbids any attempt to apply the conservation

 principles. In other words, Bohr understood through the theory of virtual oscillators,

 that the concepts of space and time were in conflict with the concepts of energy and

 momentum, or rather that said concepts could not be used simultaneously to describe

 the interaction processes between radiation and matter as in classical physics. Appar-
 ently, the dual nature of radiation was not destined to crystallize in an insuperable
 contradiction paralyzing quantum theory. Instead, dualism produced paradoxes that

 would show up quite clearly, if only it were grasped that they arose from an incorrect
 application of classical concepts in the context of quantum processes.70 It was an
 important clue that Bohr was to exploit in the following months in light of the devel-
 opments of matrix mechanics and of Schrodinger's wave mechanics, and especially
 after the experimental confirmation of Louis de Broglie's wave conception of matter.

 3 [10-7-1927]?

 3.1 The conceptual framework

 After the above necessary survey of the historical and theoretical context in which
 Niels Bohr's 1926-1927 work was set, we can go back to the mss26, attempting first
 of all to find some kind of logical thread between those scattered and apparently
 disorganized notes. Let us leave the third sheet aside for the moment.

 In the first two items, Bohr asserts as an axiom of quantum theory the central
 role played by classical concepts, as well as their insuperable role as elements of a
 language that allows us to 'read' microscopic world phenomena and to collect the

 information from which to formulate any possible interpretation. But those concepts,
 he says, besides being the lexicon of physics, have the peculiarity of being defined
 only in respect of space-time images; in other words, they can take on a clear meaning

 provided that they are consistent with a space-time description method of events in

 Footnote 69 continued

 and 'virtual'. [...] On the basis of [my] knowledge of these two words [...] I have tried to guess what your
 paper may deal with. But I have not succeeded", Pauli to Bohr, 21 February 1924, WB 146.

 70 During a long interview with Thomas Kuhn, Heisenberg focused on a distinction he deemed essential in

 the evolution of Bohr's thought, between 'inconsistency' and 'paradox'. Regarding the conflict that existed
 between quantum mechanics and classical physics, he noted: "Of course, this paradoxical situation looks
 like inconsistency, and it was very difficult to understand or to realize that one could have a theory which
 was completely consistent and at the same time contained all the paradoxes. [. . .] On the other hand, in the

 course of the development, Bohr realized that an inconsistency is something still much worse that a paradox
 because inconsistency means that you talk nonsense-that you do not know what you are talking about.
 A paradox may be very disagreeable but still you can make it work. An inconsistency can never be made
 to work", Interview to Werner Heisenberg by Thomas S. Kuhn, cit.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 610 S. Petruccioli

 the physical world. ["All information about atoms expressed in classical concepts /
 All classical concepts defined through space-time pictures".71]

 From the beginning - and we are at the third item - quantum theory has had to

 deal with a bitter and apparently insurmountable conflict inherent to the above axiom,

 keeping the use of space-time images limited to local situations (in Danish Bohr speaks

 of "stykkevis Brug") with wide approximation margins. This is because Planck's con-

 stant appears in all fundamental relationships of quantum physics, essential to ensure

 the validity of conservation laws even in microscopic processes.

 In the next item, a total of 13 handwritten lines, Bohr summarizes his research

 program as follows: (a) the recognition that between the space-time images and quan-
 tum laws only non-continuous and statistical connections may be established - as
 it was effectively contained both in the postulates of quantum theory for hydrogen
 and in Einstein's derivation of the so-called Planckian law of black body radiation;
 (b) the formulation of the correspondence principle as a consequence of the recogni-

 tion of an important numerical coincidence between classical and quantum theory in

 the high quantum numbers area in which "in statistical applications one may disre-

 gard the discontinuous element"; finally, (c) the failure of the project, supported by
 the correspondence principle, aimed at achieving a quantitative treatment of atomic

 phenomena based on space-time images. In the latter case, the reference to the fields

 and virtual oscillators and to the far from exciting results of the Bohr, Kramers and

 Slater theory is more than a mere coincidence. At least 12 months had passed since he

 had written to Geiger that that theory was primarily an "endeavor to attain the greatest
 possible applicability of the classical concepts" and that several evidence seemed to
 "exclude the retention of the ordinary space-time description of phenomena". Bohr
 now saw the failure of the BKS theory taking a clearer meaning, allowing him to
 dispel any doubts. "The theory exhibited a duality when one considered on the one
 hand the superposition principle and on the other hand the conservation of energy

 and momentum".72 The incompatibility between the classical image of the wave field

 and the laws of conservation in individual processes, as demonstrated by irrefutable

 empirical evidence, did not share the fate of a particular model, nor was it the result

 of an obstinate defense of the classical image of radiation. According to Bohr, it was

 rather an unavoidable feature of the nature of any quantum object.

 The first sheet of mss26 ends with a statement that completes the initial postu-

 late. If classical concepts are and remain the language with which we can describe our

 experiences and give meaning to information gathered from our experimental devices,
 the quantum world and Planck's constant forces us to acknowledge the existence of
 "complementary aspects of experiences that cannot be united into a space-time picture

 based on the classical theories".73 For the first time, the notion of 'complementarity'

 is mentioned in Bohr's writing.

 Apart from mathematical formulae, which could also have been inserted in the text

 at a later time, the few lines collected in the second sheet contain three statements,

 71 CW6 61.

 72 Ibid.

 73 Ibid.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 61 1

 the last one of which is of the utmost importance. First, Bohr returns to the
 conflict that exists among the space-time description models typical of classical phys-

 ics and quantum phenomena due to the contrast between the concepts of wave theory

 of radiation and the hypothesis of light quanta: "Light waves require time for their
 definition"; "Particles must change velocity rapidly" and "Light quantum cannot be

 made sufficiently small". Secondly, de Broglie's assumption of wave matter produced

 a radical change in the interpretative framework since it extended dualism, hitherto
 confined to discussions about the nature of radiation and the atom's radiative behavior,

 to the whole quantum world. Even a material particle, an electron, can be described

 "by superposition of waves", and the same relations introduced for light quanta apply
 to it. In addition to de Broglie, only two names appear in the manuscript: Einstein,
 without any comment, but probably intended as a reference to his 1924 article74 in

 which, in order to explain the terms of a formula which governs the fluctuations of a

 Bose gas, he suggested that the cavity be filled with standing waves. The second name
 is obviously Clinton Davisson. The manuscript reads literally: "Change with wave
 theory of matter. De Broglie. Einstein. Confirmation by Davidson [sic]".15

 The mss26 concludes with a statement which we shall comment in the last para-

 graph, after having dispelled any and all nodes connected to the document's dating.

 4 The third sheet

 As mentioned above the mss26, archived in the 'Como lecture II' folder, consists
 of three sheets, the last one of which is undated. A brief examination of the text

 is enough to realize that this third sheet is an independent document; furthermore,
 there are reasons to believe that it was not written at the same time as the preceding

 two pages, such and so many are the differences - even formal ones - between them
 (a graphology analysis could support this claim). My opinion is based mainly on the
 content and sequence of topics treated by Bohr, always in form of notes. The sequence

 of items is almost identical with that of the first page of mss26. Reference is made to

 the essential use of classical concepts, to their definition in space and time, to the diffi-

 culty of a classical space-time description in the quantum context, to the formulation

 of the correspondence principle and to the outcome of the theory of virtual oscillators

 with the asserted statistical validity of the principle of conservation of energy and so

 on. I don't know the reasons that led the editors of Bohr's works to place such clearly

 different manuscripts together, nor do I understand J0rgen Kalckar's reasoning in his

 decision to publish them jointly in volume 6 of the Collected Works , thus implicitly
 giving credence to the thesis that they could be a single document. But there can be
 no doubt as to the papers' lack of logical connection, and in light of the quotation of
 Heisenberg's investigation on the conditions for measurements, the third sheet may
 quite likely be traced back to the early months of 1927.

 74 Einstein (1924). After having read in December the These of de Broglie, Einstein returned to the subject
 with a second article with the same title, Einstein (1925). In the context of his discussion on the interference

 term in the energy-fluctuation formula, Einstein examined the de Broglie hypothesis in detail in which he
 saw much more than "merely an analogy".

 75 CW6 62.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 612 S. Petruccioli

 4. 1 Comparison with the other documents

 Before tackling the enigma associated with the naming of American physicist
 Clinton Davisson in mss26, we should delve further into the texts to see whether

 or not there is a congruence with the other three documents written by Bohr from June

 to October 13, 1927. According to the new date attributed by Kalckar, the 10 July 1927

 manuscript should be placed sometime immediately after the note written by Bohr for

 Nature , stimulated by the discussion developed in the columns of that same journal
 between Norman Campbell and Pascual Jordan on the philosophical foundations of

 quantum theory; furthermore, it should precede by a few weeks the outline prepared
 for the Como conference (13 September), and the notes for his Solvay Conference
 speech (12 and 13 October). If so, it would seem very odd that only in mss26 - please

 remember that according to Kalckar this is the summer of 1927 - Schrodinger's name

 is completely ignored, the wave theory of matter is associated only with the name of
 de Broglie and above all no explicit reference is made to Heisenberg's uncertainty
 paper, published just over a month before and which had involved Bohr for so long.

 Even harder, if not downright impossible to explain, is the quite different interpretative

 perspective present in these documents; it would rather seem to point towards an evo-

 lution between Bohr's theoretical mss26 and other quoted manuscripts, for which the

 events of those months could not have been irrelevant: the meeting with Schrodinger

 in Copenhagen, the long and exhausting confrontation with Heisenberg and finally, the

 complementarity hypothesis with which he thought to avoid the paradoxes of dualism.

 There are two theoretical premises informing the whole treatment of the three manu-

 scripts dating back to 1927 and that are certainly completely missing from mss26:

 the quantum postulate and the consequent recognition that it is necessary to impose a

 restriction to classical concepts when applying them within a quantum context. The

 quotes of the aforementioned manuscripts speak for themselves.

 In the note written for Nature , after having brought back the well-known fundamen-

 tal difficulties in the description of atomic phenomena based on Planck's discovery

 "to the contrast between the principles underlying the ordinary description of natural

 phenomena and the element of discontinuity characteristic for the quantum theory",

 Bohr claims that "we must be prepared that every concept used in accounting for the
 experimental evidence will have only restricted validity when dealing with atomic
 phenomena".76

 In the manuscript of 1 3 September these concepts are explained further. Bohr speaks

 openly of a postulate that expresses "the essence of the theory": "any atomic process

 open to direct observation involves an essential element of discontinuity or rather indi-

 viduality completely foreign to the classical idea and symbolized by Planck's quantum
 of action". And picking up a concept he had formulated a few weeks before, he said
 that a "characteristic of the quantum theory is the acknowledgment of a fundamental

 limitation in our classical physical ideas when applied to atomic phenomena".77

 76 Ibid., p. 69.

 77 Ibid., p. 75.

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 6 1 3

 With small and irrelevant changes in terminology, we find those same assumptions

 in the text of 13 October. The essence of the theory may be expressed by the so-called

 quantum postulate "which to any atomic process open to direct observation attributes

 an essential discontinuity or rather individuality completely foreign to the classical

 theories and symbolized by Planck's quantum of action". Furthermore, "the quantum
 theory is characterized by the acknowledgment of a fundamental limitation in the
 classical physical ideas, when applied to atomic phenomena".78

 These premises will gain a more comprehensive treatment in the large article that

 Bohr was to publish in the Supplement of Nature in April 192879, after having bril-
 liantly passed the test of the Solvay Council and above all after successfully demol-

 ishing each of Einstein's subtle objections.

 This paper too starts with the observation that the characteristic feature of quantum

 theory is that classical ideas, concepts and images of mechanics and electrodynamics

 are subject to strong limitations when applied to the study of atomic phenomena. These

 difficulties have weighed on thirty years or so of atomic physics research, keeping it
 caged in what looked increasingly like an insurmountable contradiction whenever
 dealing with phenomena in which Planck's quantum of action intervened in an essen-

 tial way. However, Bohr points out, the evolution of knowledge and the developments

 of quantum theory especially in recent years have emphasized the existence of a par-
 adox: those concepts, the classical ideas subject to major restrictions in the context

 of quantum theory, are still essential and irreplaceable for our interpretation of exper-
 imental material. Concepts like 'position' and 'velocity' are therefore the terms in
 which we can, and probably must, continue to talk about what we observe; they are

 part of that language with which we can decipher, even in the context of micro-physics,

 the answers provided by nature to our experimental research. The origin of this para-

 dox is far from obvious and arises above all from the belief, developed by Bohr after

 the 'catastrophic' outcome of the BKS theory, that it was not necessary to use a new

 conceptual apparatus, but rather to be prepared for "a fundamental revolution in the
 concepts upon which the description of nature has been based until now".80

 As he had done in 1913, when he had attempted to reconcile the radiative properties

 of the atom with the stability of its structure, here too Bohr 'escaped' the paradox by

 placing a postulate at the theory's summit. In 1913, he postulated the mechanical sta-

 bility of atoms against all theoretical evidence, associating a discontinuous variation

 between states to their radiative behavior. The new 1927 postulate finally grasped the

 essence of Planck's great revolution early on in the century, concerning a matter that
 was entirely foreign to classical theory. That postulate was, therefore, the element

 78 Ibid., p. 91.

 79 Nevertheless, Bohr's ideas elicited not a few reserves within the scientific community. The editor of
 Nature became the interpreter of this widespread unease, with a note accompanying the publication of the
 article that ended with this eloquent account: "It must be confessed that the new quantum mechanics is far
 from satisfying the requirements of the layman who seeks to clothe his conceptions in figurative language.

 Indeed, its originators probably hold that such symbolic representation is inherently impossible. It is ear-
 nestly to be hoped that this is not their last word on the subject, and that they may yet be successful in
 expressing the quantum postulate in picturesque form", Bohr (1928b, p. 579).

 80 Bohr (1925), „Nachscrift" (Juli 1925), 155.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 614 S. Petruccioli

 of separation between macro- and micro-physics, stating that any observable atomic

 process is characterized by a discontinuity or essential individuality which finds its

 most effective symbolic expression in Planck's quantum of action.

 The dissimilar nature of the documents obviously makes it impossible to go any

 deeper in the comparative analysis of texts. However, I believe that the evidence gath-

 ered is sufficient to question the legitimacy of the choice made by the book's editor

 to change the date reported by Bohr in his manuscript. Therefore, we need only fit-in

 the last element of the puzzle, trying to explain why Davisson's name appeared in a

 note written by Bohr in July 1926.

 5 A matter of years: Mr. Davisson's puzzle

 "It will be a second honeymoon". With such words of enthusiasm and longing,
 Clinton Davisson announced to his wife Charlotte their imminent trip to England in

 the summer of 1926, for the 94th meeting of the British Association for the Advance-

 ment of Science to be held in Oxford from August 4 to 1 1 1926. After many years of

 intense activity in the laboratories of the Engineering Department at Western Electric

 (the future and famous Bell Telephone Laboratories), Davisson thought of a relaxing

 break, free, among other things, from heavy family burdens. He never imagined this

 trip to be crucial for his research work and for a discovery that would earn him much

 prestige among the international scientific community.

 Clinton Davisson was a brilliant and skillful experimental physicist with an impres-

 sive background. His mentors were three Nobel prize winners: Robert A. Millikan,

 who won the prestigious award in 1923 for his studies on the electron and the photo-
 electric effect, Owen W. Richardson, awarded the Nobel in 1928 for his work on the

 thermionic phenomenon and finally Joseph J. Thomson, Nobel laureate in 1906 for

 his investigations on the conduction of electricity by gases. After receiving his Ph.D.

 at Princeton with Professor Richardson, Davisson had spent the summer of 1913 at
 the prestigious Cavendish Laboratory, directed by Thomson.81

 Davisson was to obtain the Nobel in 1937, in recognition of his "experimental

 discovery of the diffraction of electrons by crystals",82 a brilliant work he had car-

 ried out in collaboration with Lester H. Germer, published on the Physical Review in

 December 1927.83 It was his due for an experimental result that had showed the wave

 nature of matter beyond any doubt, as assumed by Louis de Broglie in 1924 and whose

 81 Cf. Kelly (1962) and Gehrenbeck (1978).

 82 Davisson shared the Nobel Prize with George Paget Thomson who obtained equally significant evidence

 by a different experimental procedure to support the hypothesis of de Broglie waves of matter. At the Nobel
 Lecture, Thomson describes his discovery with these words: "A narrow beam of cathode rays was trans-
 mitted through a thin film of [...] metal. The scattered beam was received on a photographic plate normal
 to the beam, and when developed showed a pattern of rings, recalling optical halos and the Debye-Scherrer
 rings well known in the corresponding experiment with X-rays. An interference phenomenon is at once
 suggested", Thomson (1965, p. 389). Contrary to Davisson, Thomson had used a beam of fast electrons
 produced in a cathode-ray tube and the scheme of his experiment reproduced that Elsasser had tried in
 vain to propose to Franck in Gottingen laboratory. See, also for bibliographic references, Russo (1981)
 especially § 3.

 83 Davisson and Germer (1927b). First results of the experiment, however, were contained in the letter to
 Nature dated 3 March; Davisson and Germer (1927a).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 6 1 5

 solid conceptual foundation lay in the context of Schrodinger's wave mechanics. In
 his Nobel Lecture, Davisson attributed to Walter Elsasser, a young student of physics

 in Gottingen, the merit of having been the first, in 1925, to draw attention to the fact

 that "beams of electrons like beams of light would exhibit the properties of waves,

 that scattered by an appropriate grating they would exhibit diffraction"84 In short, the

 experimental demonstration of diffraction had decreed the physical existence of the
 electron waves. But then, with great intellectual honesty and with considerations that

 had surely been surprising for all those present, he was to reconstruct the genesis of

 his great discovery as follows.

 "It would be pleasant to tell you that no sooner had Elsasser's suggestion appeared
 than the experiments were begun in New York which resulted in a demonstration of

 electron diffraction - pleasanter still to say that the work was begun the day after copies

 of de Broglie's thesis reached America. The true story contains less of perspicacity and
 more of chance. The work actually began in 1919 with the accidental discovery that

 the energy spectrum of secondary electron emission has, as its upper limit, the energy

 of the primary electrons, even for primaries accelerated through hundreds of volts;
 that there is, in fact, an elastic scattering of electrons by metals. Out of this grew an

 investigation of the distribution-in-angle of these elastically scattered electrons. And

 then chance again intervened; it was discovered, purely by accident, that the intensity

 of elastic scattering varies with the orientations of the scattering crystals. Out of this

 grew, quite naturally, an investigation of elastic scattering by a single crystal of pre-
 determined orientation. The initiation of this phase of the work occurred in 1925, the

 year following the publication of de Broglie's thesis, the year preceding the first great

 developments in the wave mechanics. Thus the New York experiment was not , at its

 inception , a test of the wave theory. Only in the summer of 1926, after I had discussed

 the investigation in England with Richardson, Born, Franck and others, did it take on
 this character".85

 It was no affectation of modesty. The story was really witness to an incredible
 sequence of fortuitous events, and some accidents did take Davisson to success as if
 by magic. At the Western Electric laboratories, Davisson carried out research that had

 a declared applicative aim, intended to study the conditions (maximum of reliability,

 long life and the highest electron-emitting efficiency from the cathode) for the full

 utilization of the thermionic high-vacuum tube in the field of telecommunications.

 In particular, in the years following the end of the First World War, his studies had

 been aimed at understanding an effect, the secondary electron emission from the grid

 structure of the vacuum tubes, that was considered responsible for their malfunction-

 ing and unreliability.86 As chance had it, a tube exploded during an experiment and
 the sample of nickel used as a target underwent a series of manipulations to remove
 the impurities. This led to a change in its crystalline structure passing from a random
 configuration to a perfectly regular lattice. Once that the experimental device was
 restored, an entirely new angular distribution of scattered electrons resulted from the

 84 Davisson (1965, p. 390).

 85 Ibid., my emphasis.

 86 Cf. Russo (1981, § 2).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 surface of single crystal nickel: it showed maximum and minimum intensity typical of

 a diffraction pattern (the so-called quantum bumps), absolutely inexplicable according
 to Davisson's own atomic model.87

 As Davisson recalled, there followed years of intense work in the laboratory with

 complex and progressive refinements of the experimental device and with equally
 accurate variations in the observation conditions. Because of this unusual laboratory

 procedure some 'anomalies' previously observed in experiments that Davisson had
 conducted in collaboration with his research assistant Charles H. Kunsman were con-

 616 S. Petruccioli

 firmed; in April 1923, the Physical Review had published their full-bodied article on

 "The scattering of low speed electrons by platinum and magnesium".88 When using a

 platinum target, measurements revealed a pattern for which the authors simply stated

 that "the means of analyzing distribution curves in terms of the present theory are not

 sufficiently developed to permit of a quantitative consideration of pattern as complex

 as these exhibited by platinum". Despite the favors of chance, it was really like groping
 in the dark.

 Across the ocean, in the heart of Mitteleurope, at the Faculty of physics in Gottin-

 gen, ideas were nevertheless a little clearer, but unknown to Davisson very heated
 discussions were developing around his research. Or so it seems according to the

 reconstructions made by the main players of the time decades later: Max Born, James
 Franck, Friedrich Hund and Walter Elsasser. We have, inter alia , three reconstructions

 of the same 1925 events, contained in the personal interviews collected in 1962 by

 Thomas Kuhn and John Heilbron: 29 May with Walter Elsasser at the Scripps Institute

 of Oceanography in La Jolla, California, 12 July with James Franck in Falmouth, Mas-

 sachusetts, and finally 17 October with Max Born, and the participation of Friedrich
 Hund,89 at Bad Pyrmont in West Germany. With the exception of some obvious and

 gross loss of memory affecting mostly Elsasser's account,90 despite the diversity of

 87 Davisson (1923).

 88 Davisson and Kunsman (1923).

 89 Friedrich Hund studied in Gottingen where he received his PhD in 1922. He remained there until 1926,

 when he moved to Copenhagen. Born, who along with Franck was one of his teachers, so wrote to Bohr,
 "Now I still have [a] request for you. My assistant Dr. Hund has a great desire to spend some time at your
 Institute, and I think nothing could be more beneficial for his training as a period spent under your influence.
 [...] So I thought I'd send Hund to Copenhagen for six months next summer, with a Rockefeller grant, if
 you are willing to receive him at the Institute. As to Hund's character, Heisenberg can inform you better
 than I can, in fact the two are close friends. Let me just tell you that Hund is the perfect assistant, always
 available, able, energetic, of ready intelligence and remarkable talent. On the scientific level he is not up
 to Heisenberg's-that would be unthinkable-but he is a person of great acumen and critical thinking, and a
 vast knowledge" Born to Bohr, 10 October 1925, in CW5 31 1-313: 313.

 90 From the oral history transcript of Elsasser it is sufficient to mention two striking errors. First, referring
 to the article by Davisson and Kunsman (1923) he speaks of "a little paper". Actually, the memoir of the
 two American physicists is a broad and thorough study, with a detailed description of the device and the
 experimental procedures used and accompanied by drawings and charts, occupying 1 7 pages of the Physical
 Review. Secondly Elsasser said to have come to Gottingen in 1921, i.e., at the age of 17. But as Harry Rubin
 documented in detail-Rubin (1995)-Elsasser enrolled in 1922 at the University of Heidelberg where Nobel

 Prize Phillip Lenard taught at the time, famous supporter of the Nazi ideology and openly anti-Semitic;
 in 1923, Jewish Elsasser moved to the University of Munich to the school by Wilhelm Wien and Arnold
 Sommerfeld; only at the beginning of 1925, again due to political and racial turbulence, did he move to the

 safer University of Gottingen.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 6 1 7

 mentioned details - quite reasonable at a distance of about 37 years from the events -

 it is possible to achieve, thanks to the objective documentary evidence, a credible and

 accepted reconstruction. Apart from some clarification that will be introduced later,
 it is however possible to take Max Born's testimony as a fully reliable basis of how

 things must have gone within the rooms of the Faculty of physics in Gottingen.

 The discussion was introduced by Friedrich Hund who, urged by Kuhn, pointed

 out that in talking over the anomalies highlighted by the so-called Ramsauer effect91

 it had been Franck himself, at the time holding the chair of experimental physics in

 Gottingen, who had grasped within it the first indications for electron waves. And this
 is where Born's account begun.

 "The first indication of the waves came from a letter I got from Einstein. And it
 was quite a short letter. I haven't got it anymore, but I remember he wrote, "I am
 quite excited about a paper by a young fellow in Paris, de Broglie, and about waves
 which correspond to particles in the same way as photons correspond to the waves in
 optics. And you must read it". And now it wasn't so easy to get it from Paris, so at
 last I wrote to de Broglie. I got the thesis with his own dedication-but I have given

 it with my library to America. And then I tried to read it, and it was very impressive.

 But I didn't think about how to verify it experimentally at all. I thought that it was

 only abstract theory - an abstract idea. But this consideration that to the hn of Planck
 belonged also an 'h' times momentum was so convincing. And then came a letter

 from Davisson. He sent me a letter with some photographs of deflection experiments

 of electrons by Nickel, I think, as far as I remember. And there were diagrams which

 showed anomalous maxima in different directions. And I looked at it, and I thought,

 well, that's not very remarkable such a crystalline lattice, and in different directions

 there are different forces so why shouldn't there be such anomalies. I showed it then
 a week later to Franck, and I told Franck about this letter from Einstein. And Franck

 became very worried and said, "Now I don't believe these are just responses from
 different forces. Don't you remember what you have told me about de Broglie's paper
 which you learned of from Einstein?" And then he sat down and combined these
 things, and he said, "Well I should like to try". And we had hours of discussion on

 how one could find a simple criterion, and then at last quite simply we hit on the idea

 of the connection between momentum and reciprocal wave length. And I made quite

 a rough estimate in my mind and said to Franck, "It seems to be in the right order of

 magnitude". "Then give it one of your boys" he said. I said, "I have none now; we are

 all busy". And then Franck came to me the next day and said, "Oh, I have one I want to

 get rid of, and he's the right man for it". That was Elsasser. He was an experimentalist,
 but Franck was always exasperated about his inability to tackle simple experimental
 things. And so he wanted to shift him to me. I didn't know him, but when he came
 to me, I found him a very nice and attractive fellow and very clever. So I suggested
 to him this problem. And I said I had quite a crude estimate and thought it might be

 91 In studying the process of diffusion of slow electrons passing through a gas Carl Ramsauer focused
 on a non-justifiable behavior in the light of the classic model of description in which electrons are treated
 as point-like particles: Ramsauer (1921). Hund, as recalled in his interview with Kuhn, had discussed the
 results of the Ramsauer experiments in his doctoral thesis attained at Gottingen in 1922; in Interview to
 Max Born by Thomas S. Kuhn, on 17 October 1962, AIR

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 618 S. Petruccioli

 right and that he would have great success if this was right. And in a very short time,

 he got this result. It was, I think, the first experimental verification of de Broglie".92

 It seems that it was Franck, therefore, who read in the strange graphics that

 Davisson had sent to Born not the consequence of the distribution of forces within

 the crystal lattice of the metal used as target, but a clue to the wave properties of mat-

 ter. And it follows that it had been Franck who connected de Broglie's revolutionary

 hypothesis to the incomprehensible pattern of the distribution of the scattered electrons

 discovered in a distant General Electric lab. All of this took place in 1925, i.e., some

 months before the publication of Schrodinger's first article on wave mechanics. Born

 and Franck agree in recognizing the important role played by Elsasser in the whole

 story, since he quickly found confirmation of the suggestions of both his 'teachers'

 and handed in this result in a very short note that was submitted for publication to

 Die Naturwissenschafteri 93 Elsasser's own account, although different in claiming for
 completely understandable reasons a different and much less other-directed route94,

 does not alter the course of events in any substantial way. It is true that Elsasser was

 not able to translate his intuition into a workable experiment in Franck's laboratory,

 because of his young age, and because, as Franck noted, "he was not gifted to do exper-

 iments"95, he was more theoretically minded. One could enrich the Born account with

 the contribution made by Sommerfeld during his visit to Gottingen96; or with the
 role played by Einstein in the decision of the magazine to publish the brief note of

 92 Ibid.

 93 Elsasser (1925). "Even for the interference seems there are data obtained in an experiment of Davisson
 and Kunsman [Phys. Rev., 22, 243, 1923], in which it is investigated the angular distribution of electrons
 which were reflected on a plate of platinum. Were found several maxima of intensity that, increasing the

 speed of electrons, went in the direction that it is expected according to the equation. [X = h/mv ], when

 we consider the maximum values as a diffraction pattern in very similar way to an optical lattice. If you put

 as a constant of the crystal lattice the value of platinum and if you consider, because of the relatively low

 penetration depth of the electrons, a grid in first approximation plane, on the basis of this rough calculation

 had been obtained for the wave-length values which coincide with those calculated on the basis of the eq.
 [X = h/mv] to second order (almost 100%)".

 94 See the Interview of Walter Elsasser by John L. Heilbron, on 29 May, 1962, AIP

 95 Interview to James Franck by Thomas S. Kuhn, on 12 July, 1962, AIP.

 96 Franck notes in his reconstruction that Elsasser told him one day that he wanted to carry out experimental
 work that had been inspired by reading an article by Einstein in which he spoke of the wave theory of de
 Broglie. "And he said, "Yes, it would be nice if one could show that an electron really has wave character."
 And I had just read the day before that paper of Davisson and what do you say his name is? Kunsman. And
 when he said that to me, I said, "Yes, it would be. But how about if I tell you that it has been done. Only
 the authors don't know it. Namely, in that paper of Davisson and Kunsman they have treated their metal
 surface in such a way that it became crystalline. And therefore I am sure that what they have done for us
 is to have studied just the wave character of electrons without knowing what it is." Then Sommerfeld paid
 us a visit. [...] Also Sommerfeld said, "Look at that [Davisson and Kunsman] paper and see whether you
 can make some sense of it." [. . .] Anyway, that paper interested also Sommerfeld very much. [. . .] And then
 when Elsasser came, it clicked in my mind that it would be that. And I said, "Now Elsasser, the best thing

 to do is make some experiments, and you make these experiments. [. . .] Well, we started those experiments,

 but it turned out after four weeks that it was hopeless for him to make such experiments. He was not gifted
 to do experiments. So I told him, "Now let's see. You came with this idea of electrons and waves, and I

 showed you this paper of these men. Now you write a little note to the Naturwissenschafteri and explain the
 situation and what they did"". Ibid.

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 6 1 9

 Elsasser's97; or even with the letter sent from Born to Einstein on 15 July in which,

 even among legitimate reservations about the considerations "of our Mr Elsasser",

 he stated authoritatively that "the essential part of his idea can be saved, in particu-

 lar concerning the reflection of electrons".98 But nothing could change nor improve

 the certainty that during those months in 1925 confirmation of the de Broglie wave

 hypotheses by Davisson experiments had been found at Gottingen.

 Any remaining doubts could be entirely dispelled by an exceptional witness who

 had been involved at the time in drafting the famous paper on the quantum-theoretical

 reinterpretation of kinematics and mechanics from which matrix mechanics would

 derive. After a brief stay in Copenhagen, Heisenberg had returned to Gottingen in the

 spring of 1925 and in a letter to Pauli, 24 June, informed him of what was happening.

 "Before you take care of my silly work I want to tell you about a funny thing: you know

 about Einstein's new work on the atoms that move according to [the] wave theory? If

 you apply this theory to slow electrons we obtain Ramsauer's curves for noble gases

 ('light scattering in colloidal particles'), or better if you throw slow electrons against a

 crystal lattice a spectrum of 1 . order, of 2. order and so on is obtained, the experiments

 were carried out some time ago [but] I cannot find out by whom [...]. If what I write
 is rubbish, I do not know, it is claimed here [in Gottingen] it was Mr. Elsasser, and I

 almost believe it".99 A few days later, on 29 June, Heisenberg had sent Pauli a post-

 card in which not only was he able to remember the name of authors of experiments
 cited, but he stated: "I consider it possible in all seriousness for both the Ramsauer
 and the Davisson and Kunsman experiments to be explained by Einstein's theory (this
 was Elsasser's only statement), and since I started studying Einstein's work I'm really
 excited about it".100

 The annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science
 began on 4 August 1926, with official ceremonies and the Presidential address given

 by the Prince of Wales. The work of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences section

 began the next day with a most exceptional participation of foreign guests. In fact,

 along with Ernest Rutherford, William Bragg and Alfred Fowler the halls of Oxford
 hosted Niels Bohr, Max Born, James Franck, Manne Siegbahn, Wilhelm Wien and
 Peter Zeeman, all scholars who had been or would be awarded the Nobel Prize. Max

 Born opened the session of 10 August with a lecture on "The Quantum Mechanics of
 Electron Collisions".101 Although the final text of this conference was to appear on
 the 5 March 1927 issue of Nature with a different title, "Physical Aspects of Quan-

 tum Mechanics",102 the heart of the discussion remained the quantum formulation of

 97 In Elsasser's recollection, essentially contained in Elsasser (1978), the role of Born in the whole story
 is completely cut downsized: "Born's statement to an interviewer [...] that he had 'suggested' my note, is
 no doubt a lapse of memory in old age. As a young student in Born's classes, I hardly knew him personally,
 and I had talked with Franck, whom I knew well", ibid., p. 63.

 98 Born to Einstein, 15 July 1925, in Einstein and Born (1969, p. 1 18).

 99 Heisenberg to Pauli, 24 Jun 1925, WB 225-228: 226-227.

 100 Heisenberg to Pauli, 29 Jun 1925, WB 229-230: 229.

 101 British Association for the Advancement of Science, Report of the Ninety-Fourth Meeting , London,
 1926, 340.

 102 Born (1927).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 620 S. Petruccioli

 electron collisions. It had been Elsasser's merit, recognized Born, to show that "the

 theory yields general formulae for the distribution of electrons over the different angles

 of deflexion, that differ in a characteristic way from the results that we should have

 expected classically".103 Assuming then de Broglie's idea that the motion of material

 particles is accompanied by waves allowing, for example, to establish a relationship
 between wave-length and momentum of the particle itself, it could be concluded "that

 the collision of an electron with an atom should give rise to a diffraction" in a com-

 pletely analogous way to that involving a beam of light scattered by small particles.
 It was therefore correct to state that the maximum and minimum intensity that occur

 in different directions due to the collision processes represent the irregularities in the

 distribution of the deflected electrons; a phenomenon that could be interpreted only

 if they are ascribed a wave nature. At this point, Born introduced a comment that
 according to the above must have seemed quite natural to him: "Indications of such
 an effect are given by experiments of Davisson and Kunsman ( Phys . Rev :, 22, 243,
 1923), on the deflection of electrons from metallic surfaces".104 So, one of the most

 successful theoretical physicists of the time, speaking in one of the most prestigious

 forums to an impressively qualified audience recognized publicly that the merit of
 the first confirmation of the validity of the wave view of matter was to be credited to

 Davisson and Kunsman's experimental research. It was August 1926 and the only one

 to be surprised in hearing Born's statement was probably just Clinton Davisson.

 6 The Bohr Uncertainty

 Let's try to summarize the elements highlighted so far. Since the summer of 1925, it

 had been suggested that the data reported in the article that Davisson and Kunsman

 had published in 1923 provided a particularly meaningful empirical evidence in sup-

 port of the wave view of de Broglie's particles of matter. This hypothesis later took
 on the efficacy of a demonstration as the same conclusion had to be evinced in order
 to interpret the 'strange' behavior of electrons as revealed in the so-called Ramsauer

 effect. Everything had been published in a letter sent on 18 July 1925 to the Naturwis-

 senschaften. The author was indeed a young 21 -year-old student, but the letter came

 from Gottingen, certainly one of the most prestigious centers of physical research of
 the time. Moreover, the text had been endorsed by James Franck and Max Born, while
 Einstein himself had been involved in the decision of publishing Walter Elsasser's

 text. With the publication of that letter the interpretation of Davisson's experiment
 ceased to be a privately circulating conclusion among a small group of experts. That

 hypothesis had now been brought to the attention of the scientific community at large

 and suggested the creation of a further experiment that Einstein himself considered to

 be most promising.

 We can still grant J0rgen Kalckar and his brave editorial choice the qualm that

 Bohr may not have been aware of the note published in Naturwissenschaften , or that
 he had not valued it with the necessary attention being distracted by other issues,

 103 Ibid., p. 356.

 104 Ibid.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 621

 just weeks after the blatant experimental falsification of the theory of virtual oscil-
 lators. It would be a very singular circumstance given the very close relationship

 that existed between Gottingen and Copenhagen, as well as the intense scientific col-
 laboration that Bohr had kept in those years with both Franck and Born, who had
 undoubtedly played a key role in connecting Davisson's research to the wave prop-
 erties of matter. But any remaining reservations are dispelled by Bohr's own words,
 contained in an addendum he wrote in those very days that Elsasser's note was being
 drafted.

 On 30 March 1925, Bohr had sent an article to the Zeitschrift jur Physik} 05 con-

 cerning the behavior of atoms during collisions which was obviously affected by the
 conclusions he had reached in the BKS article on the non- validity of the principles

 of conservation in individual physical processes. Although, after the publication of

 Geiger and Bothe on X-ray scattering, "the question of the applicability of the con-
 servation laws appears in a new light"106 compared to what is claimed in the article,

 Bohr decided to publish it anyway, limiting himself to add a large text to the proofs,
 Nachschrift (Juli 1925), 107 whose closing statements leave no room for ambiguity or

 doubt about the direction of Bohr's research. First, Bohr quoted the Ramsauer discov-

 ery which emphasizes the existence of "a different kind of collision effect involving

 a conspicuous deviation from the properties of mechanical models".108 It is therefore

 precisely the study of collision processes to bring up behaviors that seem to decree the
 end of the traditional model-like approach. The discussion became even more explicit
 and assumed a quite general value because the anomalies were not ascribable to any

 particular mechanical model; in fact, shortly after he pointed out that here we are deal-

 ing"with a collision phenomenon for which space-time pictures based on the concepts

 of classical electrodynamics fail in a manner that reminds us of the paradoxes revealed

 in the analysis of the radiation phenomena".109 The point-like particles too exhibited
 properties that fell outside a space-time mode of description based on the concepts
 of classical physics and, surprisingly, even matter is subject to the same paradoxes
 concerning the supposed dual nature of radiation. Bohr quoted the de Broglie Theses
 and Einstein's articles which, by introducing assumptions about the wave nature of

 particles, seemed to him to open new and interesting perspectives towards the over-
 coming of obstacles resulting from the renunciation of space-time pictures. These
 are precisely the same works cited, together with the Ramsauer effect, in Elsasser's
 note.

 Thus Kalcar's main reason for re-dating Bohr's manuscript is no longer valid and

 in the light of the other deductions I have drawn from the above analysis it can be

 105 Bohr (1925).

 106 Ibid., p. 142.

 107 Ibid., pp. 154-157.

 108 Ibid., p. 156. In the same quoted letter, Bohr confessed to Geiger that "recently I have also felt that
 an explanation of collision phenomena, especially Ramsauer's results on the penetration of slow electrons

 through atoms, presents difficulties to our ordinary space-time description of nature similar in kind to those
 presented by simultaneous understanding of interference phenomena and a coupling of change of state of
 separated atoms by radiation", CW5 79.

 109 Ibid., p. 157.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 622 S. Petruccioli

 concluded beyond any reasonable doubt that sheets I and II of mss26 were written by

 Bohr on 10 July 1926. No reasonable argument can compel us to invoke a gross error

 by the author, which would actually also be inexplicable in such a proverbially careful
 and scrupulous scholar.

 "Possibility for space-time description closely connected with conservation the-

 orems. Measurement of energy or momentum with given accuracy implies loss of
 phase relations, which implies impossibility of interference by superposition". This
 item ends the framework outlined by Bohr in his manuscript. This is a surprising
 statement admitting only one interpretation. Bohr spoke of complementary aspects

 of the experience and, as he emphasized in the July 1925 addendum , reality shows

 a complexity that undermines any attempt of bringing it into the typical space-time

 images of classical theories. Having acknowledged that the theoretical framework of

 quantum physics is entirely changed by the formulation of the wave theory of matter,

 and having thus recognized the general failure of classical models of description, Bohr

 said that in the quantum world the "possibility for space-time description" stands in
 a relationship of mutual exclusion "with conservation theorems"; by this he meant
 that in the microscopic world any traditional mode of causal space-time description
 is impossible. The "closely connected" should not mislead: the next sentence clarified
 that the connection in fact entails a mutual exclusion. The more accurate the measure-

 ment of the energy or momentum - a necessary requirement to ensure the validity of

 conservation laws - the greater the impossibility of using the superposition principle

 to obtain the space-time localization of our quantum object, quantum of light or elec-

 tron through a wave train; this is why the conditions to apply to them a space-time

 description do not exist. Any further deduction drawn from these notes could only

 result in a forced interpretation. But keeping only to the bare wording, it seems that
 here are collected in nuce all the issues that Bohr was to develop during 1927, his

 annus mirabilis. In particular, referring to the precision with which certain dynamical

 variables can be measured and the consequences the latter would have on the ability

 to determine the corresponding kinematic quantities, it is not far-fetched to glimpse a

 more than obvious anticipation of that idea of uncertainty in the definition of classical

 concepts that conveys the very essence of the idea of complementarity. Bohr based his

 reasoning on the discontinuity typical of quantum processes, elevating this concept

 to the rank of postulate, but at the same time he grasped the enormous potentialities

 stemming from the existence of a behavior of matter to be interpreted only on the basis

 of wave concepts.

 Were these not the issues at the heart of the endless discussions with Heisenberg

 in the winter of 1927, before an exhausted Bohr decided to leave Copenhagen for
 some rest? Were these not the arguments that he was to use to criticize quite heav-
 ily Heisenberg's uncertainty paper, as soon as he was able to examine it carefully?
 Were these not the arguments with which he had tried to prevent its publication?
 Were these not the arguments used in his letter sent to Einstein in April 1927 in
 which he proposed an alternative derivation of the uncertainty relations to the one

 proposed by Heisenberg? Are there are not, finally, sufficiently well-founded reasons
 to talk about a Bohr uncertainty, and of course of complementarity before uncer-

 tainty?

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Complementarity before uncertainty 623

 References

 Beller, M. 1999. Quantum dialogue. The making of a revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Bohr, N. 1923. The correspondence principle. Report of the British Association for the Advancement of

 Science , Liverpool, 428-429.

 Bohr, N. 1925. Uber die Wirkung von Atomen bei StoBen. Zeitschrift fur Physik 34: 142-157.

 Bohr, N. 1928a. The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Atti del Congresso

 internazionale dei Fisici, 1 1-20 Settembre, Vol. II, 565-588. Bologna: Zanichelli.

 Bohr, N. 1 928b. The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory (with an introductory

 note by the Editors: New problems in quantum theory). Nature 121(Suppl.): 579-590.

 Bohr, N. 1984. Collected works. Vol. 5. The emergence of quantum mechanics ( mainly 1924-1926 ), ed. K.

 Stolzenburg. Amsterdam: NorthHolland.

 Bohr, N. 1985. Collected works. Vol. 6. Foundations of quantum physics I ( 1926-1932 ), ed. J. Kalckar.

 Bohr, N., Kramers, H. A., and Slater, J.C. 1924. The quantum theory of radiation. Philosophical Magazine

 Amsterdam: NorthHolland.

 47: 785-802.

 Born, M. 1927. Physical aspects of quantum mechanics. Nature 1 19: 354-357.
 Bothe, W., and Geiger, H. 1925. Experimentelles zur Theorie von Bohr, Kramers und Slater. Die Natur-

 wissenschaften 13: 440-441.

 Campbell, N.R. 1927. Philosophical foundations of quantum theory. Nature 1 19: 779.
 Cassidy, D. 1992. Uncertainty. The life and science of Werner Heisenberg. New York: Freeman.
 Compton, A.H. 1923. A quantum theory of the scattering of X-rays by light elements. Physical Review 21 :

 Compton, A.H., and Simon, A.W. 1925. Directed quanta of scattered X-rays. Physical Review 26: 289-299.
 Davisson, C.J. 1923. The scattering of electrons by a positive nucleus of limited field. Physical Review 21 :

 Davisson, C.J. 1965. The discovery of electron waves. Nobel Lectures, Physics 1922-1941, 387-394.

 Davisson, C.J., and Kunsman C.H. 1 923. The scattering of low speed electrons by platinum and magnesium.

 Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Company.

 Physical Review 22: 242-258.

 Davisson, C.J., and Germer, L.H. 1927a. The scattering of electrons by single crystal of nickel. Nature 119:

 Davisson, C.J., and Germer, L.H. 1927b. Diffraction of electrons by a crystal of nickel. Physical Review

 Dirac, P. A.M. 1927. Physical interpretation of quantum dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of

 483-502.

 637-649.

 558-560.

 30: 705-740.

 London 113: 621-641.

 267.

 Einstein, A. 1917. Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Physikalische Zeitschrift 18: 121-128.
 Einstein, A. 1924. Quantentheorie des ein atomigen idealen Gases. Berliner Berichte 20 September: 261-

 Einstein, A. 1925. Quantentheorie des ein atomigen idealen Gases. Berliner Berichte 9 February: 3-14.

 Einstein, A., and Born, M. 1969. Brief Wechsel 1916-1955. Munich: Nymphenburger.
 Elsasser, W. 1 925. Bemerkungen zur Quantenmechanik freier Elektronen. Die Naturwissenshaften 13:711.

 Elsasser, W. 1978. Memoirs of a physicist in the atomic age. New York: Science History Publications.
 Gehrenbeck, R.K. 1978. Electron diffraction: fifty year ago. Physics Today 31: 34-41.

 Heisenberg, W. 1 925. Uberquantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer Beziehungen.

 Heisenberg, W. 1927. Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretische Kinematik und Mechanik.

 Zeitschrift fur Physik 33: 879-893.

 Zeitschrift fiir Physik 43: 172-198.

 Jordan, P. 1927. Uber eine neue Begriindung der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift fiir Physik 40: 809-838.
 Kelly, M.J. 1962. Clinton Joseph Davisson 1881-1958. Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy

 of Sciences. New York: Columbia University Press, 51-84.

 Lakatos, I. 1970. Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes. In Criticism and
 the growth of knowledge, ed. I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, 172-198. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press.

 Pauli, W. 1970. Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein , Heisenberg, u. a ., vol. I: 1919-1929,

 ed. A. Hermann, K. von Meyenn and W. F. Weisskopf. New York: Springer.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 624 S. Petruccioli

 Petruccioli, S. 2006. Atoms metaphors and paradoxes. Niels Bohr and the construction of new physics.

 Ramsauer, C. 1921. Uber den Wirkungsquerschnitt der Gasmolekiile gegeniiber langsamen Elektronen.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Annalen der Physik 4:51 3-540.

 Rubin, H. 1995. Walter M. Elsasser 1904-1991. Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sci-

 ences, 103-161. New York: Science History Publications.

 Russo, A. 1 98 1 . Fundamental research at Bell Laboratories: The discovery of electron diffraction. Historical

 Thomson, G. P 1965. Electronic waves. Nobel Lectures, Physics 1922-1941, 397-403. Amsterdam:

 studies in the physical sciences 12: 1 17-160.

 Elsevier Publishing Company.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:17:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

