 

 

 

 

"Continuity and change": representing mass conservation in fluid mechanics
Author(s): Alex D. D. Craik
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 1 (January 2013), pp. 43-80
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23319408
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:05 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:43-80
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0108-7

 "Continuity and change": representing mass
 conservation in fluid mechanics

 Alex D. D. Craik

 Received: 26 May 2012 / Published online: 10 August 2012
 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract The evolution of the equation of mass conservation in fluid mechanics
 is studied. Following early hydraulic approximations, and progress by Daniel and
 Johann Bernoulli, its first expression as a partial differential equation was achieved by

 d'Alembert, and soon given definitive form by Euler. Later reworkings by Lagrange,
 Laplace, Poisson and others advanced the subject, but all based their derivations on
 the conserved mass of a moving fluid particle. Later, Duhamel and Thomson gave a
 simpler derivation, by considering mass flow into and out of a fixed portion of space.

 The later propagation of these derivations in nineteenth-century British textbooks and

 treatises is also examined, including Maxwell's on the kinetic theory of gases.

 1 Introduction

 The phrase "continuity and change" has become a cliche of historical talks and articles,

 but is nowhere more apt than here. This paper considers the various manifestations of
 the so-called "continuity equation" that describes conservation of mass and the con
 tinuity of matter in fluid flows.1 Though several have considered the choice of words
 unfortunate—e.g. Thomson and Tait (1867, p. 144), Batchelor (1967, p. 74)—they

 1 This is quite distinct from the so-called "continuity principle", an expression adopted in, for example,
 (Mach 1919, pp. 140, 490) to denote a rather vague conceptual process of gradual adaptation that may
 lead to new scientific insights. Mach ascribes the origin of such reasoning to Galileo. In a letter of 1739

 to Leonhard Euler, Johann Bernoulli invoked an equally vague "principle of continuity" to assert that fluid
 flows must vary gradually, rather than abruptly: see (Truesdell 1954a, XXXII-XXXIII). It is possible that

 this prompted Euler's use of the same term when he derived the equation of mass conservation.

 Communicated by: Jesper Liitzen.

 A. D. D. Craik (El)

 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews,
 St Andrews KY16 9SS, Scotland, UK
 e-mail: addc@st-and.ac.uk

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44

 A. D. D. Craik

 remain in common use. Leonhard Euler emphasized that his analysis of incompress
 ible fluids excluded motions in which particles interpenetrate one another, and those

 where a portion of fluid is expanded into a larger volume. For the latter, "the continuity

 of the particles [is] violated" and so "individual droplets would separately perform the
 motion." Likewise, in his study of compressible fluids, "both the continuity and the
 impenetrability of the fluid impose a certain limitation ,..."2 Originally, then, "con
 tinuity" did not imply mass conservation, but rather the connectedness of a mass of

 fluid. Only if the fluid remains connected and particles cannot penetrate one another,

 is it possible to express mass conservation by treating the fluid as a continuum.

 Much, of varying style and scholarship, has been written on the historical devel

 opment of fluid mechanics, from earliest up to quite recent times: for instance Dugas
 (1955), Truesdell (1954a, 1955, 1968, 1984), Rouse and Ince (1963), Tokaty (1971),
 Garbrecht (1987), Maffioli (1994), Anderson (1997), Darrigol (2002, 2005), Eckert
 (2006), Simon Calero (2008), Darrigol and Frisch (2008), Grimberg et al. (2008).
 The excellent contributions of Truesdell, Rouse and Ince, Darrigol, and Darrigol and

 Frisch are particularly relevant, as they discuss at some length the historical develop
 ment of the governing equations of motion: Euler''s equations for "ideal" non-viscous

 flow, and the Navier-Stokes equations for viscous flow. These comprise three scalar
 momentum equations and the continuity equation; also, for compressible fluids, an
 equation of state that connects the fluid density to the pressure.3 Though Rouse and

 Ince give a good account of early work on hydraulics, their treatment of more technical
 mathematical developments is less full. Truesdell and Darrigol perceptively discuss
 the development of the concepts of pressure and stress that are essential to the exten
 sion of "Newton's laws" to fluid flows. There, the acceleration of each fluid particle

 must equal the net force per unit mass exerted upon its surface by external pressure
 or stresses, together with the net force acting on its volume due to body forces. The
 effect of the surface forces is expressed by the gradients of pressure or stress at each

 point within the fluid.

 For convenience, we here state the Euler equations of inviscid flow in vector form,

 the first being the momentum equation and the second the continuity equation that is
 the subject of the present paper:

 3v V/7 dp
 — +v-Vv = + F, — + V ■ (pv) = 0.
 31 p 31

 body force per unit mass.

 3 Some authors reserve the name "Euler equation" or "Navier-Stokes equation" for the momentum equa

 tion (in vector form), distinguishing it from the purely kinematic "continuity equation."

 «£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Here, v denotes the velocity vector, p the pressure, p the density, and F any external

 It is too often assumed by historians of science that the equations of fluid flow are

 little more than a routine extension of Newton's laws of particle dynamics. However,

 appreciation of the role of pressure (or, for viscous flows, stress) and of the impor

 tance of the "continuity equation" for long proved elusive. In particular, the continuity

 2 Abstract of Euler (1761), as translated by W. Pauls; and introduction to Euler (1757a), as translated by
 E. Burton and U. Frisch.

 "Continuity and change" 45

 equation that expresses mass conservation provides a kinematic constraint that is an
 essential adjunct to "Newton's laws" when applied to a continuum, but which is absent
 from the individual equations that govern discrete particles as envisaged by Newton,
 as well as from hydrostatics.

 Here, we trace the development of the expression of mass conservation in fluid
 mechanics, from early hydraulics through the seminal works of Daniel and Johann
 Bernoulli, Jean d'Alembert, Leonhard Euler, and Joseph-Louis Lagrange. The best
 historical accounts to date are Truesdell (1954a), Darrigol (2005) and Darrigol and
 Frisch (2008);4 but even they discuss only briefly some derivations of the continuity

 equation, while highlighting others.5 By placing the continuity equation centre stage
 in this paper, rather than as an adjunct to the momentum equations, we aim to give
 a full and balanced view of its various manifestations, and their relationships to one

 another. We also examine the later reception and reworkings by nineteenth-century
 French and British writers. These include a simplified derivation espoused by William
 Thomson and Jean Duhamel (a shift overlooked by historians, though that most famil

 iar to today's fluid dynamicists), and James Clerk Maxwell's reformulation within the

 kinetic theory of gases. But we begin with some modern versions that still reflect the

 alternative modes of derivation used in the past.

 2 Some modern accounts

 We recapitulate the accounts in three well-known mid-twentieth century textbooks:
 Landau and Lifshitz (1959), Batchelor (1967) and Dryden et al. (1956), which of
 course derive from earlier sources.

 Landau and Lifshitz (pp. 1-2) begin by postulating a fixed volume Vq of space,

 containing a mass of fluid f pdV, where p is the fluid density, v is the fluid velocity,
 t is time, and integration is over Vq\

 The mass of fluid flowing in unit time through an element df of the surface
 bounding this volume is pv.df; the magnitude of the vector df is equal to the
 area of the surface element, and its direction is along the [outward] normal...

 The total mass of fluid (lowing out of the volume Vo in unit time is therefore

 j) pv.df,

 where the integration is taken over the whole of the closed surface surrounding

 the volume in question.

 4 The description in Simon Calero (2008) is spoiled by many errors and misprints.

 5 For instance, Darrigol (2005) and Darrigol and Frisch (2008) describe a rather opaque and restricted
 version in spherical polar coordinates found in Alembert (1747), that was missed by Truesdell; but their

 discussion in modernized notation of later derivations by d'Alembert and Euler is less full than is given
 here.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Next, the decrease per unit time in the mass of fluid in the volume Vq can be
 written

 The account in Batchelor (1967, pp. 73-75) is similar, and both authors observe

 where the operator D/Dt denotes the convective time derivative, representing the time
 rate of change following fluid elements. Batchelor further notes that, following the
 changing volume r it) of a given mass of fluid, the above results imply that

 46 A. D. D. Craik

 Equating these two expressions and transforming the surface integral to a volume
 integral "by Green's formula" yields

 3 ,

 "dt I pdV
 ■/'

 /  ^ + div(pv)

 ot

 dV = 0.

 (Here, differentiation under the integral sign is permitted because the volume Vq, and

 so each element d V, is fixed in space.) "Since this equation must hold for any volume,

 the integrand must vanish, i.e.

 This is the equation of continuity."

 ~ + div(pv) = 0. (2.1)
 ot

 that the equation can be rewritten as

 Dp D 3

 1- pV • v = 0, — = 1- v.V

 Dt Dt dt

 where dS denotes the surface element dS of the moving boundary with the direction

 of the outward normal. In the case of an incompressible fluid with constant density p,
 one has both

 dr
 d?  = /«.dS = /

 V • vdr

 Dp
 — = 0 and V.v = 0.
 Dt

 We shall see below that consideration of a moving element of fluid, rather than a fixed

 portion of space through which fluid flows, was key to most early derivations of the

 continuity equation. The latter viewpoint, though mathematically simpler, developed
 much later.

 The derivation in Dryden et al. (1956, pp. 33-35), in a chapter by Murnaghan, is

 very different, using from the outset what is now usually referred to as the "Lagrangian

 formulation".6 In this, individual fluid particles initially situated at points (a, b, c) in

 rectangular Cartesian coordinates are subsequently located at later times t at

 6 Some time before Lagrange, Euler developed such a formulation: see Sect. 7 below.

 *£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On differentiating the first of these velocity components with respect to t, using the

 chain rule, the x-component of acceleration of fluid particles is found to be

 x = x(a, b, c, f); y = y(a, b, c, t); z = z(a, b, c, t);

 "Continuity and change" 47

 and their velocities are

 dx dy dz
 — = u(x, y, z,t), ~ = v(x, y, z, t), — = w(x, y, z, t).
 df at at

 with similar expressions for the y and z components. In vector notation, these are just

 d u 3 u 3 u 3 u 3 u
 — = Km l-w \- w —,
 df 31 dx dy dz

 D\ ( 3
 Dt \dt J

 + v.V v

 d(x,y,z)
 ax = da db dc.
 3(a, b, c)

 in which the convective time-derivative again appears.

 Fluid initially occupying an infinitesimal rectangular volume element da db dc will,

 at later times t, occupy an infinitesimal volume dr (not usually strictly rectangular)

 given by the product of the initial volume and a Jacobian determinant:

 Since the total mass of a portion of fluid remains constant, it follows that

 /pdr = [ p ^ ^da dfrdc = / podadbdc

 J 3(a, b, c) J

 where po denotes the initial density distribution; and, since the initial volume is arbi

 trary, one must have

 d(x,y,z) /0 <Z2)

 This expresses the conservation of mass for each portion of fluid.

 To recover the continuity equation in the form given above, set dpo/dt = 0, since

 po is a function of a, b,c only. This gives

 dp d(x, y, z) + ^_d /d(x, y, z)\ _ Q
 df 3(a,b,c) df \3(a,b,c)

 where

 d fd(x,y,z)\ d{u,y,z) d(x,v,z) d(x,y,w)
 dt \d(a,b,c)J d(a,b,c) 3(a,b,c) d(a,b,c)

 '£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 48 A. D. D. Craik

 On substituting

 3u 3 u dx 3 u 3y 3u dz
 3a dx da dy da 3z da '

 the first Jacobian on the right-hand side reduces to

 and the others reduce similarly. It follows that

 3 (u,y,z) 3 it d(x,y,z)
 3 (a,b,c) dx 3 {a,b,c)'

 du dv 3 w

 3x 3_v dz

 )}  d(*. y,z) _ Q

 d(a,b, c)

 Cancelling the Jacobian yields the continuity equation, bearing in mind that d/dt
 denotes the total (convective) time derivative. The result may be re-expressed, as
 before, in the form

 Clearly, this "Lagrangian" derivation is more technical and less physically-intuitive
 than the former "Eulerian" one.

 For future reference, we also mention a simplified version of the continuity equa
 tion much used in engineering: that, for steady incompressible flow through a curved
 tube (or a "stream tube" consisting of streamlines within a flow), the volumetric rate

 of inflow must equal that of outflow. This is just

 (2.3)

 where S\, S2 denote the cross-sections of the tube at inflow and outflow, and the vector

 dS denotes the element of surface area with direction along the outward normals of
 Si and $2

 In what follows, we retain original notations as far as possible, to avoid anachro

 nisms. In particular, the derivations all predate vector calculus and usually employ
 Cartesian coordinates. This poses a dilemma for historical writers: in Darrigol (2002,
 2005), modern vector and tensor notations are freely used for conciseness and ease

 of understanding; but Truesdell (1954a, 1955) mostly avoids these, while introducing

 some modernizations of the notation of analysis. It can be argued that any changes
 of notation may lead to a distorted view of the original and sometimes conceal real
 difficulties that would have been "obvious" with better notation. For instance, d' Alem

 bert typically used poor notation; and retaining this is essential for a true appreciation

 his work, good and bad. In contrast, Euler's notation is usually limpidly clear; but
 streamlining it, as done in Truesdell (1954a) by using later Jacobian notation, can

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 impart a greater impression of generality than is warranted by the original.7 Similarly,
 Lagrange's sometimes cavalier proliferation and manipulation of differential symbols
 would be concealed by attempts at modernization. Even partial and ordinary differen
 tiation were not distinguished by the now standard use of d/dx and A/Ax until quite

 "Continuity and change" 49

 late in the nineteenth century.

 3 Hydraulic beginnings

 Archimedes (c.287-212 BCE) is rightly credited with the first theoretical advances in

 hydrostatics in his treatise On Floating Bodies. But sound progress in understanding
 fluid motion—as distinct from incorrect philosophical speculations—developed only

 much later. Ingenious experiments involving hydraulics and pneumatics are described
 in the Pneumatics of Heron of Alexandria (fl. c.150 BCE). Also, Heron's discussion

 of the flow from a spring in his Dioptra contains, according to Rouse and Ince (1963,
 p. 21): "the earliest known expression of the relationship between cross-sectional
 area, velocity, volume, and time." In contrast, later Roman engineers, most notably

 Vitruvius and Frontinus, despite their excellence in constructing water-supply systems

 employing both pipes and open aqueducts, appear to have understood the underlying
 principles of hydraulics less well than did Heron. The measure of the water delivered

 to a consumer was then the cross-sectional area of the delivery pipe, rather than the

 actual flow rate through it.8 Not until the Renaissance in Europe did clear improve

 ments occur. Probably the earliest surviving accounts of "continuity" of flow in rivers

 (and, of course, in other open channels) are those in the manuscripts of Leonardo da
 Vinci (1452-1519), for instance (Rouse and Ince 1963, p. 49):

 A river in each part of its length in an equal time gives passage to an equal
 quantity of water, whatever the width, the depth, the slope, the roughness, the

 Each movement of water of equal surface width will run the swifter the smaller

 tortuosity.

 the depth....

 (Here, the flow is taken to be steady). Though some, e.g. Macagno (1987), have claimed

 that Leonardo was the original discoverer of this and other results of hydraulics, others,

 notably (Truesdell 1968, pp. 1-83), considered that Leonardo was probably recording
 results already known.

 Certainly, a strong Italian tradition in hydraulics developed from around this time.

 Its major proponents were Benedetto Castelli (c. 1577-c. 1644) a former pupil of Gali
 leo, Evangelista Torricelli (1608-1647) a student of Castelli, and later Domenico
 Guglielmini (1655-1710) and Giovanni Poleni (1683-1761), who all wrote treatises

 on hydraulics.9 Castelli's expression of the law of "continuity" for rivers is essentially

 that stated earlier by Leonardo, and is equivalent to (2.3):

 7 In another instance, Truesdell (1954a, p. CXXIV) claims that Lagrange was "perhaps the first author to
 differentiate a 3 x 3 determinant": but, in fact, he differentiated an algebraic expression that was only later

 expressed as a 3 x 3 determinant.

 8 See Rouse and Ince (1963, pp. 27-32) and Garbrecht (1987, pp. 23-32).

 9 See Rouse and Ince (1963), Garbrecht (1987) and Maffioli (1994).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 50 A. D. D. Craik

 Sections of the same river discharge equal quantities of water in equal times,
 even if the sections themselves are unequal.

 Given two sections of a river, the ratio of the quantity of water which passes

 [in a given time] the first section to that which passes the second is in pro

 portion to the ratio of the first and second sections and to that of the first and
 second velocities. Given two unequal sections by which pass equal quantities

 of water, the sections are reciprocally proportional to the velocities.10

 However, these writers made further advances on the important topic of efflux of

 liquid from the bottom of a tank or reservoir.

 Also noteworthy are the hydraulic and pneumatic works of the Frenchmen Edme

 Mariotte (1620-1684) and Blaise Pascal (1623-1662), and the Englishmen Robert
 Boyle (1627-1691) and Isaac Newton (1642-1727). Newton's famous Principia
 (Newton 1687) (and later editions) contains much on fluid mechanics. Incorporating
 sometimes dubious empirical assumptions, his Book II treats many problems, includ

 ing efflux from vessels, resistance of moving bodies, vortex motion, and gravitational
 oscillations of liquid in curved pipes. Truesdell's assessment (Truesdell 1954a, XII),
 that "Almost all of the results are original, and but few correct" is sound, if harsh: for

 one must admire Newton's bold attempts at mathematical modelling in contexts that
 still lacked sound principles.

 4 Daniel and Johann Bernoulli

 The next major advances were made by Daniel Bernoulli, whose Hydrodynamica
 (Bernoulli 1738) is justly famous; and by his father Johann Bernoulli, whose Hydrau
 lica (Bernoulli 1742), allegedly written in 1732, was a deliberate attempt to upstage
 his son." Though Daniel Bernoulli's Hydrodynamica still contained nothing on the
 governing differential equations of fluid flow, he successfully solved many original
 problems by employing the "conservation of living force" (vis viva). This is a prin
 ciple equivalent to the conservation of mechanical energy, in which he equates the
 "potential ascent" and "actual descent" of all the particles of his system, subject to
 gravitational attraction: see e.g. Truesdell (1954a, XXIV).

 Throughout, Daniel Bernoulli's treatment of mass conservation is achieved by what

 later became known as the "hypothesis of parallel sections." This, and the principle of

 vis viva, were earlier applied by Bernoulli to flow in canals (Bernoulli 1729). Equally
 applicable to flows in pipes and in open channels, this hypothesis is identical to the

 hydraulic approximation discussed above: it is supposed that, at any plane section per

 pendicular to the channel, all fluid particles flow with the same velocity perpendicular

 to the plane, and that this velocity is "reciprocally proportional to the magnitude of the

 section".12 For flows in open channels, this approximation is restricted to steady flows,

 10 Quotation from Rouse and Ince (1963, pp. 59-60).

 '1 There is an English translation of both by Carmody and Kobus (Bernoulli and Bernoulli 1968).

 12 Trans. (Truesdell 1954a, XXIV) of Bernoulli (1738, III, sect. 2).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 51

 because the fluid depth may change in time-dependent flows; but for flows in rigid
 pipes, this law of continuity remains (approximately) valid also for time-dependent
 flows. Bernoulli exploited this fact to solve many time-dependent problems involving

 flow through, and oscillations within, open-ended tubes of variable cross-section. It
 is essential that the tube's cross-section and curvature vary sufficiently slowly for the

 hypothesis to yield an adequate approximation. Similar application to flow in slender
 stream-tubes was employed by many later writers: c.f. equation (2.3) above.

 In his Hydraulica, Johann Bernoulli re-derived many of his son's results but

 obtained no new ones. Rather, the advance that he made was methodological, sup
 planting the global "conservation of living forces" by consideration of the forces
 acting upon, and the consequent acceleration of, infinitesimal slices of fluid perpen

 dicular to the pipe or channel. Though he confused the issue by reference to a vague
 "eddy" (Latin gurges), he was the first to postulate a differential equation as fur
 nishing the "true and genuine method"; and it was he, not Daniel, who first gave a

 time-dependent version of what is now called "Bernoulli's equation" relating pressure

 and flow velocity.13 However, for mass conservation, neither father nor son improved

 upon the "hypothesis of parallel sections".

 Meanwhile, in Scotland, Colin Maclaurin (Maclaurin 1742, sects. 537-550)
 attempted to reconcile the work of Daniel Bernoulli with Isaac Newton's old
 "cataract theory" for efflux from a hole in the bottom of a cylindrical vessel.

 5 Jean le Rond d'Alembert

 Like Johann Bernoulli's Hydraulica, Jean d'Alembert's first book on fluid mechanics

 (Alembert 1744) duplicated many results of Bernoulli's Hydrodynamica, but contained

 nothing new, other than recasting problems in a form consistent with his Traite de dy
 namique (Alembert 1743). In both of these works, problems of motion are reduced to

 equivalent statical or hydrostatical ones by invoking a fictitious "accelerative force"
 in place of actual acceleration, a concept that was central to d'Alembert's approach to
 dynamics. An admirable overview of d'Alembert's life and writings in their historical
 context is Hankins (1970).

 Another work, Reflexions sur la cause generate des vents (Reflections on the gen

 eral cause of winds) (Alembert 1747), won the 1746 prize competition of the Berlin
 Academy, but failed to make a lasting impression. In this, d'Alembert envisaged the

 atmosphere to be a thin layer of uniform density, and he addressed its equilibrium and

 motion under the influence of gravity, the attraction of Sun or Moon, and the Earth's

 rotation (but without the Coriolis force): in effect, he investigated atmospheric tides.

 This work is often mentioned as containing the first partial differential equations to be

 derived in mathematical physics. Among these is a version of the continuity equation

 in spherical polar coordinates; but this is restricted to a "shallow atmosphere", such

 that any change in its almost-uniform depth on the Earth's sphere is caused by gradi

 ents of the depth-averaged horizontal velocity components, and the temporal rates of

 change are taken as those associated with the Earth's angular velocity.

 13 See Truesdell (1954a, XXXIII).

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A careful analysis by Darrigol and Frisch (2008, pp. 1862-1863) of d'Alembert's

 opaque reasoning and cumbersome notation (which we forebear to reproduce) identi

 fies his continuity equation, in modern notation, as

 52 A. D. D. Craik

 (Br) dr] sin0\ fdve ve 1 dv()>\
 V = co [ — cos (b = — .
 \d6 30 tan 6 J \ d0 tan0 sin 0 dcf> J

 Here, r] denotes the change in local depth of the atmosphere, the dot is a time-deriva

 tive, 6 and 0 are angular coordinates of co-latitude and longitude measured relative to
 an Earth-axis directed towards the orbiting luminary, co is the Earth's angular veloc

 ity, and vq , Vcf, are corresponding velocity components relative to the Earth, taken as

 uniform over the local depth. The right-hand side is just the negative of the divergence
 with respect to 6 and 0. Accordingly, this equation is close to that later derived by
 Laplace in his study of the tides (see below).

 In 1749, d'Alembert submitted an entry for another prize competition of the Berlin
 Academy. This was entitled Essai d'une nouvelle theorie de la resistance desfluides

 (Essay on a new theory of the resistance of fluids), subsequently published as Alembert

 (1752). The Academy rejected all entries as unworthy, and urged the authors to com
 pare their results with experiments; but the annoyed d'Alembert instead rushed into

 print. Leonhard Euler was almost certainly involved in the rejection. Truesdell sug
 gests that the given reason was merely an excuse, as "the truth, much more difficult to

 substantiate to an author, [was] that d'Alembert's reasoning was inaccurate, tortuous,

 incomprehensible, and that in the illustration of his equations he had not succeeded in
 exhibiting a single How" (Truesdell 1954a, LVIII).14 Nevertheless, despite d'Alem
 bert's frustrating shortcomings, this work contained a crucial new advance, and it is
 hard to believe that Euler had overlooked it.

 With rather opaque arguments, and with comprehensibility further hindered by mis

 prints and badly labelled diagrams, d'Alembert deduced the following pair of partial
 differential equations (Alembert 1752, sects. 43-45):

 B' =-A -- & A' = B,

 z

 where A, B, A', B' are defined by

 dq = Adx + Bdz & dp = A'dx + B'dz

 as partial derivatives of q and p, respectively. Here, the velocity components of the
 fluid in the jc and z directions are aq, ap, where a is a fixed reference velocity, the

 fluid being incompressible with uniform density. It appears only belatedly that x and

 14 Truesdell's frequent criticisms of d'Alembert are too extreme, in marked contrast to his near-adulation
 ofEuler. A more charitable view ofd'Alembert's style is taken by Darrigol andFrisch (2008). Nevertheless,
 the present writer shares some of Truesdell's reactions: d'Alembert's merits are apparent only after consid
 erable immersion in his writings, whereas modern readers have unconsciously inherited much of Euler's
 analytical style.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 53

 Z denote axial and radial cylindrical polar coordinates and that d'Alembert envis
 ages steady flow past an axisymmetric body. The first of the two equations correctly
 describes the equation of continuity in these coordinates. It is derived by supposing
 that the local velocity in any infinitesimal section varies reciprocally as the cross sec
 tion, thereby applying the old hydraulic approximation to an infinitesimal portion of
 fluid.15 Apart from the restricted version in spherical polars (Alembert 1747) that is

 mentioned above, this is the first representation of the continuity equation in differen

 tial notation. The second equation (which need not be considered here) derives from

 a hidden assumption and is the condition for what is now called potential flow.

 D'Alembert proceeds to give an alternative proof of these results (Alembert 1752,
 sect. 48), described below, again unnecessarily imposing conditions that require the

 flow to be a potential one. Subsequently, he notes the equivalent results for plane flow
 with Cartesian coordinates x, z (Alembert 1752, sect. 73):

 B' = —A & A! — B;

 that is,

 3 q dp dp dq
 — + — = 0 & — = —
 dx 3 z dx 3 z

 in modern notation, respectively expressing continuity and zero vorticity. Turning to

 "elastic fluids" in which the density <5 may vary, d'Alembert later derives the continuity

 equation for steady axisymmetric compressible flow (Alembert 1752, sect. 116):

 d(Sp) d(Sg) &p_ _ Q

 dz dx z

 In view of its similarity with Euler's later definitive derivations, we conclude this

 section by briefly describing d'Alembert's alternative proof of the continuity equation
 for steady axisymmetric flow (Alembert 1752, sect. 48). He envisages an infinitesi
 mal portion of fluid initially occupying the volume of a rectangular parallelepiped.
 Opposite sides having corners at N, C, D, B and N', C', />', B', respectively, denote

 two rectangles normal to the axis of symmetry. After an infinitesimal time dt, the fluid

 particles initially at N, C, D, B move to new locations n, c, d, b\ and those initially at
 N', C', D', B' similarly move to c', d', h'. Each of the six new faces are still almost
 rectangular. D'Alembert argues that the deviations from true rectangles due to obliquity

 and curvature of the sides involve infinitesimals of higher order that can be neglected.

 Accordingly, the new shape is also a rectangular parallelepiped at leading order.

 When the axial velocity at N is aq, that at C is aq + NC ■ a{dq/dx), and similar

 reasoning applies to the other points. In this way, the new locations of every corner

 point after a time dt may be found to the appropriate order of approximation. As the

 volumes of the original and the new parallelepipeds must be equal because the fluid
 is incompressible, the calculated leading-order change must be zero. This yields his

 previously obtained result

 15 Euler had done similarly in the earlier (Euler and Robins 1745), but he did not there go on to derive the
 continuity equation: see next section.

 •£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 54

 A. D. D. Craik

 dp da p . p
 -f- + -i + -=0, or B = —A — —.
 dz dx z z

 D'Alembert's concept of following the motion of an initial parallelepiped of fluid is
 both original and sound.

 Despite his frequent obscurities, d'Alembert deserves much credit for achieving

 these, and some other, original results, including the famous "d'Alembert paradox",
 that a body in a non-viscous irrotational flow experiences no net drag force.16 D'Al

 embert went on to write much more on fluid mechanics in several memoirs published
 in his Opuscules (Alembert 1761-80), and, more briefly, in articles of the Dictionnaire
 Encyclopaedique des Mcithematiques (Alembert 1789). The fluid dynamical memoirs
 in his Opuscules total over 300 pages of turgid meanderings, containing little that was
 new.17 There are frequent references to his own previous treatises, and some to Daniel

 Bernoulli's Hydrodynamica and Johann Bernoulli's Hydraulica, but he conspicuously
 failed to learn from the clearer writings of Euler and Lagrange, and he continued to

 claim priority over both as the discoverer of the theory of fluid motion based on partial

 differential equations.18

 Nevertheless, there was some justice in d'Alembert's claim to priority. Though

 not a clear expositor, he was a deep and original thinker, whose methods could have
 allowed more general expression of the governing equations than he achieved. The
 suggestion of Darrigol and Frisch (2008, p. 1865), that it "would seem appropriate
 to use "d'Alembert's condition" when referring to the condition of incompressibility,

 written as a partial differential equation" is perhaps a step too far. But they are right to
 emphasize that d'Alembert "was following an older tradition of mathematical physics

 according to which general principles, rather than general equations, were applied to
 specific problems."19 Unfortunately for d'Alembert, but fortunately for mathematics,

 this tradition was overturned by Euler.20

 16 Though (Truesdell 1954a, XL) observes that Euler anticipated this result in his comments on Robins'
 Gunnery [Euler and Robins 1745], the governing equations were not known at that time. A fuller account
 of the paradox is in (Alembert 1761-80, 5, mem. 34). A recent authoritative discussion is (Grimberg et al.
 2007).

 17 See, e.g. Truesdell (1954a, CXII-CXVIII).

 18 These memoirs in Alembert (1761-80) are at: vol. 1 (dated 1759) 4th memoir, 137-168; vol. 5 (1768)

 31st, 32nd, 33rd, 34th memoirs pp. 41-138; vol. 8 (1780) 57th memoir, pp. 52-230. In claiming priority,
 he wrote, for example: "on peut voir ce que nous en avons dit dans les Memoires deja cite. On peut voir
 aussi les savants recherches de MM. de la Grange & Euler sur ce sujet,... recherches fondees sur les meme

 principes qui servent de fondement a la theorie nouvelle, generale & rigoureuse que j'ai donnee le premier
 du mouvement des fluides" (One can see what we have said in the Memoirs just mentioned. One can also
 see the scholarly researches of Messrs. de la Grange and Euler on this subject,... researches founded upon

 the same principles which provide the basis for the new, general and rigorous theory that I first gave for the
 motion of fluids.) (Alembert 1761-80, 8: 135-136).

 19 After this paper was drafted, I was told by Olivier Darrigol of the thesis by Gerard Grimberg, D'Alem

 bert et les equations aux derivees partialles en hydrodynamique, (Universite Paris 7, 1998). Unfortunately,
 I have not been able to consult this.

 For more on d' Alembert's relations with other scientists, particularly his rivalry with Euler, see Hankins
 (1970, pp. 42-65). Hankins (pp. 63-64) also remarks on d'Alembert's style of writing, observing that
 Laplace considered that his mathematical works lacked clarity and that C.G.J. Jacobi later complained that
 "it is impossible today to choke down a single line of d'Alembert's mathematics, while most of Euler's
 works can be read with delight."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 55

 6 Leonhard Euler

 An interesting prelude to Euler's definitive work on fluid mechanics is his commentary
 on the Englishman Benjamin Robins' New Principles of Gunnery (Euler and Robins
 1745). Without deriving the governing differential equations, he applies methods that
 derive from Daniel Bernoulli to calculate the force exerted on a two-dimensional solid

 body in uniform motion. Thereby, he anticipated the result now commonly known as

 "d'Alembert's paradox" that the net drag is zero: a recent account is Grimberg et al.
 (2008). In doing so, Euler considered flow in a thin curved "fillet" (or filament) of

 fluid bounded by adjacent streamlines, noting that the local velocity v along the curve

 and the local width 8z of the fillet are such that vSz remains constant along the fillet.

 This, of course, is again the well-known hydraulic approximation, but viewed in terms

 of local motion along streamlines within a more complex flow.

 Leonhard Euler gave several derivations of the continuity equation, the two ear
 liest long delayed in publication. His first attempt, "Recherches sur le mouvement
 des rivieres" (Researches on the motion of rivers) (Euler 1767a), seems to have been

 composed in 1750 or 1751.21 His next, the important "Principia motus fluidorum"
 (Principles of the motion of fluids), was written in 1752 but not published until 1761
 (Euler 1761); while his "Principes generaux du mouvement des fluides" (General
 principles of the motion of fluids), the second of three major linked papers on fluids
 written during 1753-55, was published more promptly (Euler 1757a). These three
 papers therefore appeared in reverse order of composition.

 A further derivation of the continuity equation for both incompressible and com

 pressible fluids is contained in the second part of Euler's four-part Latin treatise on
 fluid mechanics (Euler 1770). This appeared during 1768-1771 in successive volumes
 of the proceedings of the St Petersburg Academy soon after Euler's return there in

 1766.22 The part containing the derivation of the equations of motion is entitled "Sec

 tio secunda de principiis motus fluidorum" (Second section on the principles of the
 motion of fluids).

 Nowhere in these papers does he mention d'Alembert's prior work. However, else
 where, he does make a few brief remarks about d'Alembert and other contemporaries

 and predecessors.23 In view of their priority dispute, a couple of these, characterized

 by faint praise, are worth noting.

 The sequel to his "Principes generaux ...", entitled "Continuation des recherches
 sur la theorie du mouvement des fluids" (Euler 1757b), begins with the following

 paragraph (present author's translation):

 In my previous two Memoirs, having reduced all the Theory of fluids, as much

 their equilibrium as their motion, to two analytical equations, the consideration

 21 The dating of this and other manuscripts are those given by Enestrom and accepted by Truesdell: see
 e.g. Truesdell (1954a, LVIII).

 22 A German translation in 1805 by H.W. Brandes became the first separately published treatise on hydro

 dynamics to describe Euler's equations of motion.

 ^ Just how few is evident from the remarkably brief index of names cited in vols. XII and XIII of Euleri
 opera omnia (ser. 2, XIII (1955), 375). There are just 16 references to 10 individuals, and some of these
 are to the editor's footnotes.

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 of these formulae may appear to be of the greatest importance, seeing that they
 include not only all that has already been discovered by very different, and for

 the most part hardly convincing methods, both about the equilibrium and motion
 of fluids, but also all that one can still desire in this Science. However sublime

 may be the researches on fluids for which we are indebted to Messrs. Bernoulli,

 Clairaut and d' Alembert, they flow so naturally from my two general formulae

 that one cannot enough admire this agreement of their profound meditations with

 the simplicity of the principles from which I have drawn my two equations, and
 to which I have been led immediately by the first principles of Mechanics.24

 A few years later, in a Latin paper on the resistance of fluids (Euler 1763), he

 56 A. D. D. Craik

 mentions d'Alembert's Essai:

 The most celebrated d' Alembert has commented on these things concerning the
 resistance of fluids in an extraordinary [Lat. peculiari] Tract: they more than

 usually demonstrate, rather than remove, the greatest difficulty in investigating
 the true resistance.25

 (a) "Recherches sur le mouvement des rivieres" (Euler 1767a)

 The writing in 1750-51 of his "Recherches sur le mouvement des rivieres" (Euler
 1767a) predates d'Alembert's Essai by a couple of years. That d'Alembert saw this
 work in manuscript (though he does not identify its author) is clear from a statement

 at the end of the Essai (Alembert 1752, p. 189). He is at pains to point out that:

 I had found the principles on which my method is based by the end of 1749 ...
 more than a year before the memoir in question fell into my hands .... It would
 not even be impossible that the method presented in my work was unknown to

 the author of the memoir of which I speak, and did not aid him in his researches
 on the flow of rivers." (Translation by Truesdell 1954a, LVIII retaining d'Al
 embert's errors of "unknown" for "known" and "did not aid" for "aided" that

 reverse his intended meaning).

 In this paper, Euler considers steady motion in two spatial dimensions, taking x

 horizontally downstream and y vertically. He gives the first expression of the equations

 of motion in material coordinates. Particles initially situated at heights z above the bed

 at some chosen section of the river have coordinates at later times t denoted by x and

 y, where

 dx = Pdt + Qdz and dy = Rdt + Sdz

 Equating the cross-derivatives gives

 dP __ dQ ^ dR _ dS
 dz dt dz dt

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 -4 It is interesting that Euler refers to his "two" equations, for continuity and momentum, though the latter

 are three in number along coordinate directions: a proto-vectorial viewpoint!

 25 Author's translation of Eulerii opera omnia ser.2, XII, p. 219.

 "Continuity and change" 57

 Choosing points O and O' initially at z and z+dz, with respective horizontal and verti
 cal velocity components P = m, R = —natOand/5 = m+dm, R = —n—dnat O',
 Euler envisages that, after a short time dr, O and O' respectively move to o, and o', and
 he shows that, at leading order, the area (he says "masse') O O'oo' is equal to mdzdr.

 More generally, after any time t, O is at M and O' at M', with respective coor

 dinates x, y and x + Qdz, y + Sdz\ and at time t + dx, they are at m and m' with
 respective coordinates

 x + Pdr, y + Rdx and x + Pdx + Qdz, y + Rdr + Sdz,.

 At leading order, the area MM'mm! is found to be PSdzdr — QRdzdx, which by

 conservation of mass must equal mdzdr. Accordingly, the equation of continuity is

 PS - QR = m, or — — = —— = m (6.1)

 dx dy dx 3v d(x, v)

 dt dz dzdt 8 (t,z)

 in modern notation.26

 Euler himself says that this condition expresses the "continuity of the fluid"
 ("la continuite du fluide") (Euler 1767a, sect. 12)—an early occurrence of the word
 "continuity" to mean mass-conservation. This result is a precursor of the equation of

 continuity expressed in so-called "Lagrangian coordinates", in which a Jacobian of the

 transformation of space coordinates appears: see (2.2) above.27 ButEuler's version is

 here restricted to steady, incompressible, and two-dimensional flow; and time t, rather
 than a second material coordinate, appears in the Jacobian.28 But nowhere in this
 paper does there appear the now familiar continuity equation expressed in so-called
 "Eulerian variables", which, as seen above, d'Alembert derived in special cases.

 (b) Principia motus fluidorum (Euler 1761)

 Euler's "Principia motus fluidorum" (Euler 1761) was written in 1752, the same year
 in which d'Alembert's Essai appeared in print and about two years after Euler had
 seen it in manuscript. Here is the first of Euler's derivations of what we now know as
 the Euler equations of incompressible hydrodynamics. This paper is summarized and
 commented on in Truesdell (1954a, LXII-LXXV).29 There is also a brief online sum

 mary, focusing on Euler's derivation of the continuity equation, by Sandifer (2008), and

 another account (unfortunately marred by many misprints) in Simon Calero (2008).

 Truesdell observed that Euler's treatment is the first to clearly separate kinematics

 26 Carelessly, Euler here uses m in two senses, to denote both the initial horizontal velocity component

 and the position of a point. That in (6.1) is the horizontal velocity.

 27 Euler later returned to the equations in material coordinates in Euler (1762, 1766), around the same
 time as did Lagrange: see Sect. 7 below.

 The two-dimensional incompressible equivalent of (2.2), with material coordinates a. z, is formally

 obtained by setting da = mdt in (6.1).

 29 There are now two full English translations: one by Enlin Pan in the online Euler Archive E258 at http://

 www.math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/, the other by Walter Pauls in Physica D 237 (2008): 1840-1854.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 1 ,
 -dxdy( 1 + Ldt)( 1 + mdt) — -Mldxdydt ,

 which must equal the area Imn. Therefore,

 Ldt + mdt + Lmdt2 — Mldt2 = 0

 correct to second order. Cancelling dt and ignoring remaining infinitesimals yields the
 desired condition

 58

 A. D. D. Craik

 from dynamics: Euler's first section concerns the continuity equation and his second
 the equations connecting pressure and acceleration.

 Euler's derivation of the continuity equation shows similarities with d'Alembert's

 Essai, but it is much clearer and more general. He begins with two-dimensional flows,

 introducing the now standard notation of u, v for velocity components in the Cartesian

 x- and y-directions, and their partial derivatives defined by

 du = Ldx + Idy, dv = Mdx + mdy.

 He considers a small triangular element of fluid with vertices initially at/, m, n, where
 Im = dx and In = dy. Taking (u, v) as the velocity components of the point /,
 it follows that those of m and n are, respectively, (u + Ldx, v + Mdx), and (u +
 Idy, v + mdy).30 Accordingly, after an infinitesimal time dt, the points /, m, n are
 moved to the points p,q,r by respective distances parallel to the coordinate direc
 tions of (udt, vdt), {(u + Ldx)dt, (v + Mdx)dt} and {(u + ldy)dt, (v + mdy)dt}.
 Because the initial triangle Imn is infinitesimally small, "its sides cannot receive cur

 vature from the motion" over the time dt; accordingly, pqr is also a triangle. The area

 of Imn is just \dxdy. but that of pqr requires calculation by considering the areas of
 three associated trapezia. He finds the area of pqr to be

 L + m = 0, or 1 =0

 3 u dv

 dx dy

 in modern notation.

 by

 Euler then proceeds to consider motion in three dimensions, in which the velocity

 at an arbitrary point X with Cartesian coordinates x, y, z has velocity components
 u,v,w. The various partial derivatives of u,v,w with respect to x, v, z are defined

 du = Ldx + Idy + Xdz, dv = Mdx + mdy + [idz, dw — Ndx + ndy + vdz.

 Neighbouring points n,v,o are chosen with respective coordinates (x + dx, y, z),
 (x, y + dy, z) and (x, y, z + dz): here, Euler uses X, /x and v in two senses, but

 there is no risk of confusion. These four points define a triangular pyramid with volume

 30 Euler does not use such brackets.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 59

 5dxdydz■ The respective velocity components of the four points are (u, v, w), (u +
 Ldx, v + Mdx, w + Ndx), (u+ldy, v + mdy, w+ndy) and (u+Xz, v + ^dz, w +
 vdz).

 In a short time interval dt, the points X, v, o are carried with these velocities

 to the points it, </>, p, a, the coordinates of which are readily found. To calculate the
 volume of the new pyramid defined by these points, Euler first has to determine the
 volumes of four associated prisms, at length finding that the pyramidal volume is

 ^dxdydz[ 1 + (L + m + v)dt + (Lm — Ml + Lv + mv — n/j, — NX)dt2

 +(Lmv — Mlv — Ln/x + MnX — NmX + Nlfu,)dt^].

 Here he assumes, as before, that the sides cannot become curved. As the two pyramidal

 volumes must be equal, it follows by ignoring higher-order differentials that

 L + m + v = 0, or 1 1 = 0

 3 u dv 3 w

 dx dy dz

 in modern notation.31

 It might seem that Euler has here derived the continuity equation only for steady

 flows. But he goes on to observe (sect. 38) that, for unsteady flows, it is only necessary
 to write the differentials as

 du = Ldx + Idy + Adz + L dt, dv = Mdx + mdy + jxdz + M dt,
 dw = Ndx + ndy + vdz + N dt

 and "it will still always hold that L + m + v = 0."

 (c) Principes generaux du mouvement des fluids (Euler 1757a)

 Written a few years after the Principia motus fluidorum, but published before it, this

 was the second of three classic papers written in French on the equilibrium and motion
 of fluids.32 Here, Euler's notation and exposition have matured, and this paper can be

 read with ease and pleasure by any modern fluid-dynamicist.

 For the continuity equation, the main differences are that Euler here considers fluid

 with variable density; and, instead of a triangular pyramid, he takes his initial element

 of fluid to be a rectangular parallelepiped with sides dx, dy, dz■ Representing velocity

 31 In his summary of this paper, Truesdell expresses the above results in suggestive but anachronistic
 Jacobian notation, and he observes that Euler's higher-order terms in dt2 and dr are not generally correct
 (Truesdell 1954a, LXIII-LXIV, LXXI-LXXII) as they omit terms involving second spatial derivatives of
 the velocity. In fact, such additional terms are indeed negligible compared with those retained provided

 the spatial infinitesimals dx, dy, dz are taken to be an order of magnitude smaller than the displacements
 udt, vdt, wdt: but this was surely not in Euler's mind. In any case, only the leading-order terms matter, as
 d'Alembert had earlier realized.

 32 An English translation by T.E. Burton, adapted by U. Frisch, is in Physica D 237 (2008), 1825-1839.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 60

 A. D. D. Craik

 components by u, v,w as above, he determines the velocities at each corner of the par
 allelepiped and hence their subsequent positions after an infinitesimal time dt. Unlike

 in his Principia, he retains only leading-order terms from the outset: this ensures that

 the shape of the new element is "infinitely little different from a rectangular parallele

 piped"—as d' Alembert had earlier realized. With this simplification, it is easily found
 that the new volume is

 dxdydz (l + d, (£) +d, +d, (£)) .

 By way of further justification, he adds: "If one still had any doubt of the justness of this
 conclusion, one would only have to read my Latin piece: Principia motus fluidorum,

 where I have calculated the volume without neglecting anything" (sect. 15)—however,

 this would not appear in print for another four years.

 If the initial fluid density within the element is q, this changes over the interval

 dt to

 "+d' (§)+ "dl (s)+ "" (^)+ wi' (£) •

 because the leading-order displacement of the element has components udt, vdt, wdt.

 (This is just q + dt(Dq/Dt), where Dq/Dt is the "convective derivative" of q following
 the motion.) Euler then briefly observes that, "since the density is inversely propor

 tional to the volume, this quantity will be to q as dxdydz to

 dxdydz{l+d'i^+d'{^+d'{ji)) ■

 Consequently,

 (§)+«(S)+»(I)+<S)+' (S+' o+' (S) =»■

 which reduces to the previous result for incompressible flow when q is constant.

 This is the continuity equation in full generality in Cartesian coordinates: c.f. (2.1).

 Euler's account is masterly: his argument is succinct and his clear notation is virtually

 that adopted today.

 (d) Sectio secunda de principiis motus fluidorum (Euler 1770)

 In his later Latin treatise, Euler derived his equations of motion afresh. Perhaps feeling

 that the above brief derivation of the continuity equation was insufficiently rigorous,

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 61

 he surprisingly reverts to considering a pyramidal volume as in his Principia motus

 fluidorum. Though in different notation, he proceeds much as before, this time finding

 that the volume of his (almost) pyramidal element after time dt is

 frdydz[l+dt

 fdu\\f (dv\

 ( dw\\ , .

 1 +

 dt I —j— J J y(l — XX — mi — vv + 2Xfiv).

 Here, X, ji and v are the cosines of the angles made by the three line elements joining
 the new vertices of his pyramid. As each angle is close to 90°, these cosines are first

 order infinitesimals and the term under the square root may be replaced by unity with
 an error of the second order. Correct to first order, the volume is therefore

 \dxdydz (l +d, (£) + dt (£)+dl (if))

 If the initial density of the element is q and that after time dt is </', it follows that

 q'— q q'— q (du\ (dv\ / dw\
 q'dt qdt \dx J \dy) \dz )

 as before.

 where

 q' = tI + „d,(dJ.) + vdl('!l) + wd, (d/)+dl^i

 dx J \dy J \dz J \dt

 since the displacements in the x, y, z directions during the time dt are udt, vdt, wdt.
 The final continuity equation immediately follows, as stated above.

 Later in this paper, Euler gives a clear derivation of the equations of motion in
 material coordinates, employing a method that differs from that of Lagrange (1760
 61). Denoting the instantaneous coordinates of fluid particles at times t by x, y, z,

 and those at the initial time t = 0 by X, Y, Z, he finds the continuity equation for

 compressible flow in the form33

 d ■ Kq

 dt

 = 0,

 33 This is in Euleri opera omnia ser.2, XIII, pp. 138, 142.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 62 A. D. D. Craik

 where q is density and34

 (e) Flow in tubes

 Elsewhere, Euler gave approximate forms of the continuity equation for flow in curved
 tubes of variable circular cross section. In Euler (1757b)35 he derives

 rrqv = ff4>co — f rrds ( —

 d t

 Here, r denotes the radius of the tube, q the density, and v the velocity of the fluid,

 all varying with axial distance s along the tube; /, (p, o:> are the respective values of
 r, q, v at some chosen location; and the integral is taken along the tube between the
 two locations. The connection with the hydraulic approximation of Sect. 3 is clear.

 In a later paper (Euler 1767b)36 he gives the corresponding differential form,

 d-^riA +rr

 <u y+'rU/=a

 The extension to flow in non-axisymmetric tubes is obvious: one only needs to replace
 r2 by A/n, where A is the local cross-sectional area (compare equation (2.3)). Such
 versions of the continuity equation in "streamline coordinates" occur frequently in
 later literature and remain commonplace in engineering textbooks.

 7 Joseph-Louis Lagrange

 Lagrange's writings on the governing equations of fluid mechanics are threefold: (i)
 the concluding sections XL-LII of a long paper devoted to applying his recently
 developed calculus of variations (Lagrange 1760-61); (ii) his "Memoire sur la theorie
 du mouvement des fluides" (Lagrange 1781); and (iii) the final sections X-XII of the
 second volume of his treatise Mecanique analytique (Lagrange 1788/1853-55). The
 last is mainly an improved recapitulation of his earlier work.

 His 1781 paper begins with a fulsome tribute to d'Alembert, who "has reduced
 to analytical equations the true laws of movement of fluids." He states that a great

 number of subsequent researches have appeared in the Opuscules of d'Alembert, and

 34 Euler's K is the same as Lagrange's 9 (see Sect. 7) and both are equal to the Jacobian t'le
 coordinate transformation, as in (2.2).

 35 At Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII, p. 101.

 36 At Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII, p. 251.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 63

 in the journals of the Academies of Berlin and of St Petersburg, but he fails to mention
 Euler by name anywhere in this paper. He then proceeds to derive the equations in a

 manner little different from Euler's, apart from some changes of notation.

 For the continuity equation, he considers an infinitesimal parallelepiped with sides

 of initial length <5jc, <5y, <5z, and he calculates its position and volume after a time

 dt, neglecting "infinitely small quantities of third order". He duly arrives at the new
 volume

 where p, q, r denote the three velocity components in Cartesians x, y, z~, while the
 new density has changed from A to

 As mass is conserved, the product of these expressions must equal the original mass

 A<5x<5)>(5z.The continuity equation results in the form

 d(Ap) ^ d(Aq) ^ d(Ar) dA
 dx dy dz dt

 and Lagrange notes the reduction for incompressible flows.

 Though Lagrange later tries to find some new solutions of the governing equations—
 with very limited success—his derivation of these equations is totally unoriginal, and

 his lack of acknowledgment of Euler's prior work seems churlish.

 Nevertheless, his earlier paper (Lagrange 1760-61) contains fresh insights. In his
 section XL, he expresses the equations of motion for incompressible flow as a varia
 tional principle; and in his section XLIV, he gives his first derivation of the equations
 of motion in terms of the initial locations X, Y, Z of fluid particles and the elapsed time

 t. In the latter, the instantaneous coordinates x, y, z of fluid particles are regarded as
 functions of their initial locations X, Y, Z and the elapsed time t. In sections XLVIII-L

 he extends the variational formulation to "elastic fluids" of variable density; and in
 section LI he briefly considers how these equations may be recast in terms of initial
 locations X, Y, Z and time t.

 Despite being a pioneer of variational calculus, Euler showed no interest in the var

 iational formulation for fluid mechanics. However, around this time, he and Lagrange

 corresponded about casting the equations in terms of material coordinates X, Y, Z,

 and time t. A letter of January 1760 from Euler, published by Lagrange (Euler 1762)

 and cited by him in Lagrange (1760-61), further supports Euler's priority in the use of

 such "Lagrangian coordinates." He had first considered these (in restricted fashion) in

 1750-51 in his "Recherches sur le mouvement des rivieres" (Euler 1767a), a paper that

 had still not appeared in print. Then, in Euler (1766, 1770), he published derivations

 of the equations of motion in material coordinates that differ from that of Lagrange

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 64 A. D. D. Craik

 (1760-61).37 But, whoever was first, Lagrange's account was the one that became best
 known, and led to the misnomers of "Lagrangian" and "Eulerian" coordinates.38

 All that is worthwhile in Lagrange's article (Lagrange 1760-61) is described again

 in his Mecanique analytique (Lagrange 1788/1853-55), with better notation and the
 removal of much analytical meandering. Accordingly, we discuss this later version,

 with references mainly to the more accessible third edition.

 Lagrange's Section X of volume 2 "on the principles of hydrodynamics" (Lagrange

 1788/1853-55,2:243-249) is a brief historical survey, mentioning the contributions of

 Newton, Varignon, Torricelli, Daniel and Johann Bernoulli, Maclaurin, Clairaut and,
 especially, d'Alembert. He praises d'Alembert's Essai (Alembert 1752) as having first
 established "the rigorous equations of the movement of fluids, whether incompress
 ible, or compressible or elastic, equations that belong to the class of those called of

 partial differences ..." Incredibly, in his first edition, Lagrange here makes no mention

 of Euler. But, in later editions, the following passage was inserted:

 But these equations still did not have all the generality or simplicity to which

 they were susceptible. It is to Euler that one owes the first general formulae for

 the movement of fluids, founded on the laws of their equilibrium, and presented

 with the simple and luminous notation of partial differences.

 He proceeds almost immediately (Sect. XI) to state his variational formulation for

 incompressible fluids:

 d x

 dt2

 + X <5x +

 dzy
 dt2  + Y)Sy

 dlz

 dt2

 + Z)Sz

 Dm + SX8L = 0. (7.1)

 Here, S is an integral taken over all the mass of fluid, Dm an element of mass, X, Y,

 Z are now the Cartesian components of the external "accelerative force" acting on the
 element, and x, y, z the position coordinates of the element. (In Lagrange's defini
 tion, (X, Y, Z) are the components of the force per unit mass acting on the element
 along the negative coordinate directions. The first integral derives from the variation

 of the "Lagrangian" L — T — V, where T and V are the kinetic and potential energy,
 respectively.) The incompressibility condition is L = DxDyDz — const., expressing
 the constancy of volume of any infinitesimal parallelepiped of fluid, and X is an
 "undetermined quantity" (nowadays called a "Lagrange multiplier"). The quantities
 8x, 8y, Sz, <5L denote arbitrary small variations of x, y, z, and L. This formulation

 resembles those used in previous sections of the treatise for rigid bodies (without the

 incompressibility constraint) and for hydrostatics (without the acceleration terms),
 and it is in accord with Lagrange's objective to provide a general theory for all of
 mechanics.

 37 A work with the same title as (Euler 1766) was presented to the Berlin Academy in December 1759: see

 the Euler Archive Online, E306, citing C.G.J. Jacobi, http://www.math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/ (accessed 30

 May 2012). In Lagrange (1760-61), the derivation of the continuity equation in material coordinates starts
 from his already-established equation in the usual Cartesian coordinates, whereas Euler derives it from first

 principles, considering the evolution of an initial infinitesimal tetrahedron of fluid.

 38 See (Truesdell 1954a,CXXn; 1954b, 30-3 In) for a full discussion of the question of priority.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 65

 Lagrange's incompressibility condition L = DxDyDz — constant, where

 ADxDyDz is the mass Dm of a parallelepiped with constant density A, has the
 variation

 8L = <5(DxDvDz) = DxDvDz + —- + .

 /D8x D Sy D<5z\

 V Dx Dy Dz J

 Substituting this into SXSL and integrating by parts produces

 5A5L = —S —8x H 8y H 8z ) DxDyDz + three surface integrals,

 / DA. DA. DA \

 \Dx Dy Dz J

 the three latter integrals being supposed to vanish at the boundary of the fluid. Sepa

 rating the independent variations 8x, 8y, 8z then yields the three dynamical equations

 (d2x \ DA (d2y \ DA.
 A I 7T + X ) =0, A I —ir + Y ) =0,
 \dt2 J Dx \dt2 J Dy
 fd2z \ DA
 4U+Zh^=0

 Next, Lagrange derives from these equations the corresponding equations of motion

 in material form that are satisfied by x, y, z as functions of initial position a, b, c and
 time t. (These need not be stated here.) Later (art. 10), he shows that the acceleration

 components can also be written as

 d2x dp dp dp dp dry dq dq dq dq
 . 9 = — h p— h q— 1- r 9 = — 1- p— 1- q— h r ——,
 dtz dt dx dy dz dtz dt dx dy dz
 d2z dr dr dr dr
 —t = 1- P I- q b r —.
 dt2 dt dx dy dz

 Thereby result Euler's three momentum equations, with velocity components p,q,r

 and with the "undetermined quantity" —A identified as the pressure.

 The appearance of the pressure in this way, without any consideration of its physical
 role, and its association with the constraint of mass conservation as an undetermined

 multiplier (with which it has no obvious physical connection), still seem rather mys

 terious: a bit of "mathematical magic" without physical interpretation. This no doubt

 pleased Lagrange, whose aim was to reduce all of mechanics to analysis, and who
 used no diagrams, and a minimum of physical discussion, in his treatise.

 Returning to the incompressibility condition, replacing 8x, <5y, 8z by dx, dy, dz, and

 dividing by dt yields (art. 7)

 p-ar , , D-f Q
 Dx Dy Dz

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A. D. D. Craik

 As dx/dt, dy/dt, dz/dt are just the velocity components p,q,r, this is the now familiar
 continuity equation for incompressible fluids; but one can hardly approve Lagrange's
 cavalier handling of <5's, d's, and D's.

 Lagrange then derives from this equation the corresponding one in material coordi

 nates. Suffice to say that this, together with his derivation of the momentum equations
 in material form, is a considerable analytical achievement. After considerable manipu

 lation (arts. 5-7), it turns out that the above equation is equivalent to d6/dt = 0, where

 dx dy dz dx dy dz dx dy dz dx dy dz dx dy dz dx dy dz

 da db dc db da dc db dc da dc db da dc da db da dc db

 Further, since x = a, y — b and z = c at time t= 0, 0 — 1

 In his later section XII, he derives the corresponding equations for "compressible
 and elastic fluids" where A is the variable density. Mass conservation is expressed as

 fif.(ADxDvDz) = 0, (7.2)

 and logarithmic differentiation yields

 Replacing dx, dy, dz by pdt, qdt, rdt, changing D into d, substituting for d A its "com
 plete value"

 and then dividing by dt, he arrives at the continuity equation (2.1),

 d A D dx Defy D dz

 -|- -4- - 0.

 A Dx Dy Dz

 dA dA dA dA \

 1 p H a H r ) dt,

 dt dx dy dz J

 dA d • (Ap) d • (Aq) d ■ (Ar)

 + —— + + 1—- = 0.

 dt dx dy dz

 this is precisely equation (2.2).

 8 Transmission and modification

 Book 1 of Pierre Simon Laplace's influential Mecanique celeste provided an elemen

 tary treatise of mechanics, serving as introduction for his many more specialized later

 19 In modern Jacobian notation, this is = 1. It is the incompressible version of the result derived

 in Euler (1770): see Sect. 6(d).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (Again, one is struck by Lagrange's rather informal manipulations—but he knew the
 answer in advance.)

 He also derives the continuity and momentum equations for compressible fluid in

 material coordinates. The former is AO = H, in place of 0 = 1 for incompressible
 fluid, where H(a, b, c) is the value of the density A at t = 0, and 9 is as stated above:

 "Continuity and change" 67

 Books that eventually filled five volumes (Laplace 1799-1825). The final chapter
 VIII of Book I is devoted to "The motion of fluids". Rather like Lagrange, he begins
 by expressing the relation between force and acceleration of a fluid particle in the
 variational form

 where external force components P, Q, R (per unit mass) satisfy P ■ &x + Q ■ 8y +

 R -Sz = 8V and p is the density. But he has already identified p as the pressure in his

 previous section on hydrostatics: it is no longer an undetermined multiplier associated

 with the continuity condition.

 Adopting material coordinates, he then derives the continuity equation as

 pP = (p),

 (equivalent to Lagrange's AO — H above) where (p) denotes the initial density of
 the particle, p that at time t, and fi the Jacobian given by 0 above. He then obtains

 the equations of motion in now-so-called "Eulerian form," in notation close to Euler's

 rather than Lagrange's, with velocity components represented by u, v, w. Later, he
 goes on to re-express these equations of motion in spherical polar coordinates, needed

 for his study of water waves and tides on the Earth's surface. In the latter, he was the

 first to incorporate the so-called "Coriolis force" due to the Earth's rotation.

 Simeon Denis Poisson derived the hydrodynamic equations in the last Book VI of

 his popular Traite de mecanique (Poisson 1811). His account and notation are almost
 the same as Euler's and so need no description. For the continuity equation, he con
 siders the subsequent motion of an infinitesimal parallelepiped as described above.
 It was through the work of Lagrange, Laplace, and Poisson that British scientists

 first began to study theoretical fluid mechanics and to cast aside old-fashioned New
 tonian prejudices. Rather improbably, among the first was Thomas Young (a brilliant

 physicist, but reactionary mathematician) who gave an anonymous and rather eccentric
 reworking of Book 1 of Laplace's Mecanique celeste (Laplace and Young 1821).40 He
 replaced large sections of Laplace's writings with his own, inserted many diagrams,
 and in his section "Of the motions of fluids", quoted many pages from Poisson's Traite

 de mecanique (Poisson 1811) that he considered clearer than Laplace and "reduced to
 more elementary principles." Other, more faithful, translations of Laplace's Book 1

 were by the Cambridge-educated John Toplis (Laplace 1814) and the Dublin-educated
 Henry Harte (Laplace 1822). Harte also translated Poisson's Traite de Mecanique
 (Poisson 1842). In his introduction, Toplis favourably quotes the judgment of S.F.
 Lacroix that "the Mechanique Analytique and the Mechanique Celeste are the true
 sources from which a complete and methodical knowledge of all the properties of

 the equilibrium and of the motion of bodies either solid or fluid ... can be obtained"
 (Laplace 1814, Preface v (footnote)). It was no coincidence that Toplis's translation
 was contemporaneous with the activities of the Cambridge Analytical Society that

 40 See also Craik (2010).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 68 A. D. D. Craik

 promoted the continental calculus by translating Lacroix's Traite elementaire (Lacroix
 1816). A freer translation and condensation of much more of Laplace's Mecanique
 celeste is Mary Somerville's The mechanism of the heavens (Somerville and Laplace
 1831). Her Chapter VII on the motion of fluids contains derivations of the equations
 of motion close to those of Laplace and Poisson. A more faithful translation and copi

 ous commentary of all but the final volume of the Mecanique celeste was later given
 by the American Nathaniel Bowditch (Laplace and Bowditch 1829). In contrast with
 the attention to Laplace, there was no English translation of Lagrange's Mecanique
 analytique until 1997 (Lagrange 1997).

 An inauspicious contribution was made by Peter Barlow in his long article 'Hydro

 dynamics' for the London-based Encyclopaedia Metropolitana (Barlow 1840). After

 much about hydrostatics, efflux from vessels, and practical hydraulics, he at last comes
 to the equations of motion (pp. 275-278). Following Poisson's "Traite de Mecha
 nique", but choosing to re-express the analysis in outdated Newtonian 'dot' notation,
 Barlow derives the continuity equation as

 d du d v dw
 - + — + — + — = 0

 t x y z

 where d is density and u, v,w the components of velocity. He concludes with the

 common view that these fluid equations are intractable: "unfortunately, their general
 integration cannot be obtained by any means at present known" (p. 278).

 The others following all had Cambridge affiliations. George Biddell Airy's long
 encyclopaedia article "Tides and Waves" (Airy 1841), important in other respects
 (see, e.g. (Craik 2004)), follows Laplace's formulation of the continuity equation, but
 restricts attention to incompressible flows in two dimensions and to tidal motions on
 a sphere. John Henry Pratt's derivation for three-dimensional compressible flows in
 The mathematical principles of mechanical philosophy (Pratt 1836, pp. 574—577) also
 follows Laplace and Poisson. The same is true of the Cambridge textbooks of William
 Hallowes Miller (1850, 4th edn., 62-63) and Thomas Webster (1836, pp. 137-139),
 the latter of whom cites both Poisson and "the published papers of Professor Challis"
 in his preface. More antiquated was the collection of problems on hydrostatics and
 hydrodynamics published by William Walton (1847), that no doubt reflected much of

 the teaching and examining at Cambridge at that time. His hydrodynamical problems

 all concern efflux from and oscillations in pipes, employing the method of parallel
 sections: nowhere do the general equations of motion appear.

 James Challis, Cambridge's Plumian Professor, wrote several papers on fluid mec

 hanics, all of them misguided. In Challis (1851, p. 32), he follows Lagrange in deriving

 the continuity equation by setting to zero the variation of the total mass S(pDxD;yDz)
 where S denotes integration, see (7.2) above. But Challis was convinced that the
 established equations of motion were insufficient and that a further condition had to

 be applied, namely that "the direction of motion is everywhere normal to a system of

 continuous surfaces". An increasingly testy exchange took place with G.G. Stokes, by
 then Cambridge's Lucasian Professor, who pointed out Challis's error (Stokes 1851).

 "S Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 69

 9 A new derivation

 It might seem that there is little more to be said about the continuity equation, but this

 is not so. A major methodological puzzle remains. Why were all the above derivations
 of the continuity equation based on a moving fluid element, relating its initial volume

 to that after a time dtl As we have seen, this was first done by d'Alembert, refined and

 generalized by Euler, and accepted and recapitulated by Lagrange, Laplace, and Pois
 son. It was perhaps natural that the first derivations should have focused on a moving

 particle of fluid, as this was necessary for expressing Newton's laws of momentum.
 But the latter equations require consideration of just a single typical moment of time,

 whereas the corresponding derivation of the continuity equation involves two moments

 of time, with calculation of the new position of an element of fluid after an infinitesimal

 time dt, in order to find its new volume. But this is an unnecessarily complicated way

 of arriving at the result: it follows more naturally from considering a fixed portion of
 space through which the fluid flows. The latter method involves just a single typical
 moment of time, like the momentum equations, and is the true "Eulerian" derivation,

 though unknown to Euler. This improvement was adopted by the next generation of

 scientists in Britain. In the remainder of this section, we outline their reception of the

 tradition and their reworking of it.

 When the recently graduated William Thomson (later to become Baron Kelvin)
 took over the editor's duties of the Cambridge Mathematical Journal, he enlarged its

 scope and changed its name to the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal. For
 it, he and his friend George Gabriel Stokes together wrote six "Notes on hydrodynam

 ics" with the aim of countering the lack of suitable textbooks. The first note was "On
 the equation of continuity" (Thomson 1847). Here, at last, is the simple derivation
 based on fluid entering and leaving a fixed volume of space. He begins:

 The following proof of the Equation of Continuity is simpler than that which is

 generally given in treatises on Hydrodynamics .... Thus, instead of considering a
 portion of the moving fluid and the varying space which the particles composing
 it occupy at successive instants, as in the ordinary proof, we imagine a space S
 fixed in the interior of the fluid, and we consider the fluid which flows into this

 space, across part of the bounding surface, and that which flows out of it, across

 the remainder in a given interval of time.

 Considering a small parallelepiped with edges a, p, y parallel to the Cartesian coor

 dinate axes, the quantity of fluid lost in time dt is

 where p is density. Also, "the excess of the quantity of fluid which leaves the
 parallelepiped across one of the faces f$y above that which enters it across the
 other" is

 dp

 dt

 dt • apy

 dx

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 70 A. D. D. Craik

 Adding to this the corresponding quantities associated with the other two pairs of
 sides, it readily follows that

 where u, v, w are the components of velocity. He then goes on to apply the result to

 an arbitrary finite space S, involving integrals over its volume.

 Thomson does not claim his demonstration as original, remarking in a footnote

 that: "The proof in the text has been frequently given in lectures in Cambridge, and
 elsewhere, and it is likely to occur to anyone reading Fourier's Theory of Heat; but I

 am not aware that it has been hitherto published in any work except Duhamel's Cours
 de Mecanique (Deuxieme Partie: Paris 1847)." Thus, he gives credit for first publica
 tion to Duhamel (1845-46) shortly before his own note appeared; and it seems that

 Duhamel at the Ecole polytechnique in Paris and others in Cambridge had previously

 given this demonstration in lectures.41 But who in Cambridge would have given this in

 lectures? It does not appear in any of the books mentioned above, and official lectures
 in Cambridge were in any case then haphazard and ill-attended. Another possible
 individual is Thomson's and Stokes' private tutor, William Hopkins; but the notes
 on hydrostatics and hydrodynamics copied by Stokes and Thomson from Hopkins'
 booklets contain nothing on Euler's equations (Stokes 1838^10; Thomson 1842-44).
 What of Thomson's claim that "it is likely to occur to anyone reading Fourier's

 Theory of Heat" (Fourier 1822)? Fourier derived the heat conduction equation as fol

 lows, here given in the later English translation by Alexander Freeman (Fourier 1878,

 pp. 101-102). Considering a "prismatic molecule enclosed between six planes at right
 angles" having opposite corners at x, y, z and x + dx, y + dy, z + dz:

 The quantity of heat which during the instant dt passes into the molecule across

 the first rectangle dydz perpendicular to x, is

 — Kdydz—dt,

 dx

 and that which escapes in the same time from the molecule, through the opposite
 face, ... is

 the differential being taken with respect to x only.

 Here, v denotes temperature and K the "conductability" of the material. Considering
 the other two pairs of opposite faces gives corresponding results. The net heat gained

 by the molecule is therefore

 41 Duhamel's demonstration is at pp. 263-266 of his second volume. It differs from that given above only
 by the use of dx, dy, dz in place of a, p, y.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 71

 ( dv
 Kdydzd —
 \dx

 dt + Kdzdxd

 — I dt + Kdxdyd
 dy J

 dt

 or

 Kdxdydz

 and this must equal (CDdxdydz)dv where D is density, C is the heat capacity, and

 dv the small change in temperature of the molecule in the time dt. The heat conduction
 equation

 follows.

 With Thomson's versatility and capacity for seeing analogies between different
 areas of physics, it was no doubt evident to him that a corresponding derivation could

 be made of the continuity equation of fluid mechanics. But one must doubt whether
 it would have occurred to "anyone" reading Fourier's Theory of Heat. Though the
 matter seems simple nowadays, it had escaped d'Alembert, Euler, Lagrange, Laplace,
 Poisson et al.

 10 Consolidation

 Later British treatises and textbooks propagated the equations of hydrodynamics to

 future generations of scholars and students. We here consider only the main ones.

 A full account of the continuity equation was given in Thomson and Peter Guthrie
 Tait's Treatise on Natural Philosophy (Thomson and Tait 1867, 1: 144-149) in their
 long preliminary section on "Kinematics". Noting that the term "equation of conti
 nuity" is "unhappily chosen"—a sentiment echoed in (Batchelor 1967, p. 74)—, they

 proceed to the formulation in terms of material coordinates x, y, z that depend on the
 initial values a, b,c and time t. Much as was done by Lagrange, they arrive at the
 result

 dx dy dz
 da' da' da

 dx dy dz

 dx dy dz
 dc' dc' dc

 p db' db' db ~Po

 where p is the density at time t and po that at the initial time.42

 42 This is just equation (2.2) and Lagrange's result A8 = H.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 To find the corresponding form in terms of velocity components, they then choose

 a, b, c as the coordinates at the initial time t — dt and x, y, z those at the slightly later
 time t. Thus,

 where u,v,w are the velocity components at time t. Substitution into the determinant
 yields the value

 72 A. D. D. Craik

 dx dy dz
 x — a = —dt — udt, y — b = —dt = vdt, z — c = —dt = wdt,
 dt ' dt dt

 on ignoring all higher powers of dt. "The corresponding ratio of variation of
 density is

 f du dv dw\

 1 —( — -|- — — J dt,

 \da db dc J

 Dp

 1 +

 if Dp denote the differential of p ... as it moves from the position (a, b. c) to (x, y, z)

 The continuity equation readily follows as

 1 (dp dp dp dp\ du dv dw
 — ( —t" u —I" v ~JT + w T~ ) h ^ ~77 ~J~~ ~
 p \dt da db dc J da db dc

 Their shortcut gives a derivation far simpler, though less general, than that in Dryden
 et al. (1956, pp. 33-35) described in Sect. 2.

 Thomson and Tait then move on to the more direct derivation, considering flow
 into and out of an infinitesimal parallelepiped, as done in Thomson (1847). They do
 not give the equivalent derivation involving calculation of the volume of a moving
 particle of fluid, already implicit in their previous demonstration.

 William H. Besant (Besant 1859, pp. 125-127) gives a derivation similar to that

 of Duhamel (1845-46) and Thomson (1847). In his third edition (Besant 1877, pp.
 168-171), Besant expands this account to derive the continuity equation in mate
 rial coordinates, much as in Thomson and Tait (1867), explicitly citing Lagrange's
 Mecanique analytique.

 Horace Lamb's treatise (Lamb 1879, pp. 5-6) first gives a rather cursory derivation

 of the continuity equation by considering a moving fluid particle, initially a parallel
 epiped, but without detailed calculation of the disturbed volume, and he uses a now

 confusing notation ^ to denote the total (convective) derivative. But a few pages later
 (p. 9) he gives a better version, observing that if "2 denote the measure, estimated per

 unit volume, of any quantity connected with the properties of fluid" its rate of increase

 in a fixed rectangular space dxdydz is

 dQ

 dt

 dxdydz

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 73

 and "the total gain of Q due to the flow across the boundary" is

 - — 1 | dxdydz.

 fd-Qu d ■ Qv d ■ Qw \
 \ dx dy dz J

 If Q is the density, the continuity equation is recovered.

 In the first edition of his full treatise Hydrodynamics (Lamb 1895, pp. 4-7), Lamb

 gave a more satisfactory derivation for a moving fluid particle, citing G.G. Stokes as

 the originator of the notation D/Dt to denote differentiation following the motion. He

 then gives "Another, and now more usual method" fixing attention on an element of
 space dxdydz as in Thomson (1847). Then, in pages 14-15, he gives the "Lagrangian
 equations" of motion in material coordinates, employing the Jacobian notation in the

 continuity equation.

 The derivations of the continuity equation in (Bassett 1888, pp. 7-9) are compact,
 broadly similar to those of Thomson and Tait (1867), and also including its form in

 spherical polars (first given by Laplace). But, rather than considering the net mass flux
 into or out of a parallelepiped, Basset instead invokes "a particular case of Green's
 Theorem" (Green 1828) that

 JJJ + ~^jdxdydz — jj (/f + mrj + nt;)dS

 where r], £ are any functions of x, y, z, and /, m, n are the direction cosines of each

 point of the surface S drawn outwards.43 Basset later gives a brief derivation of the
 equations of motion by the Principle of Least Action (Bassett 1888, pp. 32-33). In

 this, the requirement of mass conservation occurs as an integral constraint, multiplied

 by an undetermined function that turns out to equal the fluid pressure. This is as first

 given by Lagrange, as in (7.1) onwards, but here more carefully argued. According to

 Basset it is "as Mr Larmor has shown": but no reference is given, and Joseph Larmor
 does not give this derivation in Larmor (1884), that seemed a likely source. There
 seems to be no account of this variational derivation in any other nineteenth-century
 British textbook.

 11 Extension to kinetic theory of gases

 All of the derivations so far discussed employ the continuum hypothesis of a fluid, as

 is still normally assumed in fluid mechanics. However, it is far from obvious, a priori,

 that the continuum hypothesis is valid for liquids and gases, for they are known to
 be composed of discrete molecules. The random motions of molecules of gases are
 considerable; and those of liquids, though less so, are detectable as Brownian motion.

 An early attempt to incorporate random molecular motions into a theory of fluids is
 Section 10 of Daniel Bernoulli's Hydrodynamica (Bernoulli 1738). There, Bernoulli

 describes pressure as due to the impact of particles of air on the wall of the containing

 43 This result, usually known as the Divergence Theorem, is commonly attributed to C.F. Gauss: see Crowe
 (1985).

 <£i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 vessel. This and later developments are surveyed in Truesdell (1968, VI) and Brush
 (1976). For present purposes, the key advance was made by James Clerk Maxwell in
 his paper "On the Dynamical Theory of Gases" (Maxwell 1867) following an earlier
 attempt in 1860, see also the clear account of this and subsequent work in Jeans (1940,
 Ch. IX).

 74 A. D. D. Craik

 In Maxwell's own words

 Molecular theories suppose that all bodies, even when they appear to our senses
 homogeneous, consist of a multitude of particles .... In fluids the molecules are
 supposed to be constantly moving into new relative positions, so that the same

 molecule may travel from one part of the fluid to any other part.
 If we consider an element of volume which always moves with the velocities
 u,v,w, we shall find that it does not always consist of the same molecules,
 because molecules are continually passing through its boundary. We cannot

 therefore treat it as a mass moving with the velocity u, v, w, as is done in hydro
 dynamics (Maxwell 1867, pp. 49-50, 68).

 Instead, each molecule has velocity components «+f, v + rj, w + 'C,; and the number
 dN of such molecules, per unit volume, having f?, < with values lying between §i
 and + d^\, r]\ and r]\ + dr)\, and £i and £i + d£\, is given by

 dN = /(§i, ?7i, S\)d%idr]]dS],

 where / is some distribution function. (Maxwell also allows for gases composed of
 molecules of two types with respective number densities N\, Ni and distributions
 fuh-)

 For an equilibrium state under collisions, Maxwell argued that

 N g2+>)2+<2
 /(£, tj, K) = jc ,
 a37r 2

 where a is a known constant, inversely proportional to the absolute temperature of the

 gas. This is now known as the Maxwellian distribution, and was later established with

 greater rigour.

 Maxwell then considers a plane of unit area moving perpendicular to the x-axis

 with velocity u!', observing that (m + % — u')dN molecules will pass from the negative

 to the positive side of the plane in unit time, for each f. Denoting by Q "any property

 belonging to the molecule, such as its mass, momentum, vis viva &c. which it carries

 with it across the plane", then "the quantity of Q transferred across the plane in the

 positive direction in unit time is

 J («-u! +%)QdN, or... (u - u')QN +JQN",

 where QN = f QdN and %QN = f £ QdN. He in turn takes Q to denote (i) the
 mass M of each molecule, (ii) the momentum M(u + f) in the x-direction of each

 molecule, and (iii) the kinetic energy of each molecule.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 75

 dQN SQ d , , _ ,

 He then considers the rate of variation of Q in an element of volume with sides dx,

 dy, dz (p. 71), finding that "by the ordinary investigation of the increase or diminution
 of matter in an element of volume as contained in treatises on Hydrodynamics",

 - — {(» - Ii')QN + - j- {(u. - w')QN + IQN).

 Here, "we employ the symbol 8 to denote the variation of Q due to actions of the first
 kind on the individual molecules [i.e. that due to their mutual action or to external

 forces], and the symbol 3 to denote the actual variation of Q in an element moving with
 the mean velocity of the system The remaining terms express the changes due to

 molecules passing into and out of the element across the three pairs of parallel sides.
 Next, "If we perform the differentiations and then make u' = u, v' — v, w' = w, ...
 the equation becomes

 dQN — /du dv dw\ d d d SQ

 + QN{— + — + —) + — GQN) + — (r,QN) + — UQN) = -£

 at \ax dy dz' dx dy dz ot

 N.

 (This last process, holding u', v'. w' fixed while differentiating u, v, w, and then set
 ting u' — u, v' = v, w' = w, seems decidedly dubious, though it yields correct
 results.)

 On choosing suitable values for Q, both the continuity equation and the momen
 tum equations may be derived. Setting Q — M, the constant mass of a molecule, and

 writing the density MN = p, it follows that

 dp (du dv dw\

 the usual continuity equation (2.1) (remembering that Maxwell's 3/31 denotes the
 convective derivative). Also, putting Q = M(u + £), the x-component of momentum
 of a molecule, the equation yields

 3 u d d — d —

 Pt- + ) + -t-ipHvi) + = XP>

 at dx dy dz

 where X denotes an external force per unit volume in the x-direction. (In fact, Max

 well's equation includes another term, here ignored, as he considers a gas consisting
 of two species of molecules.) Corresponding equations for the y- and z-components
 of momentum of course follow. The terms in d/dx, d/dy and d/dz in these three

 equations are interpreted as gradients of normal and tangential stresses. Fluid dyna

 mists will notice their close resemblance to the gradients of the "turbulent Reynolds

 stresses" first proposed by Reynolds (1895) for the equations of mean velocity in
 turbulent flows.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 76 A. D. D. Craik

 When the distribution function is Maxwellian, these stresses reduce to a pure pres

 sure and so yield the equations of inviscid hydrodynamics. Under other hypotheses,
 these stress gradients turn out to yield terms identical to those of the Navier-Stokes
 equations of viscous fluid mechanics. The latter had been formulated by Stokes (1845),

 and earlier versions were obtained by others under more restrictive hypotheses: see

 Darrigol (2002). How Maxwell, and the later workers who extended his work, achieved

 this correspondence is interesting and impressive; but this need not concern us here,
 as the continuity equation is not affected. Suffice to say that the problem is a non

 equilibrium one, where the Maxwellian distribution is modified by the varying motion

 of the fluid. It was no doubt reassuring that the continuity equation is unaltered from

 that based on the continuum hypothesis. But the main achievement of the kinetic the

 ory of gases was that, by providing a molecular explanation of the continuum concepts

 of pressure and viscosity, the full equations of fluid mechanics were validated for real
 gases. In similar manner, it provided an explanation of heat conduction and, when
 two species of molecules are present, of diffusion of concentration: see, e.g. (Jeans
 1940).

 12 Conclusion

 The derivation of the equation of mass conservation, the so-called continuity equation,
 passed through several manifestations. The first hydraulic approximations led to the
 "doctrine of parallel sections" exploited by Daniel Bernoulli and later by Lagrange
 and Laplace in situations where the full equations remained intractable (notably for

 shallow-water waves and tides). The derivations by d'Alembert, restricted to axisym
 metric and two-dimensional steady flows (but capable of generalization), prepared the
 way for Euler's definitive versions for unsteady flows in three (Cartesian) dimensions.
 Later accounts by Lagrange, Laplace, and Poisson were largely based upon that of
 Euler (usually without acknowledgment—just as Eulerhad rarely acknowledged d'Al
 embert); but Lagrange also developed the derivation in terms of material coordinates
 (previously addressed by Euler), and a variational expression of the full equations of
 motion employing the Principle of Least Action.

 In retrospect, it is surprising that derivations of the continuity equation were so
 long based upon calculating the shape and volume of a fluid element at a time t +dt,

 given its shape as an infinitesimal parallelepiped or tetrahedron at time t. The first

 published direct derivations, considering the net flow of mass into a fixed infinitesimal

 volume of space, were those of Duhamel and Thomson, the latter of whom considered

 it "likely to occur to anyone reading Fourier's Theory of Heat." Later British treatises

 and textbooks incorporated the new version, while also giving variants of the older

 ones.

 Though usually derived and used in Cartesian form, some early derivations of the
 continuity equation were given in other coordinate systems, namely d'Alembert's
 restricted versions in spherical polar and cylindrical polar coordinates, and Laplace's

 in spherical polar coordinates for his investigation of tides on a spherical earth. With

 increased proficiency in the calculus of partial derivatives, it became an easy mat
 ter to re-express the equations of motion in other coordinate systems. Also, the later

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 77

 development of quaternion, vector, and tensor notations allowed more compact for
 mulations, as in the introductory section of this paper: see also Crowe (1985), Aris
 (1962), and Truesdell (1954b).

 Yet the full equations of hydrodynamics and, a fortiori, those of viscous fluid

 dynamics long defied solution in cases of practical interest. Nearly all the exact solu
 tions of Euler's equations obtained before 1900 were for irrotational flows, for which
 the troublesome nonlinear terms disappear to yield Laplace's equation. Even then,
 solutions so obtained were often unrealistic, on account of the neglect of viscous
 effects. Indeed, the troublesome d'Alembert paradox, that a finite body moving
 through inviscid fluid experiences no drag force, led to an understandably hostile
 reaction from engineers: see Darrigol (2005) and Eckert (2006) for the eventual
 reconciliation. The one big early success was the theory of water waves and tides,
 and there were advances in the theories of vortex motion and propagation of sound.
 Eventually, however, new mathematical methods were discovered. Conformal trans

 formations yielded solutions for inviscid flows past streamlined bodies and accurately

 predicted aerodynamic lift; and the development of the boundary-layer approximation

 for slightly viscous flows, and the low-Reynolds-number approximation for highly
 viscous ones, led to crucial advances. Gradually, new areas of application, ranging
 from meteorology to the swimming of micro-organisms, were successfully explored.
 However, relatively few studies have employed the equations of motion in material
 coordinates: rather, particle paths have usually been reconstructed from the "Eule

 rian" velocities. With the advent of high-speed computing, a further revolution has
 occurred. Now, even the full Navier-Stokes equations hold few terrors: off-the-peg
 computer packages are readily available, and their results are at least sometimes
 believable.

 Acknowledgments There are many references in this article to the writings of the late Clifford A. Trues

 dell. Fifty years ago, as a young lecturer, I discovered his masterly editor's introduction to the fluid dynamical

 works of Euler (Truesdell 1954a), a copy presented to Sir Edmund Whittaker that found its way into the
 St Andrews University Mathematics Class Library. For the first time, I realized that it was possible to
 present technical mathematics from a historical perspective, and this awakened my interest in the history
 of mathematics. Though I do not now agree with all of his trenchant opinions and interpretations, I remain

 in his debt. I am also grateful to Olivier Darrigol. Jeremy Gray and the referees for helpful comments on
 an earlier draft.

 References

 Airy, George B. 1841. Tides and waves. In Encyclopaedia metropolitana or universal dictionary of knowl
 edge (1817-1845), Mixed Sciences, vol. 3, 2nd ed. eds. E. Smedley, Hugh J. Rose, and Henry J. Rose
 (1845). London: Baldwin & Cradock. Also in Trigonometry, on the figure of the Earth, tides and waves
 (Airy's articles from the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana).

 Alembert, Jean le Rond d'. 1743. Traite de dynamique .... Paris: David.
 Alembert, Jean le Rond d'. 1744. Traite de I'equilibre etdu mouvement des fluides .... Paris: David.
 Alembert, Jean le Rond d\ 1747. Reflexions sur la cause generate des vents. Paris: David.
 Alembert, Jean le Rond d'. 1752. Essai d'une nouvelle theorie de la resistance des fluides. Paris: David.
 Alembert, Jean le Rond d'. 1761-80. Opuscules mathematiques, ou memoires sur differens sujets de

 geometrie, de mechanique, d'optique, d'astronomie, &c. 8 vols. Paris: David.

 Alembert, Jean le Rond d", Charles Bossut, Joseph La Lande et at. 1789. Dictionnaire encyclopaedique des

 mathematiques. Paris: Panckoucke.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Anderson, John D. (Jr.). 1997. A history of aerodynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Aris, Rutherford. 1962. Vectors, tensors, and the basic equations of fluid mechanics. London: Prentice-Hall.
 Barlow, Peter, c. 1840. Hydrodynamics. In Encyclopaedia metropolitana or universal dictionary of knowl

 edge III (Mixed sciences, vol. 1), ed. E. Smedley, Hugh J. Rose, and Henry J. Rose, 161-296, 2n ed.
 (1845). London: Baldwin & Cradock.

 Bassett, Alfred B. 1888. A treatise on hydrodynamics, 2 vols. Cambridge: Deighton, Bell.
 Batchelor, George K. 1967. An introduction to fluid dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Bernoulli, Daniel. 1729. Theoria nova de motu aquarum per canales quoscunque fluentium. Comm. acad.

 sci. Petrop. 2 (1727): 111-125.

 Bernoulli, Daniel. 1738. Hydrodynamica, sive de viribus et motibus fluidorum commentarii. Strasbourg:

 78 A. D. D. Craik

 Dulsecker.

 Bernoulli, Johann. 1742. Hydraulica nunc primum detecta ac demonstrata directe ex fundamentis pure

 mechanicis. Anno 1732. Opera omnia 4: 387-493. Lausanne and Geneva: Bousquet.

 Bernoulli, Daniel, and Johann Bernoulli. 1968. Hydrodynamics and hydraulics. English trans, by Thomas

 Carmody and Helmut Kobus. New York: Dover.

 Besant, William H. 1859, 1877. A treatise on hydromechanics (3rd ed. 1877). Cambridge: Deighton, Bell.
 Brush, Stephen G. 1976. The kind of motion we call heat, 2 vols. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
 Challis, James. 1851. On the principles of hydrodynamics. The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosoph

 ical Magazine and Journal ofSciience 4th ser. 1: 26-38, 231-241, 477^178.

 Craik, Alex D.D. 2004. The origins of water wave theory. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 36: 1-28.
 Craik, Alex D.D. 2010. Thomas Young on fluid mechanics. Journal of Engineering Mathematics 67:95-113.
 Crowe, Michael J. 1985. A history of vector analysis: The evolution of the idea of a vectorial system.

 New York: Dover.

 Darrigol, Olivier. 2002. Between hydrodynamics and elasticity theory: the first five births of the Navier

 Stokes equation. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 56: 95-150.

 Darrigol, Olivier. 2005. Worlds of flow: a history of hydrodynamics from the Bernoullis to Prandtl. Oxford:

 Darrigol, Olivier, and Uriel Frisch. 2008. From Newton's mechanics to Euler's equations. Physica D 237:

 Oxford University Press.

 1855-1869.

 Dryden, Hugh L., Francis P. Murnaghan, and Harry Bateman. 1956. Hydrodynamics. New York: Dover.
 Originally Report of Committee on Hydrodynamics, Division of Physical Sciences, National Research
 Council, USA.

 Dugas, Rene. 1955. A history of mechanics (English trans, by J.R. Maddox). Neuchatel: Griffon.
 Duhamel, Jean Marie C. 1845-46. Cours de mecanique de I'ecole polytechnique (2 vols). Paris: Bachelier.
 Eckert, Michael. 2006. The dawn of fluid mechanics. A discipline between science and technology.

 Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

 Euler, Leonhard, and Benjamin Robins. 1745. Neue Grundsatze der Artillerie ... (Robins' New principles
 of gunnery (1742) with extensive commentary by Euler.) English translation by Hugh Brown Mil, The
 true principles of gunnery explained.... London: J. Nourse.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1757a. Principes generaux du mouvement des fluides. Mem. acad. sci. Berlin 11 (1755):
 217-273. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 2-91. English translation by Thomes E. Burton,
 adapted by Uriel Frisch, Physica D 237 (2008): 1825-1839.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1757b. Continuation des recherches sur la theorie du mouvement des fluides. Mem. acad.

 sci. Berlin 11 (1755): 316-361. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 92-132.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1761. Principia motus fluidorum (written in 1752). Novi comm. acad. sci. Petrop. 6
 (1756/7): 271-311. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 133-168. English translations by Enlin
 Pan, Euler online archive E258. http://www.math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/. Accessed 24 Jan 2012; and by
 Walter Pauls, Physica D 237 (2008): 1840-1854.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1762. Lettre de M. Euler a M. de la Grange, Recherches sur la propagation des ebran
 lemens dans un milieu elastique (dated January 1760). Misc. Taur. 2^ (1760-1761): 1-10. Also Euleri
 opera omnia ser. 2, X: 255-263.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1763. Dilucidationes de resistentia fluidorum. Novi comm. acad. sci. Petrop. 8 (1760/1):

 197-229. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 215-243.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1766. Supplement aux recherches sur la propagation du son. Mem. acad. sci. Berlin 15:

 210-240. Also Euleri opera omnia, ser. 3,1: 452 - 483.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1767a. Recherches sur le mouvement des rivieres (written c. 1750-51). Mem. acad. sci.

 Berlin 16 (1760): 101-118. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 272-288.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Continuity and change" 79

 Euler, Leonhard. 1767b. De motu fluidorum a diverso caloris gradu oriundo. Novi comm. cicad. sci. Petrop.

 11 (1765): 232-267. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XII (1954): 244-271.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1770. Sectio secunda de principiis motus fluidorum. Novi comm. acad. sci. Petrop.

 14 (1769): 270-386. Also Euleri opera omnia ser. 2, XIII (1955): 73-153.

 Fourier, Joseph. 1822. Theorie analytique de la chaieur. Paris: Firmin Didot.
 Fourier, Joseph. 1878. The analytical theory of heat. English translation of [Fourier 1822] by Alexander

 Freeman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Garbrecht, Giinter (ed.). 1987. Hydraulics and hydraulic research: a historical review. Rotterdam:

 Green, George. 1828. Essay on the application of mathematical analysis to the theories of electricity and

 magnetism. Nottingham: privately printed.

 Grimberg, Gerard, Walter Pauls, and Uriel Frisch. 2008. Genesis of d'Alembert's paradox and analytical

 elaboration of the drag problem. Physica D 237: 1878-1886.

 Hankins, Thomas L. 1970. Jean d'Alembert: science and the enlightenment. Oxford: Oxford University

 Jeans, James H. 1940. An introduction to the kinetic theory of gases. Cambridge: Cambridge University

 Balkema.

 Press.

 Press.

 Lacroix, Silvestre F. 1816. -4/j elementary treatise of the differential and integral calculus. Trans, by Charles

 Babbage, John Herschel, and George Peacock. Cambridge: Deighton.

 Lagrange, Joseph-Louis. 1760-61. Application de la methode exposee dans le memoire precedent a la
 solution de differents problemes de dynamique. Misc. Taur., 2. Also in Oeuvres de Lagrange, ed. J.-A.
 Serret, 1 (1867): 365-468. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Lagrange, Joseph-Louis. 1781. Memoire sur la theorie du mouvement des fluides. Nouv. mem. acad. roy.

 sci. et belles-lettres de Berlin, annee 1781. Also in Oeuvres de Lagrange, ed. J.-A. Serret, 4 (1869):
 695-748. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Lagrange, Joseph-Louis. 1788/1853-55. 1st ed. Mechanique analitique 1788 Paris: Desaint. 3rd ed. Meca
 nique analytique. 1853-55, 2 vols. ed. M.J. Bertrand. Paris: Mallet-Bachelier. Also in Oeuvres de
 Lagrange, ed. J.-A. Serret, v. 11-12 (1888-89). Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Lagrange, Joseph-Louis. 1997. Analytical mechanics. 1811 ed. of Mecanique analytique. Translated and

 edited by A. Boissonnade and V.N. Vagliente. Boston: Kluwer.

 Lamb, Horace. 1879. A treatise on the mathematical theory of the motion of fluids. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Oxford: Pergamon.

 Lamb, Horace. 1895. Hydrodynamics (6th ed. 1932). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Landau, Lev D., and Evgeny M. Lifshitz. 1959. Fluid mechanics. Trans, by J.B. Sykes and W.H. Reid.

 Laplace, Pierre-Simon. 1799-1825. Traite de mecanique celeste, 5 vols. Paris: Duprat.
 Laplace, Pierre-Simon. 1814. A treatise upon analytical mechanics; being the first book of the Meca
 nique Celeste of M. le Comte Laplace .... Translated and elucidated by John Toplis. Nottingham:
 J. Barnett.

 Laplace, Pierre-Simon, and Thomas Young. 1821. Elementary illustrations of the Celestial Mechanics of

 Laplace. Part the first, comprehending the first book. London: Murray.

 Laplace, Pierre-Simon. 1822. A treatise of celestial mechanics, by P.S. Laplace ..., part the first—book the
 first. Trans, by Henry H. Harte. Dublin: Milliken; and London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown.

 Laplace, Pierre-Simon and Nathaniel Bowditch. 1829-39. Celestial mechanics by the Marquis de La Place,

 4 vols. Boston. Also 1966 reprint, New York: Chelsea.

 Larmor, Joseph. 1884. On the direct application of the Principle of Least Action to the dynamics of solid

 and fluid systems, and analogous elastic problems. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 15:
 170-184.

 Macagno, Enzo O. 1987. Leonardo da Vinci: Engineer and Scientist. In Garbrecht (1987), 33-53.
 Mach, Ernst. 1919. The science of mechanics: a critical and historical account of its development. Trans,

 by T.J. McCormack, 4th ed. Chicago and London: Open Court.

 Maclaurin, Colin. 1742. A Treatise on fluxions, 2 vols. Edinburgh: Ruddiman.
 Maffioli, Cesare S. 1994. Out of Galileo: The science of waters 1628-1718. Rotterdam: Erasmus.
 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1867. On the dynamical theory of gases. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal

 Society of London 157: 49-88. Also in The scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell (1890), 2: 26ff.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Miller, William H. 1850. The elements of hydrostatics and hydrodynamics, 4th ed. Cambridge: Deighton.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Newton, Isaac. 1687. Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica. London: Royal Society.
 Poisson, Simeon David. 1811. Traite de mecanique. Paris: Courcier. 2nd ed., 1833, Paris: Bachelier.
 Poisson, Simeon David. 1842. A treatise of mechanics. Trans, by Henry H. Harte. London: Longman;

 Dublin: Milliken, Hodge & Smith.

 Pratt, John Henry. 1836. The mathematical principles of mechanical philosophy. Cambridge: Deighton.
 Reynolds, Osborne. 1895. On the dynamical theory of incompressible viscous fluids and the determination

 of the criterion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A 186: 123-164. Also in
 Reynolds' Papers on Mechanical and Physical Subjects, 3 vols. (1900-1903), 2: 535-577. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press.

 Rouse, Hunter and Simon Ince. 1963. History of hydraulics. Corr. ed. New York: Dover.
 Sandifer, Ed. 2008. "How Euler did it: PDEs of fluids". MAA Online http://www.maa.org/news/

 80 A. D. D. Craik

 Simon Calero, Julian. 2008. The genesis of fluid mechanics 1640-1780. Trans, by Veronica H.A. Watson.

 howeulerdidit.html. Accessed 24 Jan 2012.

 Dordrecht: Springer.

 Somerville, Mary, and Pierre-Simon Laplace. 1831. The mechanism of the heavens. London: Murray.
 Stokes, George Gabriel. 1838^-0. Mss. Stokes Collection: Add Ms. 7656, PA 18-19 (Microfilm reel 73).

 Cambridge University Library.

 Stokes, George Gabriel. 1845. On the theories of the internal friction of fluids in motion, and of the equi
 librium and motion of elastic solids. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 8: 287-319.
 Also in Stokes' Math, and physical papers (1880-1905), v. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Stokes, George Gabriel. 1851. On the alleged necessity of a new general equation of hydrodynamics. The
 London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 4th ser. 1: 157-160. On
 the principles of hydrodynamics, in reply to Professor Challis ibid. 393-394.

 Thomson, William. 1842-44. Mss. Kelvin Collection: Add Ms. 7342, PA 16 (Microfilm reel 23).

 Cambridge University Library.

 Thomson, William. 1847. Notes on hydrodynamics: I. On the equation of continuity. Cambridge and Dublin

 Mathematical Journal 2: 282-286. (Cambridge Math. J. 6).

 Thomson, William (Baron Kelvin), and Peter G. Tait. 1867. Treatise on natural philosophy, part 1, 2nd ed.,

 2 vols. 1886, 1890: reprinted 1912. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Tokaty, Gregory A. 1971. A history and philosophy of fluid mechanics. Corr. ed. New York: Dover.
 Truesdell, Clifford A. 1954a. Rational fluid mechanics, 1687-1765. Editor's introduction to Euleri opera

 omnia, ser.2, XII. Lausanne: Orell Fiissli.

 Truesdell, Clifford A. 1954b. The kinematics ofvorticity. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
 Truesdell, Clifford A. 1955. Editor's introduction to Euleri opera omnia, ser. 2, XIII. Lausanne: Orell Fiissli.

 Truesdell, Clifford A. 1968. Essays in the history of mechanics. New York: Springer.
 Truesdell, Clifford A. 1984. An idiot's fugitive essays on science: methods, criticism, training, circum

 Walton, William. 1847. A collection of problems in illustration of the principles of theoretical hydrostatics

 stances. New York: Springer.

 and hydrodynamics. Cambridge: Deighton.

 Webster, Thomas. 1836. The theory of the equilibrium and motion of fluids. Cambridge: Deighton.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

