 

 

 

 

Conventions for recreational problems in Fibonacci's "Liber Abbaci"
Author(s): John Hannah
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 2 (March 2011), pp. 155-180
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134344
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:25 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (201 1) 65:155-180
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-010-0074-X

 Conventions for recreational problems in Fibonacci's
 Liber Abbaci

 John Hannah

 Received: 29 January 2010 / Published online: 3 December 2010
 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract Fibonacci's treatment of so-called recreational problems in his Liber
 Abbaci has been interpreted as an early episode both in the history of systems of

 linear equations, and in the history of negative numbers. However, these problems are
 also interesting in their own right. We discuss some of the conventions which seem

 to have governed these problems. By considering certain pairs of problems, where
 one problem is unsolvable and its partner is solvable, we show that Fibonacci went
 to a significant effort to conform to these conventions. We also examine the methods

 which he could have used to construct his problems.

 1 Introduction

 Leonardo of Pisa, also known as Fibonacci, published his Liber Abbaci in 1202, and

 again in revised form in 1228. For many people his fame rests on a minor problem in

 Chap. 12 of Liber Abbaci which gives rise to the Fibonacci sequence.1 The twelfth and

 longest chapter of Liber Abbaci has nine sections devoted mostly to various methods
 of solving what some people call recreational problems (Singmaster 1988) and what

 1 See Vogel (1971) and Katz (1998, Chap. 8) for a general introduction to Leonardo. His Liber Abbaci was
 published in the original Latin as Boncampogni (1857) and it has been translated into English as Sigler
 (2002). Leonardo's treatment of various problems, his possible sources and his own influence on later devel-
 opments are discussed, for example, in Bartolozzi and Franci (1990), Docampo Rey (2009), Franci and
 Toti Rigatelli (1985), H0yrup (2005, 2007), Katz (1998), Rashed (1994), Sesiano (1985, 2009), Spiesser
 (2000), Vogel (1940, 1971).

 Communicated by Menso Folkerts.

 J. Hannah (S)

 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury, Private bag 4800,
 Christchurch 8 1 40, New Zealand

 e-mail: john.hannah@canterbury.ac.nz

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 156 J. Hannah

 other people call mathematical riddles (H0yrup 2002, pp. 364-367). As many of the
 problems can be interpreted as systems of linear equations, Leonardo has been seen
 as a pioneer in the development of methods for solving such systems (Vogel 1940).
 Because some of the problems involve amounts of money and are unsolvable unless
 you allow negative solutions (interpreted as debts), Leonardo has also been seen as an
 early advocate for negative numbers (Sesiano 1985). In this article, however, I want

 to look at these problems in their own right, trying to see them as Leonardo saw them.

 The most obvious effect of this change of viewpoint is that we will now be looking,

 not at systems of linear equations, but at problems such as:2

 Two men have some denari. The first says to the other:

 If you give me one of your denari, I shall have the same as you.

 The other man replies:

 And if you give me one of your denari, I shall have ten times as much as you.
 How many denari does each man have? (Boncompagni 1857, p. 190) or (Sigler
 2002, p. 289)

 Thus the unknowns are not usually abstract numbers, but instead concrete quantities

 such as "the first man's denari." The change of viewpoint also results in a change of
 questions. Instead of looking for the antecedents of modern ideas, such as general

 methods for solving systems of linear equations, or the existence of negative numbers,

 we shall be looking at issues which concerned Leonardo himself. We shall focus in
 particular on two questions: Which kinds of questions was Leonardo allowed to ask?
 and How could he have constructed acceptable problems?

 We shall concentrate on Leonardo's treatment of three groups of problems: men

 giving and taking (as in the above example), men finding a purse, and men wishing to

 buy a horse (see Sect. 2 for examples of such problems). All three groups of problems
 have a long history before and after Leonardo's time (Singmaster 2004, Sect. 7.R).
 Leonardo contributes to this history by offering a wide range of variations (for exam-

 ple, increasing the number of men involved and allowing various groupings of men),

 by offering a variety of solution methods (such as false position and regula recta) and,

 most particularly, by exploring variations of the problems which, for one reason or
 another, are unsolvable. In what follows, it is Leonardo's wealth of examples which
 allows us to observe the conventions which seem to have applied to these families

 of problems, and it is his interest in unsolvable and solvable problems conforming to
 these conventions, which gives us the chance to see how he might have constructed

 his problems.

 In Sect. 2, we introduce the three families of problems mentioned above, and iden-

 tify the conventions which seem to have applied to such problems, especially to the

 more complex variations involving three or more unknowns. The most noticeable con-
 vention is that values of parameters (such as amounts of money being exchanged, or
 ratios of amounts of money) increase as you recite the problem, a convention which

 may have made it easier to remember the data in an oral environment. This convention

 2 All translations are mine. Where paraphrases are given, the reader seeking more detailed translations is

 referred to (Sigler 2002) which is more than adequate for that purpose.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci's Liber Abbaci 1 57

 is followed by many complex problems in many cultures, so it cannot be said to belong

 particularly to Leonardo, even though he seems to adhere to it more closely than many

 of his predecessors.

 Section 3 looks at how the three families of problems fit into Leonardo's plan for

 Chap. 12 of Liber Abbaci. We shall see that Leonardo's systematic exploration of
 variations of these problems inevitably unearths some unsolvable problems. Earlier
 authors do not seem to have been interested in such unsolvable problems, so this
 material may actually be original to Leonardo. His main concern seems to be that his
 readers learn how to recognize unsolvable problems, and for this purpose he offers

 pairs of related problems, one unsolvable and the other solvable. To construct these
 problems Leonardo seems to have gone to significant effort to conform to the con-

 ventions found in Sect. 2. Although Leonardo tells his readers nothing about how to

 construct these problems, we show that nothing extra was needed beyond the methods
 taught in Liber Abbaci. Thus there is no need to postulate (as Sesiano (2009, p. 103)
 seems to do) that he had formulas for solving these problems, or that he used such
 formulas to choose parameter values which lead to unsolvable problems or negative
 values for some of the unknowns.

 2 Conventions for complex problems

 In this section we shall introduce three families of problems discussed by Leonardo,

 and then look at the general conventions which seem to govern them. At this stage all

 that is involved is a superficial inspection of the statements of the problems and their

 solutions. We postpone a deeper analysis of Leonardo's actual methods until the next
 section.

 All the problems discussed here are variations on well-known classical puzzles.
 The first family of problems, about "giving and taking", occurs in the third section
 of Chap. 12 of Liber Abbaci, a section where Leonardo introduces the method of

 (single) false position. This group of problems deals with men taking money from
 one another and then making observations about the relative sizes of their holdings.

 Such problems have a long history, with Diophantus (third century CE) showing how

 to solve an abstract problem corresponding to the case of just two men; see Problem
 I, 15 in Heath (1910, p. 134) or Ver Eecke (1959, p. 20). Somewhat later, Mahavira
 (ninth century CE) offers two examples involving three men (Mahavira 1912, pp. 158-
 159). These problems still seem to have had some currency as challenge problems in

 Leonardo's time since his third example is said to have been posed to him by a teacher
 in Constantinople (Boncompagni 1857, p. 190) or (Sigler 2002, p. 290):

 Two men have some denari.

 If the first takes 7 denari from the second, he will have 5 times what that man
 has left.

 Similarly, if the second takes 5 from the first, he will have 7 times what the first
 has left.

 How many denari does each man have?

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 158 J. Hannah

 or, in algebraic form3

 a + 7 = 5(b - 7)

 * + 5 = 7(a-5).

 We shall examine Leonardo's method of solution later, but for the moment the most

 interesting feature is that the solution is quite messy. Indeed, the amounts held by the

 two men at the start of the problem are found to be

 This is typical of Leonardo's examples and those of his predecessors mentioned above.

 Convention 1 Data in problems are usually small integers. A consequence of this is
 that solutions are relatively messy (for example, non-integers).

 This may seem too simple an observation to be worth making, but one important

 consequence is that this means such problems were generally constructed first, and the
 solution calculated afterwards. This contrasts, for example, with many problems in

 Old Babylonian texts where not only were the solutions known beforehand, but some-
 times these solutions were still found "correctly" despite arithmetical errors being

 made during the solution process (H0yrup 2002, p. 72). Constructing problems first

 and accepting the solution which then arises, is probably a sign that the author is con-
 fident that his method of solution will work for any problem. Using round numbers

 in the problem statement may also make it easier to remember the data during the

 solution process, whilst the messy answer may have the advantage, in the context of
 challenge problems, that an opponent would be unlikely to find the correct answer
 simply by guessing.

 Leonardo presents 16 problems on the theme of giving and taking, some involving
 more complicated exchanges, and others involving larger groups of men.4 The prob-
 lems involving more than two men seem to follow additional conventions, as we can
 see by looking at the first such problem (Boncompagni 1857, p. 198) or (Sigler 2002,

 3 In this and succeeding examples, such equations should be viewed only as a short hand notation for the

 problem statement. There is no intention of suggesting anything resembling an algebraic approach to the
 problems. One significant difference between the rhetorical version and the algebraic version in this case
 is that the amounts exchanged are mentioned only once in the rhetorical version, but appear twice in each

 equation. Thus the equations make the enunciation appear more complicated from the point of view of an
 oral delivery of the problem.

 4 To help the reader see the conventions discussed below, all 16 problems are listed in algebraic form in
 Appendix A.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci's Liber Abbaci 1 59

 p. 300).5

 0 + 7 = 5(¿ + c-7)

 b + 9 = 6(c + a - 9)

 c+11 =7(a + b- 11)

 Once again, we see that all the numbers are integers, but this time there is also a

 pattern amongst the parameters, or numbers playing the same role in each condition

 (or equation) of the problem. Thus the takings (7, 9, 1 1) and the comparison ratios (5,

 6, 7) both increase as we read or recite the problem. On the other hand, the solution is

 still messy:

 7 98 L r 206 ^ a 24

 a = 7263' 7 98 * L = 5263' r 206 C ^ = 4263- a 24

 This behaviour is common to all the more complex giving and taking problems in
 Liber Abbaci (see Appendix A).

 Convention 2 In complex problems, the various parameters increase as you read or
 recite the problem.

 Similar conventions can be found in Leonardo's treatment of purse problems in
 Sect. 4 of Chap. 12 of Liber Abbaci. Again, these problems have a long history, with
 early examples found in Iamblichus (fourth century CE) and Mahavira (Singmaster
 2004). Leonardo's first problem gives the basic scenario of purse problems (Boncom-
 pagni 1857, p. 212) or (Sigler 2002, p. 317):

 Two men with denari find a purse with denari in it.

 The first says to the second, "If I were to have the denari from the purse along

 with those I already have, I would have three times as much as you."

 To which the other replies, "And if I were to have the denari from the purse along

 with my denari, I would have four times as much as you."

 How much does each man have, and how much is in the purse?

 As with the giving and taking problems, I shall represent such problems in symbolic
 form:

 a + p = 3b

 b + p = 4a

 but these symbolic representations should, of course, be read as stories of the above

 form. All 15 purse problems are given in symbolic form in Appendix B, and we can
 see there that Conventions 1 and 2 also apply to all of Leonardo's purse problems.
 This time, however, the problems are all indeterminate and so have infinitely many

 5 This example should be read as: the first man having 7 of the others' denari, will have 5 times as much as

 them; and so on. Thus the algebraic form displays more detail, and may tend to make the problem statement
 look more complicated, than the rhetorical form does.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 solutions. Leonardo may not have a fully developed theory for systems of linear equa-

 tions, but he is aware of the freedom which we associate with indeterminacy, and he

 uses that freedom to find integer solutions to all his problems, usually the smallest

 integer solutions. Thus in solving the above problem he finds that

 160 J. Hannah

 0=4, ¿? = 5, c=ll.

 It is perhaps debatable whether this solution is relatively messy compared with the

 initial data (as Convention 1 would suggest) but for problems involving more men the
 distinction is much more clear cut. For example, Leonardo's solution to the second
 purse problem (see Appendix B) is

 a = 7, b = 17, c = 23, p = 73

 compared with initial data of 2, 3 and 4.

 However, Convention 2 needs a slight modification if we are to see it applying in

 the group of problems considered by Leonardo in Sect. 5 of Chap. 12 of Liber Abbaci.

 These problems are variations of yet another classical problem: men buying a horse,
 where men (or groups of men) with money seek money from other men in order to

 buy a horse.6 The second problem highlights the main features of most of these prob-
 lems, (Boncompagni 1857, p. 229) or (Sigler 2002, p. 338). Symbolically, it could be

 represented by the following system of equations:

 a + 'b = h

 b + 'c = h
 c+±a = h

 or, in words, the first man seeks one third of the denari of the second man in order
 to be able to buy the horse, and so on. Notice that, because of the context of these

 problems, we can expect the parameter (the fractions sought, that is, ', ' and ' in
 the above problem) to take values between 0 and 1. At first sight, this parameter does

 not appear to increase as we read through the problem. However, if we think in terms
 of the oral delivery of the problem, the numbers being mentioned do still increase,
 as in a third, a fourth, a fifth. Viewed in this light, these examples follow a natural
 extension of Convention 2. Since the fractions sought are generally expressed in terms
 of unit fractions, we can think of the denominators of these fractions as parameters

 which, in line with Convention 2, ought to increase as we read through the prob-
 lems. In the few cases where fractions sought are expressed as proper fractions rather
 than unit fractions, Leonardo's numerators usually increase too. For example, this

 6 This group of problems has been studied in (Vogel 1940) and we refer the reader to Vogel's article for a
 complete listing of these problems in algebraic form.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 6 1

 happens in Leonardo's third horse problem (Boncompagni 1857, p. 231) or (Sigler
 2002, p. 341):7

 a + ' b = h
 b+±c = h

 c+'d = h

 Summarizing our findings then, we have one more convention.

 Convention 3 In complex problems, if parameters are expected to be fractions, then

 they are usually expressed in terms of unit fractions, with denominators increasing

 as you read or recite the problem. If the parameters are expressed in terms of proper
 fractions, then numerators and denominators both increase as you read or recite the

 problem.

 Lest it be thought that this last example violates Convention 1, it should be noted

 that Leonardo's solution to this indeterminate problem is indeed relatively messy:

 a = 35435, ¿7 = 35313, c = 41412.

 Of course, using parameters such as |, j and | may simply be an attempt to set a
 hard problem but, as we shall see in the next section, it is also possible that the above
 conventions sometimes forced Leonardo to use complicated parameters.

 2.1 Discussion

 We have seen that Leonardo's problems dealing with giving and taking, men finding

 purses, or men wishing to buy horses, almost all follow what I have called Conventions

 1, 2 and 3. A glance at other ancient or mediaeval collections of problems shows that

 their authors usually follow the same conventions, although perhaps not as rigidly as

 Leonardo does. For example, when Diophantos needs to choose three or more typical
 values to illustrate his method for a general problem, he usually chooses according to
 these conventions; see, for example, Problems 16 to 25 from Book I in Heath (1910)

 or Ver Eecke (1959). Similarly, many of Mahavira's problems involving three or more
 statements use increasing (or decreasing) parameter values, although there are also
 several cases where the final values are out of sequence. Thus, for example, one purse
 problem has successive ratios 8, 9, 10, 11, but another, where fractions are taken

 from the purse, has the two sequences of parameter values 5,5*5*5» and 2, 3, 5, 4
 (Mahavira 1912, p. 156). Again, problems from the Suan Shu Shu (second century

 7 Leonardo gives just two other examples involving proper fractions. Using the numbering in Vogel (1940)

 they are Problem 7, which has the fractions sought 3, 7, -pp j$, ^, and Problem 19, which has the

 fractions sought 5, |, ^-, ^. The only exception to these apparent conventions is Vogel's Problem 20,
 an unusually complicated problem posed to Leonardo by "a most skilful master" from Constantinople. Its

 fractions sought are expressed as sums of unit fractions which would be read as 3 + 5, ^ + ¿ + 337}, Ž +
 1,1 2,1,1 2,1,1,1
 S + SSS'S + T + raí'S + TÜ + TT + STÜ-

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 BCE) which involve three quantities often follow these conventions; see Problems
 11, 13, 15 and 21 in Dauben (2008). And as one final example, most of Al-Karajfs

 problems dealing with three or more unknowns follow the above conventions; see, for
 example, Problems 24 to 35 in Sect. Ill of Woepcke (1853). Further examples can be
 found in the comprehensive listing of so-called recreational problems in Singmaster
 (2004).

 162 J. Hannah

 However, it is still conceivable that what we have here are not really conven-
 tions, in the sense of rules which should be followed when you construct a problem.
 Perhaps what we have observed is simply a natural behaviour when you pose prob-
 lems for people who are expected to have a general method of solution. In such
 cases, you seem to have complete freedom to choose values for any parameters in
 the problem, so why not choose the simplest numbers, such as 1, 2, 3, and so on?
 Choosing increasing parameter values may originally have been a response to the
 extra load on the hearer's memory when a complex problem is recited, as increas-
 ing (or decreasing) sequences of numbers may be easier to remember. Certainly, as
 Appendix A shows, this behaviour does not occur in the simpler problems dealing
 with only two men giving and taking. If this is the reason for the observed behav-

 iour, then choosing messier numbers could simply represent an attempt to pose harder

 problems.

 Although this is an appealing hypothesis, in the next section I shall argue that, at

 least for Leonardo, these conventions had become rules which had to be followed

 when you constructed a problem.

 3 Conventions under strain

 In this section we examine Leonardo's overall plan in the parts of his Liber Abbaci

 which deal with problems about giving and taking, or about men finding a purse,
 or about men wanting to buy a horse. In the natural course of following this plan,
 he comes across problems which, for him at least, are unsolvable. It seems that,
 in each case, he then looks for a solvable counterpart for the unsolvable problem.
 In at least one case, he goes to surprising lengths to produce a problem which
 conforms to the conventions we discussed in the previous section. As we follow

 Leonardo in this journey, we can see how he might have constructed some of these
 problems.

 Leonardo's 16 giving and taking problems, discussed earlier, form a single coherent

 unit amongst the 100 or so problems which he solves in Sect. 3 of Chap. 12 of Liber
 Abbaci. Although Leonardo introduces several different methods in Sect. 3, his main

 thesis is that the method of (simple) false position can be used to solve many problems.

 To support this thesis he offers a wide variety of problems and shows how to reduce
 each of them to a false position calculation. For the 16 problems about giving and

 taking (see Appendix A) Leonardo works systematically through variations on the
 basic scenario, and shows that in each case the same reduction technique can be used.

 Perhaps one reason that he deals with so many variations, all using the same reduction,
 is that it turns out that some of his examples cannot be solved and so he decides to

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 devote some time to showing his readers how to distinguish solvable problems from
 unsolvable ones.

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 63

 To see why some problems might be unsolvable for Leonardo, let us look briefly
 at Problems 5 and 7 from Appendix A.8 Problem 5 deals with two men giving and
 taking, but with a surplus involved in the resulting comparison (Boncompagni 1857,
 p. 193) or (Sigler 2002, p. 294):9

 Leonardo works in terms of a lesser sum which we might represent as

 and he shows that

 0 + 7 = 5(6-7) + 12

 ¿> + 5 = 7(a-5) + 12.

 s =a+b- 12

 G+I)f-

 which he says is impossible}® Leonardo does not say why this conclusion might be

 impossible, but he is probably referring to the Euclidean principle that the lesser can-
 not be equal to the greater. Indeed his turn of phrase {quod est impossibile) may be

 a deliberate echo of a phrase which occurs frequently in reductio ad absurdum proofs

 in the version of Euclid's Elements which was translated directly from the Greek, a

 version which Leonardo seems to have known. 1 1 Many of these reductio ad absurdum

 proofs reach the same kind of conclusion as Leonardo has just reached in our example:

 such and such are equal; the lesser to the greater; which is impossible}2 By using the
 final part of this rather formulaic construction, Leonardo could remind his audience

 of the Euclidean principle encapsulated by the whole construction.13

 From our modern viewpoint, we might say that for Leonardo all magnitudes (includ-
 ing this lesser sum) have to be positive numbers. Thus s = 0 is not entertained as a
 possibility here. The scenario corresponding to s = 0 could well have been excluded

 8 In modern terms, some problems are unsolvable because Leonardo is unwilling to countenance zero or
 negative quantities. See Sesiano (1985) for a discussion of these problems and their role in the history of
 negative numbers.

 9 These equations should be read as saying, If the first man takes 7 denari from the second, he will have
 five times what that man has, and 12 more, and so on.

 10 In Latin: impossibile. In this article I have consistently translated this word as impossible.

 Folkerts (2005, pp. 106-1 12) presents compelling evidence that Leonardo was at least familiar with this

 version of the Elements. Busard (1987, pp. 17-20), in his critical edition of this version, even suggests that
 Leonardo may have had a hand in compiling its Compendium of Books XIV and XV.

 12 For example, Proposition I, 14 says: ...est equalis. Minor maiori. Quod est impossibile (Busard 1987,
 p. 35).

 13 See Netz (1999, Chaps. 4 and 5) for a discussion of formulaic phrases in Greek mathematics. A key idea
 here is that formulas are naturally subject to ellipsis, and that the entire original formula can be conjured
 up for the reader by the mention of just a part.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 164 J. Hannah

 on other grounds too. This value leads to the first man having just 5 denari and the

 second just 7. Thus, after the first exchange in the statement of the problem, the first

 man (with all 12 denari in his hand) would be saying, 'I have 12 more than five times

 what you have,' to a man who has nothing in his hand. Perhaps there is some discom-

 fort, in this context of public challenge, with making arithmetical comparisons about

 amounts of money when one party actually has no money.

 Leonardo's treatment of Problem 7 from Appendix A shows another way in which

 problems may be unsolvable. In algebraic terms the problem can be expressed as the
 following system (Boncompagni 1857, p. 196) or (Sigler 2002, p. 297):

 a+7 = 5(fc-7) + l

 ¿ + 5 = 7(0-5) + 15.

 S = a+b-l.

 Leonardo shows that this problem is unsolvable by working in terms of a middle sum

 He derives a condition which we might represent by the equation

 and, after a false position calculation, he deduces that the first man must have 4 j|

 denari. Leonardo says that this value is absurd14 because it is less than the 5 which

 the first man is supposed to give the second.

 If we are thinking in terms of solutions to systems of linear equations, then we

 might say that the obstruction to solvability this time is that Leonardo is unwilling

 to allow negative values (for the holdings of the first man after he has handed over 5
 denari to the second man). However, if we think in terms of the original problem, the

 obstruction is not being able to make sense of the proposed solution in terms of the

 original story.15

 Earlier writers do not seem to have been interested in unsolvable problems, so this

 material may be original to Leonardo. In more general settings, however, unsolvable

 problems must have arisen throughout the history of mathematics. Traces of some of

 these problems can perhaps be found in the <$¿op¿a/zocr, or condition of solvability,

 14 In Latin: inconueniens. I have translated this word as absurd as this is consistent with the use of inconu-

 eniens as a translation of aronocr in Books III to IX of the translation of the Elements made directly from

 the Greek, a text with which Leonardo seems to have been familiar (Busard 1987, pp. 17-20) and (Folkerts

 2005). In Liber Abbaci the words inconueniens and impossibile are used as synonyms describing not only

 the contradictions which we might associate with inconsistent problems, but also other contradictions of
 Euclidean principles which we might now resolve by using negative numbers or zero. The same books
 of the translation of the Elements made directly from the Greek consistently use impossibile to translate
 aSvvaTOcr.

 lJ Later on, Leonardo does allow negative solutions (viewed as debts) tor some purse or norse-ouying
 problems (Sesiano 1985), perhaps thinking of these later problems as more advanced material. However,
 none of his problems are allowed zero solutions.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 65

 which Euclid supplies for some problems in his Elements (Heath 1926, pp. 129-131).

 For example, unsolvable instances of the problem "to construct a triangle out of three

 straight lines equal to three given lines" are eliminated by the condition that any two
 of the lines taken together should be greater than the third {Elements, I, 22). Leo-
 nardo was certainly familiar with the Elements (Folkerts 2005) and so, with such
 Euclidean examples in mind, Leonardo may have aspired to eliminating unsolvable

 problems by finding similar conditions of solvability. An example where this was pos-
 sible occurred in Chap. 11 of Liber Abbaci where he discusses alloy problems. Here
 he was able to offer rules for when certain problems were solvable. For example, to

 form an alloy of a desired richness, the reader is told to start with two alloys, one richer

 than the desired richness and one poorer (Boncompagni 1857, p. 151) or (Sigler 2002,

 p. 238). By contrast, al-Karajï gives an unsolvable problem about alloys in his collec-
 tion al-Fakhrî and he resolves the dilemma simply by changing the desired richness

 to an appropriate value (Woepcke 1853, p. 79). As we shall see shortly, Leonardo was
 also able to demarcate the solvable cases of two simpler variations of giving and taking

 problems by supplying the critical cases beyond which all problems were unsolvable
 (Problems 5 and 7 from Appendix A). It seems likely that Leonardo was not aware
 of al-Karajfs work (Rashed 1994) but we shall see that Leonardo responds to other
 unsolvable problems in the same way that al-Karajï does, giving a modification of an

 unsolvable problem which renders it solvable.

 The first of Leonardo's pair of four-man giving and taking problems is unsolvable

 and can be represented symbolically as follows (Boncompagni 1857, p. 201) or (Sigler

 2002, p. 303): 16

 a+b + l = 3(c + d-l)

 b + c + 8 = 4(d + a - 8)
 c + d + 9 = 5(a + b-9)

 d + a + ll =6(¿ + c-ll)

 To see why Leonardo thinks this problem is unsolvable, we shall follow a paraphrase

 of his explanation. Not only does this show his general method for solving such prob-

 lems, but it may also shed some light on his construction of a solvable version of the
 same problem.

 Leonardo works in terms of the whole amount of denari present, a quantity we

 might represent as

 S = a+b + c + d.

 The first condition in the problem, says Leonardo, implies that the first and second

 men, once they have the 7 denari handed over by the other two, must hold | of the total

 amount S. Hence the third and fourth, initially, must have ' of S plus the 7 denari.

 16 This example should be read as: the first and second men having 7 of the others' denari, will have three
 times as much as them; and so on. Once again, the rhetorical version is not as dense with details which need
 to be remembered as the symbolic version is.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Similarly, using the third condition, the first and second men must initially hold ¿
 of 5 plus the 9 denari. Combining these facts, Leonardo deduces that all four men

 between them must have ' + ¿ of S plus 16 denari. Since he wants to use the method
 of false position, he rephrases this conclusion in a form which we might represent by

 166 J. Hannah

 the equation:

 For this false position calculation Leonardo would normally guess that S = 24, the
 least common multiple of the denominators 4 and 6. Evaluating the left-hand side of

 the equation would then give 14 instead of the desired 16, and so he would scale his

 guess to get the true value of 5:

 In the text he simply states this solution (by this stage he has already done more than

 fifty false position calculations in this section of Liber Abbaci). Proceeding in the same

 way with the second and fourth conditions from the problem, he derives a condition

 which we might represent by the equation:

 *-(H)*"*

 Once again Leonardo simply states the solution, but his normal guess for this false
 position would be 5 = 35. This yields 23 instead of 19, so this time the true value of
 S appears to be

 , 35x19 21
 S- , -ja" -2%- 21

 He says this situation is absurd since the earlier calculation gave a different value for
 S.

 The question naturally arises: why did Leonardo give an unsolvable problem here,
 and how did he find it? The situation can be clarified if, for a moment, we switch to

 a completely anachronistic and modern viewpoint. Giving and taking problems like
 this one can be written in matrix form:

 1 1 -a -a a *

 -ß 1 1 -ß b _ *
 -y - y 1 le""*
 _ 1 -8 -8 1 J |_t/J |_*_

 In our case, the parameter values (the ratios of what we will have to what you will
 have) are

 a = 3, 0=4, y=5, 8 = 6

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 67

 but, regardless of the parameter values, the coefficient matrix here has rank at most

 3, and so almost all such problems are inconsistent. A glance at the complete list

 of giving and taking problems (Appendix A) shows that this form of problem arose
 naturally during Leonardo's exploration of variations on the basic problem. Hence,
 Leonardo did not need to search for this unsolvable problem. Once he had decided to

 look at this form of problem (pairs of men from amongst four men, giving and taking,

 with the pairs changing cyclically) it was almost inevitable that his example would be
 unsolvable. In particular, there is no need to postulate in this case, as Sesiano seems
 to do in Sesiano (2009, p. 103), that Leonardo had a general formula for solving all

 such problems, and that he used this formula to deliberately choose parameter values

 which would lead to, say, negative solutions. As we have just seen, Leonardo does have

 an algorithm for solving such problems but, in the absence of algebraic symbolism,
 it seems unlikely that he would have been able to express the solutions in terms of
 arbitrary parameter values. (By way of contrast, we shall see later a situation where
 it would have been entirely feasible for him to see the effect of choosing arbitrary
 parameter values.)

 Immediately after the above unsolvable problem, Leonardo says that if we want

 to exhibit a solvable variation on this problem,17 then we can use the example which
 can be expressed in symbolic form as follows (Boncompagni 1857, p. 201) or (Sigler
 2002, p. 303):

 How could he have found this problem? After all, we have just seen that almost all
 problems with this pattern of giving and taking are unsolvable.18 One easy way to

 construct a solvable problem is to start with the solution. In this case the easiest way

 would be to choose arbitrary amounts for the denari of each man (more than they are

 required to give away, of course), and then to calculate the new proportions needed

 to replace the proportions 3, 4, 5, 6 in the original problem. For example, keeping the
 same amounts being exchanged and starting with the solution a = 5,b = l,c = 9
 and d = 10 would lead to the problem:

 a + b+l00 = 3(c + d- 100)

 b + c+lO6 = 4(d + a- 106)

 c + d + U5 = 5(a+b- 145)

 d + a + 170 = 6(b + c - 170)

 a + b + 1 = l|(c + d-7)
 ¿ + c + 8= 3*(d + fl-8)

 c + d + 9= f(a + b-9)
 d + a + ll = %(b + c-U)

 In Latin: nom si earn solubilem propone re uolumus ...

 1 O

 ° Notice that one modern strategy for making the problem solvable will not work here: changing one entry

 in the coefficient matrix destroys the structure of the story.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 168 J. Hannah

 Unfortunately, the new parameter values (the ratios of what we will have to what you
 will have) no longer conform to the conventions we observed earlier. Indeed, in all
 Leonardo's giving and taking problems, involving more than two men, the ratios are
 integers which increase as you read through the problem. As we shall see shortly,
 Leonardo does construct some problems by starting with the solution, but it seems
 likely that in this case he was deterred by the resulting unsuitable values for the

 ratio parameter. Instead, it appears that Leonardo decided to retain the original values

 (3, 4, 5, 6) of the ratio parameter, and to look for suitable new exchange values. This is

 a more intricate task, but there are several ways in which it could be done. For example,

 if you start with a solution, then an algebraic approach to the first "equation" could be

 used to show that the first taking needs to be |S - (a + b) where S is total amount of
 money held by all four men, and there are similar expressions for the other takings.

 The calculations involved in this approach are certainly within Leonardo's capability,

 even if he lacked a symbolic algebra. However, the fact that Leonardo's first taking

 is 100 suggests that he actually chose this number first, rather than deriving it from a
 known solution.

 Leonardo's attempt to solve the original problem may give us a hint as to how he

 found the new exchange values and the corresponding solution. As we saw earlier, in

 his investigation of the original problem, Leonardo found that the total amount S had

 to satisfy the two conditions

 5 - (' + ¿) S = sum of first and third takings

 5 - (^ + j) S = sum of second and fourth takings.

 Since he wanted both conditions to be true, his usual guess for a false position would

 be S = 420, the least common multiple of 4, 5, 6, 7. Using this value of S in the above
 two calculations shows that he needed to have

 sum of first and third takings = 245

 sum of second and fourth takings = 276.

 From the many combinations which satisfy these two conditions, Leonardo chose
 245 = 100+145 and 276 = 106+170, and then his solution method yielded the
 values

 a = 100, ¿>=115, c=115, d = 90.

 It seems reasonable to assume that the especially round numbers here (the first tak-

 ing being 100, and the first man's initial holding being 100) represent free choices by
 Leonardo. If he was guided by the proposed conventions, then the construction process

 and

 and

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 69

 was reasonably straightforward, even if he was not guided by a formula for solving all

 such problems. Once he had chosen the first taking to be 100, the third taking had to be

 145, and then the second taking had to lie between these by Convention 2. Choosing

 106 had the advantage of making the first and fourth men's share total to a relatively

 round number (since then a + d = 'S + 106 = 190). Of course, since Leonardo
 was constructing a problem, rather than solving an already given problem, the false
 position guess S = 420 did not need to be scaled, but as a consequence some of the
 parameters in the problem look unusually large.

 Leonardo does not actually tell us how he constructed this problem, but he does

 solve it, using false position calculations similar to those just mentioned. In the course

 of doing this, he observes that there are many solutions. For example, in his solution,
 there are 215 denari which can be divided at will between the first and second men

 (Boncompagni 1857, p. 201) or (Sigler 2002, p. 303). In modern terms, this is what

 we would expect: as the coefficient matrix of the system of linear equations has rank

 at most 3, once we make the system consistent, there will be an infinite number of
 solutions. Leonardo does not have the modern theory of linear equations at his dis-

 posal, of course, but his methods are still powerful enough to reveal the indeterminacy

 of his solvable problem.

 To see a case where Leonardo probably did construct a problem by starting with a

 solution, we look at another instance where he considers a pair of problems, one unsolv-
 able and one solvable. This occurs when he discusses pairs of men (from amongst
 four men) all wanting to buy a horse. He says that he offers these two examples so

 that the reader will know better how to distinguish the solvable from the unsolvable
 (Boncompagni 1857, p. 251) or (Sigler 2002, p. 365). 19 Once again the unsolvable
 example comes first:20

 a + b+'(c + d) = h

 b + c+'{d + a) = h
 c + d + '(a+b) = h

 d + a + '(b + c) = h

 Leonardo tries two different methods of solving this problem.21 The first method,
 which has been used in several previous problems, works in terms of what Leonardo

 calls the residue, the total amount of money left to the other men after a group has
 acquired the price of the horse. When the calculations are done in full, this method uses

 a false position calculation similar to the one above except that, because the problem
 is undetermined, the guess is simply a convenient value for the main unknown and no

 scaling step is needed. However, by this stage, Leonardo has reduced the method to a

 recipe, so he simply tells the reader that using the earlier method gives the combined

 19 In Latin: quare ponamus unam questionem insolubilem et aliam solubilem de 1 1 1 Ior hominibus ut
 habeas melius notitiam cognoscendi solubiles ab insoluti libus.

 The first and the second men seek half the denari of the third and fourth in order to be able to buy the

 horse, and so on.

 1 1

 iX Vogel (1940, p. 233) mentions only the second method.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 170 J. Hannah

 holdings of the four men as 73 bezants, and the residue as 24 bezants. Hence the price

 of the horse is 73 - 24 = 49 bezants. Using the first condition in the problem, he then
 shows that the first and second men must have 49 - 24 = 25 bezants, whilst the third

 condition shows that the third and fourth must have 49 - ^24 = 41 bezants. But this is
 impossible, he says, because they ought to have 73 - 25 = 48 bezants. In Leonardo's
 second method, he considers the first and second men as one man, and the third and

 fourth as another man. Using the first and third conditions from the problem, he shows

 that the price of the horse must be -^ of the combined holdings of both new men (that
 is, of all four original men). In a similar way, though, the second and fourth conditions

 of the problem show that the price of the horse must be jj of the combined holdings of
 all four original men. This, he says, is absurd and so the problem is unsolvable. This
 could be taken as a refusal to allow zero solutions, but it is easy to understand how

 an audience might disapprove of a solution to a horse-buying problem, if the solution

 called for the horse to be free and for the combined holdings of all the men to be zero.

 As with the unsolvable giving and taking problem, this problem was easy to find.

 First, as can be seen from the problems listed in Appendix C, the form of the problem

 arose naturally as Leonardo systematically explored variations on the classic prob-
 lem of "men wishing to buy a horse". It is worth noting, however, that he presents a

 solvable five-man problem first, before giving the unsolvable four-man problem. This
 break from the natural sequence of increasing complication (see Appendices A and

 B, for example) suggests that Leonardo wished to establish first that his methods did

 still work for this variation of horse-buying problems. Secondly, if we take the modern

 perspective once again, horse-buying problems involving pairs of men from amongst
 four men can be written in matrix form:

 I I a a a 1

 ß ! 1 ß b =h 1
 y y 1 1 e 1
 1 8 8 lj [d] L1-

 In our case, the parameter values (the fractions that we need from what you hold) are

 but, regardless of the parameter values, the coefficient matrix still has rank at most 3
 and so, if h ^ 0, almost all such problems are inconsistent. Thus, once again, Leo-
 nardo did not need to search for this unsolvable problem, or to use a formula to choose

 suitable values for the parameters. In a sense, he probably stumbled on the problem.

 As Leonardo promised, he immediately gives a solvable problem of the same type

 (Boncompagni 1857, p. 252) or (Sigler 2002, p. 366):

 a+b+ '(c + d) = h
 b + c+^(d + a) = h

 c + d + ^(a + b) = h

 d + a + -^(b + c) = h

 51 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 7 1

 In Leonardo's solution the four men have 5, 6, 7 and 9 bezants (and so the price of the

 horse is 19 bezants). So it seems likely that he constructed this problem by starting

 from his solution. This time substituting the values from a simple solution has resulted

 in proper fractions which obey the earlier conventions for values of parameters which

 are expected to take fractional values. Further evidence that Leonardo proceeded this

 way lies in the fact that this is the "first" problem which satisfies these conventions.

 More precisely, if you construct a four-man problem starting from a solution of the
 form a = n, b = n + I, c = n + 2 and d = n + 4 (so that a + b + '{c + d) is a
 whole number) then n = 5 is the first case which gives parameter values conforming
 to the above conventions. In other words, in a systematic search for a solvable prob-
 lem, this is the first suitable example which Leonardo would have found. Amongst
 the smaller values of n, the cases n = 1, 2 lead to scenarios where two of the men

 can already buy the horse, whilst the cases « = 3,4 gives sequences of parameter

 values ', |, y, ^, and 2» -j^» g» yy> respectively, which do not conform to the above
 conventions.

 The fact that this problem is in some sense the smallest suitable example, raises

 the issue of whether Leonardo consciously sought out what Thomaidis calls "first
 admissible cases" (Thomaidis 2005, pp. 604-605). This certainly seems to be the
 case for Problems 5 and 7 in Appendix A, for example. The parameter values 12
 and 15 (respectively) are the first values which yield unsolvable problems for giv-
 ing and taking problems with that structure, and Leonardo does comment on this
 fact when discussing Problem 5.22 As Thomaidis makes clear, Diophantos showed

 an implicit interest in this issue (in the sense that he sometimes uses the first admis-
 sible case to illustrate how to solve a problem) and Leonardo's approximate con-
 temporary, Maximus Planudes, showed an explicit interest when commenting on
 Diophantos' work. In the present context, the question is whether Leonardo was
 interested in demarcating the boundary between solvable and unsolvable problems.
 Certainly his treatment of all these unsolvable problems suggests an interest, but
 it may be that a full investigation was beyond his capability. For example, in his
 treatment of Problem 9 in Appendix A (which involves both a surplus +6 and a
 deficit -8) he mentions that, although his example is solvable, some such problems
 are not solvable (Boncompagni 1857, p. 198) or (Sigler 2002, p. 300). However his
 chosen example is not a critical example this time, which suggests that he did not
 know the critical values. Of course, if he had a formula for the solution of such

 problems, it should have been a straightforward matter to provide such a critical
 example.

 Finally we look at a situation where it appears that Leonardo was unable to find
 a problem satisfying the expected conventions. As before, the problems concerned
 focus on the solvability issue, this time dealing with four men, pairs of whom take a

 22 Boncompagni and Franci (1857, p. 193) or Sigler (2002, 294).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 172 J. Hannah

 purse (Boncompagni 1857, p. 227) or (Sigler 2002, p. 336):23

 a + b + p = 2(c + d)

 b + c + p = 3(d + a)

 c + d + p = 4(a + b)

 d + a + p = 5(b + c)

 S = a + b + c + d + p.

 Once again it worth seeing why Leonardo thinks this problem is unsolvable. As before,

 he works in terms of the whole amount of money present:

 Using a similar argument to the one we have already seen, he uses the first and third

 conditions to show that the combined holdings of the four men are

 whilst the other two conditions show that the combined holdings are

 (i + i)S. or §S

 Ü + ¿)S, or gs.

 He calls this situation absurd. Once again it is easy to understand how an audience

 might disapprove of a solution to a money problem where the total amount of money

 present is zero.

 As with the earlier unsolvable examples, it seems likely that Leonardo stumbled

 upon this example, as opposed to deliberately constructing it. Indeed, as Appendix B
 shows, the form of the problem arose naturally during Leonardo's systematic explo-

 ration of variations on the classic problem "men finding a purse". Furthermore, if we

 once again take the modern viewpoint, purse problems like this one can be written in
 matrix form:

 1 1 -a -a a 1

 -ß I 1 -ß b 1
 -y -y 1 1 c P 1
 1 -8-8 1 J L^J L1.

 In our case, the parameter values (ratios comparing what we will have with what you
 already have) are

 a = 2, j8 = 3, y =4, 8 = 5.

 But, regardless of the parameter values, the coefficient matrix still has rank at most 3
 and so, if p ^ 0, almost all such problems are inconsistent.

 23 The first and the second men, with the purse, have twice the denari of the third and fourth, and so on.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 73

 From what we have seen with the preceding problems, we might expect Leonardo

 to follow this unsolvable problem with a solvable one having a similar structure. Once

 again, this requires care since almost any other choice of proportions a, ß, y, 8 instead

 of 2, 3, 4, 5 will produce the same absurdity which we have just seen. It is possible that

 Leonardo tried to construct a solvable problem by starting with a solution. However,
 his calculations above show that a solvable problem needs to have

 -J- + -!- = J- + J- m
 a + l y + 1 ß + 1 8 + 1'

 Furthermore, in this case, the relationship between the original parameter values
 a, ß, y, 8 and the condition which they need to satisfy is simple enough that even
 someone without symbolic algebra could reasonably be expected to observe the pat-

 tern. Indeed, Leonardo's habit of representing fractions as sums of unit fractions means

 that he would see, on the calculating surface in front of him, a condition for solvability
 quite similar to the above algebraic condition. Hence, it is entirely conceivable that
 Leonardo realized that no solvable problem could satisfy the convention for purse

 problems, namely that:

 a < ß < y < 8.

 In any case, Leonardo makes no comment this time about offering a solvable example

 of the same type. As we might expect, his next problem is indeed a solvable one, but
 this time it involves an extra man (Boncompagni 1857, p. 227) or (Sigler 2002, p.
 336):

 a + b + p = 2(c + d + e)

 b + c + p = 3(d + e + a)

 c + d + p = 4(e + a+b)

 d + e + p = 5(a + b + c)

 e + a + p = 6(b + c + d)

 As can be seen from a glance at the corresponding matrix formulations, from the
 modern point of view the unsolvable purse problem is essentially the same as the
 previous unsolvable horse-buying problem. However, from Leonardo's point of view,
 there may have been a subtle difference. The unsolvable purse problem is followed by

 a solvable problem involving an extra man, but the unsolvable horse-buying problem
 is followed by a solvable problem with the same number of men. As we have seen,

 Leonardo could not give a solvable purse problem for four men without abandoning
 his apparent conventions for the wording of such problems. For purse problems, this

 meant having increasing integer parameter values as you read through the statement

 of the problem. However, in the case of the horse-buying problem, his conventions did

 allow him to present a solvable four-man problem. Horse-buying problems involved
 the transfer of some fraction of a man's (or a group's) money, and his convention for

 fraction parameter values did allow him to satisfy condition (1).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 174 J. Hannah

 4 Conclusions

 We have seen that the so-called recreational problems in Leonardo's Liber Abbaci
 seem to follow various conventions. Thus Leonardo shows a marked preference for

 problems which have relatively simple data (small integers or unit fractions) and rela-

 tively complicated solutions (non-integers or relatively large integers). Such problems

 were almost certainly constructed first, with the solution calculated afterwards. This

 probably means that the poser of the problem possessed, and expected any potential

 solver to possess, a general method of solution. Simple data may also have been easier

 to remember during the solution process, whilst a complicated answer may have dis-

 couraged a potential solver from seeking the correct answer simply by guessing. All

 these features would make such problems useful, not just in the classroom, but also in

 the context of challenge problems posed for one another by professional mathemati-
 cians (for want of a better title).

 Another convention appears in complex problems (those involving three or more

 unknowns). Here we see that the various parameters usually increase as you read

 through the problem. In particular, if parameters were expected to be fractions, then
 they were usually expressed in terms of unit fractions, with increasing denomina-

 tors. Similarly, proper fractions usually had increasing numerators and denominators.

 Increasing parameter values may originally have been a response to the extra load on
 the hearer's memory when a complex problem was recited, as increasing (or decreas-

 ing) sequences of numbers are probably easier to remember.

 A glance at other ancient or mediaeval collections of problems shows that their
 authors usually followed these same conventions, although perhaps not quite as rig-
 idly as Leonardo did (see the extensive lists in Singmaster (2004), for example). We
 have seen that Leonardo's own attachment to these conventions was tested when there

 was a potential conflict between the conventions and his overall plan for Chap. 12
 of Liber Abbaci. This plan involved showing that various solution methods (such as

 false position and regula recta) could be used to solve many problems. As he worked
 systematically through variations on some basic scenarios, such as men giving and

 taking, or men finding a purse, or men wishing to buy a horse, he stumbled on exam-

 ples which were not solvable. Problems 14 from Appendices A and B, and Problem 22
 from Appendix C, could all arise in this way, since almost all problems with the same

 structure are also unsolvable. In particular, there is no need to postulate, at least not for

 these examples, that Leonardo had a general formula for solving all such problems, and
 that he used this formula to deliberately choose parameter values which would lead,

 say, to negative solutions. It has to be admitted that Problems 5 and 7 from Appendix
 A do seem to have been sought out deliberately, as they represent critical cases on the
 border between solvability and unsolvability. But these examples are small enough

 that a patient incremental search could have unearthed them.

 Euclidean practice suggests that the ideal response to unsolvable problems is to state

 necessary and sufficient conditions which guarantee solvability, as in Elements, I, 22
 and VIy 28. Leonardo's critical examples in Problems 5 and 7 from Appendix A serve

 this purpose for those simple variations of giving and taking problems. Furthermore he

 reaches towards this goal when he remarks, before Problem 22 from Appendix C, that

 some problems may be unsolvable if the number of men is even and two or more men

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci's Liber Abbaci 1 75

 take from the others (Boncompagni 1857, p. 25 1) or (Sigler 2002, p. 365). But it seems

 likely that Leonardo could not supply necessary and sufficient conditions for the solv-

 ability of any of the complex variations on classical problems discussed in this article.

 Indeed, even recognizing that a problem was unsolvable was a non-trivial calculation.

 Perhaps because unsolvable problems could arise accidentally, just by exploring natu-
 ral variations on standard problems, Leonardo instead devoted some time to showing

 his readers how to distinguish between the solvable and unsolvable cases. To do this he

 needed to construct solvable examples sufficiently like the unsolvable ones, as with the

 pairs of Problems 14 and 15 from Appendix A and Problems 22 and 23 from Appen-

 dix C. In the latter case, the solvable problem was relatively easy to construct from a

 simple solution, although it seems that Leonardo ignored two "smaller" examples in

 order to make sure that his example fitted the above conventions. But the construction

 of Problem 15 from Appendix A was significantly more intricate. Here, if you start
 from a solution and retain the most convenient parameter values (the amounts being

 exchanged) a straightforward calculation gives the values for the other parameter (the

 ratio between people's holdings after the exchanges) but unfortunately these values
 typically violate the conventions. Instead, Leonardo decided to retain the values of
 the ratio parameter, and seems to have used some careful juggling of information to

 calculate both suitable values of the other parameter and a solution to go with them.

 This suggests that Leonardo took considerable care to make sure his examples fitted

 the conventions, as if the conventions were rules which had to be followed when you

 constructed a problem.

 Owing to the existence of unsolvable problems, Leonardo needed to add a sec-

 ond focus to his basic plan. Not only did he need to show his readers how to solve
 problems, but also how to recognize unsolvable problems. Where possible, he seems
 to have sought out solvable variations of each unsolvable problem. But Leonardo
 makes no mention of how one might deliberately construct an unsolvable problem,
 and instead focuses on distinguishing between solvable and unsolvable problems. In
 other words, these sections of Liber Abbaci could equip the reader to solve challenge
 problems (using Leonardo's various methods of solution), and to set challenge prob-

 lems (simply by choosing their own favourite parameter values in any of these typical
 problems discussed by Leonardo) and finally to avoid setting unsolvable challenge
 problems (because he has shown his readers how to recognize the unsolvable cases).

 It seems that his readers did not need to know how to construct an unsolvable problem

 (perhaps it was considered absurd or even unfair to set unsolvable problems). Indeed,
 as we have seen, it is possible that Leonardo himself did not know how to construct
 an unsolvable problem, unless it was by executing patient incremental searches or
 by stumbling upon them in the course of a systematic examination of families of

 problems. But Leonardo did know how to construct solvable problems under difficult

 circumstances, and although he withheld this knowledge from his readers, we have

 seen that he could have constructed these problems using just the techniques which
 he taught in Liber Abbaci.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 176 J.Hannah

 Appendices

 Appendix A: giving and taking problems from Liber Abbaci

 Listed below are the 16 problems on giving and taking from Sect. 3 of Chap. 12 of
 Liber Abbaci. Section 3 consists of almost 100 problems, and its main purpose is to

 explain the method of (single) false position. To help the modern reader understand the

 relationships between the various problems, I have presented the problems in symbolic

 form. To see the problems as Leonardo would have seen them you would, of course,

 need to read them as stories about men giving and taking denari. For examples of such

 readings, see the footnotes earlier in the article. For Leonardo, Problems 5, 7 and 14
 are unsolvable.

 1. fl + 1 =b- 1

 6 + 1 = 10(0 - 1)
 l(a). a + 1 = b - 1
 b + 1 = 12(0 - 1)

 2. a + 7 = 5(6 - 7)
 b + 5 = 7(a - 5)
 3. 0 + 6 = 5±(6-6)
 ¿ + 4 = 7f(0-4)
 4. 0 + 7 = 5(b - 7) + 1
 ¿> + 5 = 7(0-5) + l
 5. 0 + 7 = 5(6-7) + 12
 b + 5 = 7(0 - 5) + 12

 6. 0 + 7 = 5(6-7) + l
 b + 5 = 7(0 - 5) + 2
 7. 0+7 = 5(6-7) + l

 b + 5 = 7(0 - 5) + 15

 8. 0 + 7 = 5(6-7)-l
 6 + 5 = 7(0-5)-3
 9. 0 + 7 = 5(6-7) + 6
 b + 5 = 7(0 - 5) - 8
 10. 0+7 = 5(6 + c-7)
 b + 9 = 6(c + 0 - 9)
 c+11 =7(0 + 6-11)

 11. 0+7 = 5(6 + c-7) + l
 b + 9 = 6(c + 0 - 9) + 1
 c+11 =7(0+6- 11) H- 1

 12. 0 + 7 = 5(6 + c- 7) + 1
 6 + 9 = 6(c + a - 9) + 2
 c+11 =7(0 + 6- 11) H- 3

 13. 0 + 6 + 7 = 5(c- 7)
 6 + c + 9 = 6(0-9)
 c + 0 + 11 =7(6-11)

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci's Liber Abbaci 177

 Appendix B: purse problems from Liber Abbaci

 Listed below are the 15 problems about finding a purse from Sect. 4 of Chap. 12 of

 Liber Abbaci. As with the giving and taking problems in Appendix A, these problems

 should be read as stories. For examples of such readings, see the footnotes earlier in
 the article. Some of the problems are followed by subproblems where, for example,
 values for the contents of the purse (p) are specified. For Leonardo, Problem 14 is
 unsolvable.

 14. a + b + 7 = 3(c + d - 7)
 ¿> + c + 8 = 4(d + a-8)
 c + ¿ + 9 = 5(a + * - 9)
 d + fl + 11 =6(* + c- 11)
 15. a + è + 100 = 3(c + d - 100)
 * + c + 106 = 4(d + a - 106)
 c + d+145 = 5(a + fc- 145)
 d + a + 170 = 6(fc + c-170)
 16. a + ¿7 + c + 7 = 2(d + e - 7)

 b + c + d + S = 3(e + a-S)
 c + d + é? + 9 = 4(a+¿?-9)
 d + e + a + 10 = 5(* + c - 10)
 ^ + a + Z?+ll =6(c + d-ll)

 1. a + p = 3b
 b + p = 4a
 2. a + p = 2(b + c)
 b + p = 3(c + a)
 c + p = 4(fl + b)
 3. a + p = 3(b + c + d)
 b + p = 4(c + d + a)
 c + p = 5(d + a + b)
 d + p = 6(a + b + c)

 4. a + p = 2'(b + c + d + e)
 b + p = 3'(c + d + e + a)
 c + p = 4'(d + e + a+b)
 d + p = 5±(e + a + b + c)

 e + p = 6'(a + b + c + d)

 5. a + p = 2b
 b + p = 3c
 c + p = 4a
 6. a + p = 2^b
 b + p = 3'c
 c + p = 4'a

 7. a + p = 2b
 b + p = 3c

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 178 J. Hannah

 c + p = Ad
 d + p = 5a

 8. a + p = 2b

 b + (/? + 3) = 3c
 c + (/? + 7) = 4d
 oř + (/? + 13) = 5a

 9. a + /? = 2b

 6 + (/> + 13) = 3a

 10. a + p = 2(¿? + c)

 ¿> + (/? + 10) = 3(c + a)
 c + (/?+10+13)=4(a + ¿>)

 11. a + /? = 2(¿> + c + ¿)

 b + (p + '0) = 3(c + d + a)
 c + (/? + 10+13)=4(¿ + a+¿>)
 úř + (p + 10 + 13 + 19) = 5(a + b + c)

 12. a + b + /? = 2c
 b + c + /? = 3a
 c + a + /? = 4&
 13. a + b + p = 2c
 b + c + p = 3d
 c + d + p = 4a
 d + a + p = 5b

 14. a + ¿? + /? = 2(c + d)
 b + c + p = 3(d + a)
 c + d + p = 4(a + b)
 d + a + p = 5(b + c)

 15. a+b + p = 2(c + d + e)

 b + c + p = 3(d + e + a)
 c + d + p = 4(e + a+b)
 d + e + p = 5(a+b + c)
 e + a + p = 6(b + c + d)

 Appendix C: horse-buying problems from Liber Abbati

 Listed below are five problems about men wishing to buy a horse from Sect. 5 of Chap.

 12 of Liber Abbaci. The numbering of the problems comes from Vogel (1940) and the

 full collection of horse-buying problems is listed and analysed there. The five prob-
 lems listed below make up Vogel's Group 6, dealing with situations where subgroups

 of the men (for example, pairs) seek a fraction of what all the other men hold in order

 to have enough money to buy the horse. The case involving pairs of men doing the

 buying, from a group of three, was covered in an earlier group of problems (Vogel's
 Group 4) under the guise of one man giving to the rest. As usual, these problems
 should be read as stories. For examples of such readings, see the footnotes earlier in
 the article. For Leonardo, Problem 22 is unsolvable.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Conventions in Fibonacci 's Liber Abbaci 1 79

 21. (a + b) + '(c + d + e) = h
 (b + c) + '{d + e + a) = h
 (c + d) + '(e + a + b) = h
 (d + e) + '(a + b + c) = h
 (e + a) + '(b + c + d) = h

 22. (a+Z?) + ±(c + ¿) = /i

 {b + c) + '{d + à) = h
 (c + d) + '(a+b) = h
 (d + a) + '(b + c) = h
 23. {a+b) + '(c + d) = h
 (b + c) + l(d + a) = h

 (c + d) + ^(a + b) = h
 (d + a) + ^(b + c) = h

 24. (a + b + c) + '(d + e + f + g) = h
 (b + c + d) + '{e + f + g + à)=h
 (c + d + e) + '(f + g + a + b) = h
 (d + e + f) + '(g + a + b + c)=h
 (e + f + g) + '(a + b + c + d) = h
 (f + g + a) + '(b + c + d + e) = h
 (g + a + b) + '{c + d + e + f)=h

 25. (a +b + c) + '(d + e + f + g) = h

 (b + c + d) + '{e + f + g + à)=h
 (c + d + e) + '(f + g+a + b) = h
 (d + e + f) + '{g + a+b + c) = h
 (e + f + g) + '(a + b + c + d)=h
 (/ + g + a) + '(b + c + d + e) = h
 (g + a + b) + '(c + d + e + f) = h

 References

 Bartolozzi, M., and R. Franci. 1990. La teoria delle proporzioni nella matematica dell'abaco da Leonardo

 Pisano a Luca Pacioli. Bollettino di Storia della Scienze Matematiche 10: 3-28.

 Boncompagni, B. 1857. Liber Abbaci. In: Scritti di Leonardo Pisano. Rome: Tipografia delle Scienze

 Mathematiche e Fisiche.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1987. The Mediaeval Latin translation of Euclid's "Elements": made directly from the

 Dauben, J.W. 2008. Suan Shu Shu a book on numbers and computations. Archive for History of Exact

 Greek. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

 Sciences 62: 91-178.

 Docampo Rey, J. 2009. A new source for medieval mathematics in the Iberian Peninsula: The commer-
 cial arithmetic in Ms 10116 (Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid). Revue d'Histoire des Mathématiques 15:
 123-177.

 Folkerts, M. 2005. Leonardo Fibonacci's knowledge of Euclid's Elements and of other mathematical texts.
 Bollettino di Storia della Scienze Matematiche 24 (2004), no. 1, Leonardo Fibonacci. Matematica e
 societa nel Mediterraneo nel secolo XIII. voi. II: 93-1 13.

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Franci, R., and L. Toti Rigatelli. 1985. Towards a history of algebra from Leonardo of Pisa to Luca Pacioli.

 180 J.Hannah

 Janus 72: 17-82.

 University Press.

 Heath, T.L. 1910. Diophantus of Alexandria: A study in the history of Greek algebra. Cambridge: Cambridge

 Heath, T.L. 1 926. The thirteen books of Euclid" s Elements, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Reprint: Dover Publications, New York, 1956.

 H0yrup, J. 2002. Lengths, widths, surfaces. A portrait of old Babylonian algebra and its kin. New York:

 H0yrup, J., 2003. Leonardo ribonacci and Abbaco culture. A proposal to invert the roles. Revue a Histoire

 Springer-Verlag.

 des Mathématiques 11: 23-56.

 H0yrup, J. 2007. Jacopo da Firenze' s Tractatus algorismi and early Italian abbacus culture. Science net-

 works. Historical studies, vol. 34. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag.

 Katz, V. 1998. A history of mathematics, 2nd ed. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

 Mahavira, 1912. Ganita Sara Sangraha (trans: Rangacarya, M.). Madras: Government Press.
 Netz, R. 1999. The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics. A study in cognitive history. Cambridge:

 Rashed, R. 1994. Fibonacci et les mathématiques arabes. In Le scienze alla corte di Federico IL Micrologus

 Cambridge University Press.

 2: 145-160.

 Exact Sciences 32(2): 105-150.

 American Mathematical Society.

 Sesiano, J. 1985. The appearance of negative solutions in mediaeval mathematics. Archive for History of

 Sesiano, J. 2009. An introduction to the history of algebra. Mathematical World, vol. 27. Providence:

 Sigler, L.E. 2002. Fibonacci's Liber Abaci. New York: Springer.
 Singmaster, D. 1988. Some early sources in recreational mathematics. In Mathematics from manuscript to

 print, 1300-1600 (Oxford, 1984), ed. C. Hay, 195-208. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Singmaster, D. 2004. Sources in recreational mathematics: An annotated bibliography. Source files avail-

 able at http://www.g4g4.com/MyCD5/SOURCES/singmaterial.htm. Accessed 21 Jan 2010.

 Spiesser, M. 2000. Problèmes linéaires dans le Compendy de la praticque des nombres de Barthélémy de

 Romans et Mathieu Préhoude il 47 H. Historia Mathematica 27: 362-383.

 Thomaidis, Y. 2005. A framework for defining the generality of Diophantos' methods in "Arithmetica".

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 59: 591-640.

 Ver Eecke, P. 1959. Diophante d'Alexandrie: Les six livres arithmétiques et le livre des nombres polygones.

 Paris: Albert Blanchard.

 Vogel, K. 1940. Zur Geschichte der linearen Gleichungen mit mehreren Unbekannten. Deutsche Math-
 ematik 5: 217-240. Available as a reprint in: Vogel, K. 1988. Kleinere Schriften zur Geschichte der
 Mathematik. Boethius: Texte und Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Exakten Wissenschaften, vol. 20,

 1-2. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, pp. 281-304.

 Vogel, K. 1971. Fibonacci. In Dictionary of scientific biography, vol. IV, ed. C.C. Gillespie, 604-613. New

 York: Scribner's.

 Woepcke, F. 1853. Extrait du Fakhrî, traité d'algèbre par Aboû Bekr Mohammed Ben Alhaçan Alkarkhî.

 Reprint: Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlag, 1982.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

