 

 

 

 

Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory of the atom
Author(s): Sandro Petruccioli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 5 (September 2014), pp. 599-639
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569571
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:55 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569571?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2014) 68:599-639
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0137-5

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type
 theory of the atom

 Sandro Petruccioli

 Received: 19 February 2014 / Published online: 23 April 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract This article examines the problem of the origins of the correspondence

 principle formulated by Bohr in 1920 and intends to test the correctness of the argu

 ment that the essential elements of that principle were already present in the 1913

 "trilogy". In contrast to this point of view, moreover widely shared in the literature,

 this article argues that it is possible to find a connection between the formulation of

 the correspondence principle and the assessment that led Bohr to abandon the search

 for a Planck-type theory. In fact, a thorough examination of Bohr's works shows that

 the birth of this principle coincided with the depletion of a research program whose

 origins may date back to Bohr's stay at the Rutherford's laboratory (summer 1912).

 Finally, this article argues that original program of research was abandoned when it

 became clear that Planck's quantum hypothesis for the harmonic oscillator was not

 an adequate support for the theoretical architecture of atomic physics; namely, there
 was evidence enough to justify a most drastic conclusion, according to Bohr: "I do

 not think that a theory of the Planck type can be made logical consistent".

 1 Introduction

 In the spring of 1920, Niels Bohr was invited to give a lecture at the Deutsche

 Gesellschaft Physikalische. This was a prestigious venue, giving Bohr the opportunity

 I wish to thank Helge Kragh for his critical comments and suggestions that were particularly useful in the
 revision of the first draft of this article.

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 S. Petruccioli (IS)
 Université dell'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy
 e-mail: sandropetruccioli@gmail.com

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 600 S. Petruccioli

 to illustrate his ideas to the most qualified and influential physicists of the time. Also

 present in addition to Planck were James Franck, Max Born, Alfred Landé and, of
 course, Albert Einstein who met Bohr here for the first time.

 For some time, now physical research had been moving on an entirely new ground,

 full of the pitfalls arising from the crumbling of the very basis of classical mechanics

 and electrodynamics. Although some theoretical proposals—Bohr's brilliant insights

 among them—had achieved significant empirical evidence, there was not a single

 unified program catalyzing the various researches. One lived in a state of great uncer

 tainty, both conceptual and methodological, and those fragments of theory that could

 boast satisfactory experimental support were not always appreciated because of their

 fragile and limited interpretative value. The very title chosen by Bohr for the con

 ference reflected this general state of instability. Putting aside the youthful ambition

 that had led him to propose as his first major publication the formulation of a theory

 on the constitution of atoms and molecules,1 he now concentrated on providing a

 contribution to the understanding of the phenomenon of radiative behavior of atoms,

 especially when subjected to the action of electric and magnetic fields. He entitled

 the conference "Ûber die Serienspektren der Elemente," and the text was published in

 October of the same year on the Zeitschrift fur Physik.2

 Bohr concluded his speech with these words: "In closing, however, I should like

 to emphasize once more that in this lecture I have only intended to bring out certain

 general points of view lying at the basis of the spectral theory. In particular, it was my

 intention to show that, in spite of the fundamental differences between these points

 of view and the ordinary conceptions of the phenomena of radiation, it still appears

 possible on the basis of the general correspondence between the spectrum and the
 motion in the atom to employ these conceptions in a certain sense as guides in the

 investigation of the spectra."3 So he kept repeating that the laws of spectroscopy had

 definitively undermined the ordinary interpretation of radiative phenomena, breaking

 the link that should exist between optical and mechanical frequencies according to

 classical electrodynamics. Nevertheless, Bohr was certain of the existence of a cor

 respondence between spectrum and atomic motions that would allow to repair that
 fracture, at least heuristically. According to him, it was because of this "unusual" rela

 tionship that it was possible to use the outdated classical concepts as guidelines for the

 investigation of atomic spectra. The term "correspondence" might look like a linguis

 tic ruse to save the mechanical model of the atom, despite the existence of radiative

 processes no longer reconducible to the motion of charged particles. In fact, some

 colleagues considered this idea as some sort of "magic wand."4 Of course, this was

 1 Bohr (1913b,c,d).

 3 CW3 282; my emphasis.

 2 Bohr (1920). The article was published in English in Bohr (1922b, pp. 20—60); also in Bohr (1976, pp.
 242-282) [henceforth CW3],

 4 Cfr Kragh (2012, pp. 189-225). Sommerfeld in the first edition of Atombau und Spektrallinien wrote:
 "Bohr has found a magic wand [Zauberstab] in his analogy principle [...] which without clearing up the

 conceptual difficulties allows him to make the results of the classical wave theory directly useful for the

 quantum theory" Sommerfeld (1919, p. 403). In a letter to Bohr dated November 11, 1920, Sommerfeld

 expressed his doubts on a "principle" whose origins were in his opinion "foreign to the quantum theory,"
 CW3 690.

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 601

 not Bohr's intention, who in his lecture actually elevated the idea of correspondence

 to the status of principle, a "general law for the occurrence of transitions between

 stationary states."5

 But there's more. Bohr associated this new principle to a radical change of strategy.

 Right in front of Planck, he remarked that if we try to use his famous quantum hypoth

 esis in order "to explain the spectra of the elements [...] we encounter difficulties,

 because the motion of the particles in the atom, in spite of its simple structure, is in

 general exceedingly complicated compared with the motion of a Planck oscillator."6

 Then, he pointed to alternative ways that allow to generalize Planck's ideas in order

 to make them useful in the study of the properties of atomic systems. To understand

 the depth of the rift that was produced in this way within the quantum theory of the

 atom, it is sufficient to go back to what Bohr had argued, with apparent optimism, a

 few years before: Planck's original assumption as to the possible values for the energy

 of an atomic vibrator is consistent with the postulate of the atomic theory, according

 to which (a) "an atomic system can only exist permanently in a series of states cor

 responding with a discontinuous series of values for its energy," and (b) "any change
 of the energy of the system including absorption and emission of electromagnetic

 radiation must take place by a transition between two such states, [...] termed 'the

 stationary states' of the system."7 At least until the great breakthrough of the corre

 spondence principle, Bohr's research program was therefore firmly hinged on the idea

 that the Planck's quantum theory, as well as provide an effective interpretation of the

 phenomena of temperature radiation and specific heat, is also the tool that allows us to

 study situations "in which the statistical nature of the phenomena in many instances

 is only of secondary importance."8 In other terms, according to Bohr, the quantum

 theory of atomic structure and its radiative processes was in any case a Planck-type

 theory.

 It would therefore appear reasonable to say that in 1920 Bohr considered the original

 research program outdated and also that the need for its radical reformulation derived

 from the existence of a relationship of mutual exclusion between the two terms evoked

 in the title of this article, "correspondence principle" and "Planck-type theory." But

 things are not as simple as they seem, and such a statement should nevertheless be

 confronted with a different interpretive hypothesis that has long enjoyed much credit
 in the literature. Let's see what it is.

 At the time of the Berlin conference, it had been less than a decade since Bohr

 had begun to grapple with the problems of the internal constitution of atoms, making

 his debut in the scientific community with the quantum theory of the hydrogen atom.

 From the first pages of the "trilogy," Bohr had found a kind of anchor of salvation

 in the peculiar convergence existing between quantum hypothesis and the classical

 theory of radiation in the so-called limiting region of low frequencies. Here, despite

 the discontinuous nature of the processes of radiation, it seemed fair to say that the

 5 CW3 250.

 6 Ibid., pp. 243-244.

 8 Ibidem.

 7 Bohr (1916, unpublished paper), in Bohr (1981, pp. 433-461: 434) [henceforth CW2],

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 602 S. Petruccioli

 frequency of radiation and frequency of electronic motion were identical. Moreover,

 the use of considerations regarding the limiting region had allowed Bohr to circum

 vent some obstacles in an attempt to extend Planck's ideas to the study of atoms and

 especially to secure the necessary empirical evidence for his theory. On the one hand,

 he had obtained a theoretical expression of the Rydberg constant coinciding, within

 measurement errors, with the value long known by spectroscopists. On the other hand,

 he had been able to predict that certain lines observed by William Pickering in stellar

 spectra and by Alfred Fowler in the laboratory were not attributable to ionized hydro

 gen, but to ionized helium.9 It was not much compared to the ambitious project that

 Bohr had announced in 1912 at the end of his stay at the Rutherford laboratory.10 But it

 was enough to attract Einstein's interest and to have him say that it was "an enormous

 achievement [and that therefore] the theory of Bohr must then be right."11

 The limiting considerations that we find in the writings of 1913 seem very similar to

 those Bohr was to use years later to introduce the correspondence principle. This has let

 many historians see a meaningful continuity in the Danish physicist's methodological

 attitude. In their view, a sketch of that principle—enunciated for the first time in

 complete form in the Berlin conference—is already present in his early approaches

 to the quantum theory of the hydrogen atom. For example, in the classic paper of

 1969, Heilbron and Kuhn argue, inter alia, that already the great article of 1913 holds

 "a first, but already powerful, formulation of the Correspondence Principle."12 Other

 authors, such as J. Rud Nielsen, Olivier Darrigol, and Helge Kragh,13 although with

 different accents, place the origin of that principle in the special relationship that exists

 in the limiting region between the frequency of the radiation emitted in the transition

 between states n\ and «2 and the harmonic component (n\ — ηι)ω of the electron's
 motion, and that Bohr had commented in the following terms: "this is just what we

 would expect from analogy with the ordinary theories of radiation, since the motion

 of any periodic system which is not a harmonic vibrator can be resolved in harmonic

 terms corresponding with frequencies which are entire multiples of the frequency of
 revolution ω."14

 In order to test the validity of this interpretative hypothesis, we should ask ourselves

 if we are really facing the natural evolution of the same pattern of reasoning aimed at

 establishing from the outset some correlation (said correspondence) between clearly

 9 According to the two expert spectroscopists, these lines had to be attributed to hydrogen and should

 correspond, according to Bohr's theoretical formula, to semi-integer quantum numbers. On the contrary,
 Bohr considered these lines to be emitted by ionized helium atoms whose frequencies were given by an

 expression similar to that of hydrogen but with a value four times greater than the Rydberg constant. The

 two interpretations were therefore subjected by Evan Evans to a sort of experimentum crucis that required

 the repetition of Fowler's measurements in a vacuum tube filled solely with helium and with ascertained

 absence of any traces of hydrogen; Evans (1913).

 10 See infra Sect. 2.1.

 11 This is what we read in a letter sent by G. von Hevesy to Bohr on October 23, 1913. Hevesy had met

 Einstein in Vienna on the occasion of the 85th Versammlung deutschen und Naturforscher Aertze and wrote

 to Bohr of his favorable impression, CW2 532.

 12 Heilbron e Kuhn (1969, p. 272).

 13 Rud Nielsen (1976, § 2), Darrigol (1997, p. 549), Kragh (2012, p. 63).

 14 Bohr (1916, unpublished paper), cit. CW2 445.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 603

 disjointed phenomenal and conceptual frameworks. In particular, Bohr's writings are

 expected to show the beginnings of a substantial continuity between the first and

 uncertain attempts to establish an analogy between quantum events and the ordinary

 laws of electrodynamics, and the correspondence principle. We will see that it is not
 so, although in Bohr's early works there are certainly cues intended to be included

 within this principle.15 It can be shown that nothing similar to the correspondence

 principle—the singular logical relationship that allows us "to consider the possibility

 of the occurrence of a transition between two given stationary state as conditioned by

 the appearance in the motion of the corresponding harmonic vibration"—appears in

 Bohr's writings before 1918.16

 In early 1916, the Philosophical Magazine had received an article by Bohr entitled

 "On the application of quantum theory to periodic system."17 The manuscript had

 been sent by the University of Manchester, to which Bohr had returned two years after

 his first and successful meeting with Rutherford.18 On March 17, Bohr had the drafts

 of his article ready but, as he stated in a letter to his friend Carl Oseen, some novelties

 in the field gave him cause to withdraw its publication.19 Such a drastic decision

 arose from the publication of a "new and exceedingly interesting and important paper
 on the structure of spectral line" signed by Arnold Sommerfeld, an article which,

 according to Bohr, "has quite changed the present state of the quantum theory."20
 Equally meaningful and explicit were the words contained in the letter he sent two

 days later to Sommerfeld, informing him that he would have to carefully review his

 own theoretical positions "in view of all for which your paper has opened my eyes."21

 Sommerfeld's work had helped shed new light on the problems of quantum theory with

 the introduction, among other things, of a second quantum number to characterize the

 eccentricity of the elliptical orbit; it is quite likely that Bohr had already developed

 during those early months of 1916 an independent belief that made his mind naturally

 ready and enthusiastic to these new ideas. In the same letter to Oseen, commenting

 the article he had sent to the Philosophical Magazine, Bohr had in fact acknowledged
 the limitations of his attempts to bring within a logically coherent framework the

 assumptions introduced to explain the atomic processes dependent on a discontinuous

 distribution of stationary states. The resulting conclusion did not leave much room for

 doubt: "I do not think that a theory of the Planck type can be made logical consistent."22

 15 Cff. infra Sect. 2.3.

 16 Bohr develops the argument that will be taken up within the correspondence principle in Bohr (1918a,

 pp. 15-16). In this regard, see J. Rud Nielsen "Introduction" to CW3, in particular § 3.

 17 Bohr (1916, unpublished paper), cit.

 18 Bohr thanked Rutherford for the invitation received in a letter dated June 19,1914, CW2 594-595. He

 had offered a one-year readership, and Bohr had reached Manchester in October 1914, a few weeks after

 the beginning of the war operations and the closure of the German borders. Bohr stayed on in Manchester
 until July 1916.

 19 Bohr to Oseen March 17,1916, CW2 571-573.

 20 Ibid., p. 572.

 21 Bohr to Sommerfeld March 19,1916, CW2 603-604: 603.

 22 Bohr to Oseen March 17,1916, cit.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 604 S. Petruccioli

 There are therefore further clues that reinforce my original interpretative hypothesis

 allowing me to clarify the questions which I will attempt to answer in this article.

 (a) Is it possible to find the connection between the assessment that took Bohr to

 abandon the search for a Planck-type theory and the formulation of the corre

 spondence principle? In other words, is there any evidence that the birth of this

 principle coincided with the depletion of a research program whose origins may

 date back to the memorandum Bohr gave Rutherford when he left Manchester in
 the summer of 1912?

 (b) Was that original program of research therefore abandoned when it became clear

 that Planck's quantum hypothesis for the harmonic oscillator was not adequate to

 support the theoretical architecture of atomic physics? And is it fair to say that the

 moment of transition was marked by the "withdrawn paper?"

 First of all, it will be necessary to clarify in what sense Bohr intended to build a

 quantum theory of the atom along the lines of Planck's theory of thermal radiation. We

 will see that from 1913 to 1916, Bohr was to adopt different strategies—in some cases

 marked by clear forcing—in order to establish, in the light of the Planck's ideas, a

 compatibility between the mechanical model of the atom and the unavoidable element

 of discontinuity involved in the processes of interaction between matter and radiation.

 Only in this way could we, on the one hand, grasp the meaning of the statement about

 the impossibility of building a Planck-type theory of the atom and, on the other, give a

 foundation to that assessment with which Bohr would later acknowledge the correspon

 dence principle as the source of the program that was to lead to quantum mechanics.

 2 First attempts of a Planck-type theory of the atom

 2.1 "... it was not taken seriously at all"

 "In the investigation of the configuration of the electrons in the atoms, we immediately

 meet with the difficulty that a ring [occurring in the natural atoms] can rotate with

 an infinitely great number of different times of rotation, according to the assumed

 different radii of the ring; and there seems to be nothing to allow from mechanical
 considerations to discriminate between the different radii and times of vibration. In the

 further investigation, we shall therefore introduce and make use of a hypothesis from

 which we can determinate the quantities in question. The hypothesis is: that there, for

 any stable ring (any ring), will be a definite ratio between the kinetic energy of any

 electron in the ring and the [frequency] of rotation. This hypothesis, for which there

 will be given no attempt of a mechanical foundation, is chosen as the only one which

 seems to offer a possibility of an explanation of the whole group of experimental

 results which gather about and seem to confirm conceptions of the mechanism of the

 radiation as the ones proposed by Planck and Einstein."23

 This passage is taken from the famous memorandum that Bohr wrote for Rutherford

 at the end of his time in Manchester as a visiting scholar, in which he outlined the

 23 Ν. Bohr, The Rutherford memorandum (1912) in CW2 136-143:137.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 605

 research program he was to develop after his return to Copenhagen.24 Although the

 problem of atomic spectra did not fall in Bohr's theoretical horizon yet, these few

 lines sketch some elements that were to be the basis for his future quantum theory of

 the atom. Firstly, a consideration on the limits of classical mechanics in the study of

 the configuration of electrons within the atom; its laws do not contain useful criteria

 for discriminating from the infinity of theoretically possible movements those that are

 allowed physically. Secondly, the idea that this criterion can be derived from the non

 mechanical hypothesis that assigns a constant value to the ratio between the kinetic

 energy of each electron inside a ring and the frequency of its movement. Certainly, this

 was no quantization of atomic orbits, though according to Bohr it is quite clear—this

 is the third point—that his hypothesis is legitimized by the fact that similar ideas have

 allowed us to explain some important experimental results; and here, Bohr cites the
 works of Planck and Einstein.

 In the following years, these assumptions were to suffer several transformations,

 while Rutherford's nuclear model was to become one of the irreplaceable cornerstones

 of Bohr's theory. We do not intend to return here to the reasons at the basis of this

 propensity, moreover associated with a total lack of confidence in the J.J. Thomson

 model.25 Of course, Rutherford's ideas had the support of some experimental data

 such as: (a) the role assigned to the atomic number in representing the complexity

 of the electronic system and the position of the elements in the periodic table; (b)

 the existence of elements with different atomic weights and radioactive properties but

 with apparently identical chemical characteristics; (c) the regular displacement of the

 position of an element in the periodic table as a consequence of a radioactive process

 accompanied by the emission of an a or β particle. At first glance, these results should

 have but confirmed the unequivocal success of the nuclear hypothesis formulated by

 Rutherford, and the inexorable decline of the 'plum pudding model' that had fed the

 expectations of J.J. Thomson and the researches of the Cavendish laboratory for years.

 Apparently, however, matters stood differently, as Bohr reminds us in one of his

 last writings. At the time, the situation presented very controversial aspects, although

 "the primary object of the discussions within the Manchester group [year 1912] was

 the immediate consequences of the discovery of the atomic nucleus."26 Indeed, no one

 could ignore the enormous difficulties that one encountered when trying to develop

 "the general program of interpreting the accumulated experience about the ordinary

 physical and chemical properties of matter on the basis of the Rutherford model of the

 atom."27 This gave rise to "more intricate problems" which quite often brought even
 those who were sympathetic to Rutherford to "not recognize the close relation [of

 24 The manuscript is not dated, but it is reasonable to place its drafting in late June/early July 1912. Bohr sent

 the manuscript to Rutherford with a letter dated July 6,1912, which states "I send the remarks concerning the

 structure and stability of molecules, for which you kindly asked" CW2 577. On the discovery, reconstruction

 and interpretation of this manuscript cf. Rosenfeld (1963) and Heilbron and Kuhn (1969).

 25 From a long letter written by Bohr to his brother Harald October 23,1911, it can be deduced, inter alia,

 that Thomson had displayed a total lack of interest for Bohr's criticism concerning some mistakes that he

 apparently committed in the calculation of the absorption, Bohr (1972) [henceforth CW1], original and
 English translation pp. 526-533.

 26 Bohr (1961, p. 1086).

 27 Ibid.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 606 S. Petruccioli

 some results] to the fundamental features of Rutherford's atomic model":28 such was,

 for example, Soddy's attitude when he enunciated the radioactive displacement law in

 its complete form.29 Beyond the personal recollections of the Danish physicist, there

 is, however, objective evidence to support the view that Rutherford's "discovery" was

 long ignored or underestimated and that, contrary to what we would be led to believe,

 there was no mass adhesion to his revolutionary image of the atom.

 First of all, there is a somewhat surprising episode, that occurred during the second

 Solvay Conference, held in Brussels in the autumn of 1913, on the theme of "la structure

 de la matière." Two years had elapsed since the publication of Rutherford's article on

 the Philosophical Magazine and, as I said, the nuclear model had had a significant

 number of empirical evidence; during the year, the same journal had published a long

 article in which a young Danish physicist showed the potentialities of the hypothesis of

 the nuclear atom as a basis for the interpretation of some spectroscopic laws; finally,

 Rutherford was part of the Comité scientifique international de l'Institut Solvay;30

 nevertheless, the task of holding the opening conference had been given to the "losing"

 J.J. Thomson, who obviously chose to entitle his speech "La structure de l'atome."31

 Thomson made no mention of the nuclear model, and he proposed a new and shaky

 hypothesis about the structure of the atom.32 Rutherford had the comfort of a single,

 albeit authoritative, quotation by Marie Curie. Twice in the discussion he explained

 that some experimental results were interprétable only in the light of his hypothesis.33

 Evidently, Thomson had thought the arguments of his colleague quite uninteresting

 and therefore not worthy of a reply.

 Beyond Thomson's unkind behavior, the episode shows how much uncertainty there

 was around the problem of the constitution of matter. In spite of what we might be led

 to believe, in the absence of a coherent theory and of a clear and empirical evidence,

 it was really difficult to sustain one or the other competing hypotheses. On the other

 hand, the fact that, beyond the small Manchester group, Rutherford's point of view

 gathered sporadic adhesion is confirmed by the issues of two major English journals

 of physics, the Philosophical Magazine and Proceedings of the Royal Society between
 1911 and 1914.

 As one might expect, a large part of the articles came from the two primary English

 schools which at the time belonged, respectively, to the Cavendish laboratory and

 the University of Manchester. Well, out of a total of more than 600 articles, while

 28 Ibid., p. 1085.

 29 Cf. Kragh (2012, p. 47). Bohr himself was to recall that while he considered the atomic number and the

 radioactive displacement laws as results that supported the Rutherford theory, Hevesy, Fajans and Soddy

 thought precisely the opposite and "they thought that [this] was completely against Rutherford," Interview

 to Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn, Léon Rosenfeld, Aage Petersen and Erik Riidinger on October 31,1962,
 AIP.

 30 The Comité scientifique international chaired by Lorentz was composed of M. Curie, W.H. Bragg, M.

 Brillouin, H. Kamerlingh Onnes, M. Knudsen, A. Righi, E. Rutherford and E. van Aubel.

 31 J.J. Thomson, La structure de l'atome, in Solvay II, pp. 1-44. In this lecture, Thomson presented a new

 model of the atom (cf. Kragh 2012, pp. 108-110).

 32 Reserves and doubts were expressed by Bohr in a letter to Rutherford October 16,1913, CW2 587-589.

 33 Solvay II, pp. 50-51 and 53-54.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 607

 Rutherford's works between 1897 and 1914 are mentioned 93 times in 48 articles,34

 his famous 1911 paper, "The Scattering of a or β particles by matter and the structure

 of the atom" collected only eight citations.35 But above all, it is striking that, with the

 exception of Charles T.R. Wilson,36 these involve only researchers of the Manchester

 group.37 We do not expect the situation to have been any better in other scientific

 circles as, for instance, the German one, dominated by skepticism toward the atomic

 models and where, according to Rutherford, "the people do not seem to be in the least

 interested to form a physical idea of the basis of Planck's theory."38 However, it is

 surprising to discover that in about 7,500 pages published by the Annalen der Physik

 between 1912 and 1913, Rutherford's paper on the nuclear atom is quoted only once

 by a certain Fritz Mayer in a review article entitled "Zerstreuung der a-Strahlen."39

 During a long interview in the fall of 1962, Thomas Kuhn had tried to bring out

 from Bohr's memory episodes of those early days spent in Manchester to find out

 what would have "convinced of the likely validity of Rutherford's atom from first

 hearing."40 Kuhn's interview is a document holding few surprises, and most of our

 curiosities are destined to remain as such. Opposite Kuhn sat an old man, marked by

 illness.41 Bohr's recollections reveal no helpful clues to guide us in the reconstruction
 of the route that over those crucial months—between June 1912 and March 1913—led

 him to seek in quantum ideas the necessary tool to reveal the secret of atoms. One is,

 however, impressed when hearing Bohr say: "You see actually the Rutherford work

 was not taken seriously. We cannot understand today, but it was not taken seriously at

 all. There was no mention of it in any place. The great change came from Moseley. But

 before Moseley's work there was absolutely nothing about the Rutherford thing."42

 34 76 references in 41 articles apart from those written by the same Rutherford, also in collaboration with
 other authors.

 35 Rutherford (1911). The quotations would be ten if one includes those contained in the articles of Ruther

 ford himself: Rutherford (1912, p. 461) and Rutherford and Nuttal (1913, p. 702).

 36 Wilson (1912, p. 284). Wilson, a pupil of Thomson, was long his collaborator at the Cavendish
 Laboratory.

 37 Darwin (1912, p. 901,1913, p. 201), Geiger (1912, p. 605), Geiger and Marsden (1913, p. 605), Marsden
 and Taylor (1913, p. 443), Moseley (1913, p. 1025), Bohr (1913a, p. 10,1913b, p. 1.)

 38 Rutherford to Bragg, in Eve (1939, p. 208).

 39 Mayer (1913, p. 940).

 40 Interview to Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn, cit.

 41 Thomas Kuhn's interview to Niels Bohr, planned by the project for the Archive for the History of
 Quantum Physics, took place in the fall of 1962. Over 18 days, from October 31, five sessions were held

 almost entirely devoted to young Bohr's early years of scientific activity, the preparation of his doctoral

 thesis, his stay in England, first at Cambridge then in Manchester, as well as the publication in 1913 of his

 famous theory of the constitution of atoms and molecules. The interview was abruptly interrupted by a tragic

 event. The fifth session was held on November 17, and had concerned young Bohr's cultural education, his

 philosophical interests and his relationship with Harald Hoffding of whom he had been a pupil. Early in

 the afternoon of the following day, Bohr died from a heart attack.

 42 The article to which Bohr refers is Moseley (1913), cf Kragh (2012, § 3.4). In this regard, it is also

 significant to point out what Peter Debye replied to Kuhn who had asked "whether, when you had been in

 Zurich when the Rutherford atom was suggested, I wondered whether you had heard of it." According to

 Debye "in Zurich we did not talk very much about models. [...] The model of Rutherford was compared to

 that of Thomson." Interview to Peter Debye by Thomas S. Kuhn and G. Uhlenbeck on May 3,1962, AIP.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 608 S. Petruccioli

 Here, Bohr's memory does nothing but confirm a truth preserved in the pages of

 scientific journals; moreover, it forces us to acknowledge that, in a not at all favorable
 scientific environment, Bohr had adhered to the Rutherford ideas because he felt that

 in this way "everything was now aligned."43

 These words do not come from a judgement acquired a posteriori in light of the

 complex events of which he was one of the main protagonists; otherwise, one would not

 understand the reasons that led him to hypothesize, already in the mentioned memo

 randum, an original, and bold, "quantum" solution able to ensure that model a stability

 not reducible to the ordinary ideas of mechanics. Although at the time of the inter

 view this important document had not as yet been discovered among the thousands of

 manuscripts of Bohr's archive,44 he had no difficulty recognizing that when he was in

 Manchester "I only knew that we had this atom and that it seemed to be regulated from

 the inner part to the outer part by the quantum."45 Nothing more than that. There was

 not even a hypothetical application of Planck's ideas to the periodic motion of the elec

 trons. The "quantum" was a hypothesis in embryonic state, but at the same time it was so

 rooted in Bohr's thought as to convince him to admit that it somehow regulated Ruther

 ford's atom and was responsible for its stability. It was really an extraordinary intuition,

 because Bohr categorically ruled out that the knowledge of the regularity of the spectra

 or of Balmer's formula already represented an element of the puzzle that he was to build

 a few months down the line with his sending Rutherford the first part of the "trilogy."

 Of course, Bohr could not lack in his cultural background the knowledge of research

 in the field of spectroscopy. Anyone who had browsed the issue of ajournai of physics

 or astronomy would have come across the contributions of spectroscopists intent on

 recording data of their careful measurements and in finding meaningful regularities

 in an impressive and chaotic collection of numbers. So in order to explain what that
 situation was like, Bohr used an extremely clever and clear analogy: "The spectra was

 a very difficult problem. There were two different schools—those in England, and then

 there was the school of the spectroscopists. And one thought that this is marvelous,

 but it is not possible to make progress there. Just as if you have the wing of a butterfly

 then certainly it is very regular with the colors and so on, but nobody thought that one

 could get the basis of biology from the coloring of the win[g] of a butterfly. So that was

 a way to look at it."46 The colorful and regular lines of the spectra observed in the stars

 and in the laboratory were thus like the wings of butterflies, and it was hard to imagine

 that such objects could contain cues relevant to the construction of a physics of matter.

 2.2 The "trilogy": a work in progress

 On March 6,1913, Bohr sent Rutherford the first chapter of the article on the consti

 tution of atoms in which he developed the program drawn up during his last weeks in

 43 Interview to Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn ... on October 31,1962, cit. p. 7.

 44 A first critical analysis of this document can be found in Rosenfeld (1963, "Introduction"). See also
 Heilbron and Kuhn (1969).

 45 Interview to Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn ... on October 31,1962, cit. p. 10.

 46 Ibid., p. 8.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 609

 Manchester. In the enclosed letter, he expressed the hope that Rutherford would con

 sider reasonable the point of view "that I have taken [...] as to the delicate question of

 the simultaneous use of the old mechanics and of the new assumptions introduced by

 Planck's theory of radiation."47 The time elapsed was relatively short, and part of this

 had been dedicated to the preparation of the work on the absorption of α-particles.48

 However, his point of view on the whole matter had changed since the solutions he had

 outlined in the Memorandum; the quantization method was quite different, and above

 all a problem that had been ignored in the previous paper was now included, forcing

 him to redefine and extend the theory's very goals: "I have tried to show that it from

 such a point of view seems possible to give a simple interpretation of the law of the

 spectrum of hydrogen. And that the calculation affords a close quantitative agreement

 with experiments."49 Rutherford's reaction was one of admiration, even if he could

 not hide doubts and some skepticism: "Your ideas [...] are very ingenious and seem to

 work out well; but the mixture of Planck's ideas with the old mechanics make it very

 difficult to form a physical idea of what is the basis of it."50 Nevertheless, the young

 physicist's theoretical proposal seemed worthy of the most careful consideration, as

 it had obtained interesting first results in the explanation of an important class of phe

 nomena, the atomic spectra, lacking for several decades in any interpretative basis.

 The three parts of Bohr's article were published in volume 26 of the Philosophical

 Magazine and appeared in the issues of July, September and November of 1913.

 In reading this article today, we realize that only a combination of "favorable"

 circumstances have enabled us to receive a unique historical document. The text,

 written with no respect for canonical criteria, is presented as a work in progress that

 allows one to follow the evolution of Bohr's thinking closely; here are recorded, in

 particular, the reasons that led him to suggest from time to time a different use of

 Planck's quantum hypothesis. Such an editorial "singularity" was certainly favored

 by Rutherford's kindness toward the pressing demands of a young colleague so that
 the publication of his paper would take place "as soon as possible, on account of
 the accumulating literature on the subject."51 But an equally important part should

 be attributed to the absence, in the magazines of the period, of any serious scientific

 filter; evidently, the authority of the scholar who submitted the article was the highest

 guarantee requested for its publication. In fact, it is legitimate to ask what credit

 could ever be given today to an author who, having developed a theoretical treatment

 and shown that some of his predictions are supported by experience, had come to

 47 Bohr to Rutherford, March 6,1913, CW2 581-583: 582.

 48 Bohr (1913a).

 49 Bohr to Rutherford, March 6,1913, cit.

 50 Rutherford to Bohr, March 20,1913, CW2 583-584: 583.

 51 Bohr to Rutherford, March 6, 1913, cit. 581. Bohr had taken seriously the work that the astronomer

 John Nicholson had dedicated to the interpretation of some spectra also appropriately exploiting Planck's

 quantum ideas, Nicholson (1912a,b). And though Bohr was engaged to highlight the relevant differences

 between his approach and that of Nicholson (see, for example, Bohr to Rutherford 31 January 1913 CW2

 579-580), there were valid reasons for him to wish for a fairly rapid publication of his article. Heilbron,
 for example, speaks of the "alarming paper of John William Nicholson" in which Bohr found in the last

 weeks of 1912, while he was engaged in defining the conceptual framework of his theory, Heilbron (2013,
 p. 170).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 610 S. Petruccioli

 declare within that same work, that one of the assumptions used "may be regarded

 as improbable."52 And Bohr's hypothesis was not marginal; it called directly into

 question the basic objective of the article consisting "in an attempt to show that the

 application of the above [quantum] ideas to Rutherford's atom-model affords a basis

 for a theory on the constitution of atoms" and in the case of hydrogen in explaining

 "in a simple way" the law of the spectral lines.53

 At the beginning of the third paragraph, significantly entitled "General Consider

 ation continued," Bohr definitely belied himself by stating that it is unlikely to think

 that "the different stationary states correspond to an emission of a number of different

 energy-quanta,"54 as required by a direct application of Planck's quantum formula to

 the atomic system. Hence, it only had to be acknowledged that the mechanism acting

 within the atom responsible for the emission of energy was still unknown, but certainly

 more complex than the one assumed in the case of heat radiation.

 In the first part of the "trilogy," we can therefore see two consistently developed

 versions of the theory, each one following a different logical approach.55 The first of

 these versions can be summarized in the following points.

 Al. A system consisting of a nucleus and an orbiting electron is taken into consid

 eration, and the following approximations are introduced: (a) the mass of the

 electron is negligible compared with that of the nucleus, and (b) its velocity is

 much smaller than that of light, so that is possible to neglect relativistic effects.

 A2. Assuming, contrary to ordinary physical ideas, that there is no loss of radiant

 energy, electron orbits are elliptical and classical mechanics allows us to deter

 mine, for an inverse-square system, the expression of frequency ω and the major

 axis 2a as a function of the ionization energy W.

 A3. It is assumed that at the beginning of the process, the electron is at infinite distance

 from the nucleus with an almost zero relative velocity and, furthermore, that "after

 the interaction has taken place [the electron] has settled down in a stationary orbit
 round the nucleus."56

 A4. Finally, the hypothesis that the process of binding the electron is accompanied

 by the emission of a homogeneous radiation with frequency υ "equal to half the

 frequency [ω] of revolution of the electron in its final orbit"57 is introduced.

 A5. If one extends the validity of Planck's hypothesis to this context—according to

 which "the amount of energy emitted by the process considered is equal to hrv,

 where h is Planck's constant and τ an entire number"58—from A4 the "quantum"

 formula of the energy of the system follows:

 W = ta|. (2.1)

 55 In a recent paper, Heilbron identifies four formulations of the theory, Heilbron (2013, pp. 175-177).

 52 Bohr (1913b, p. 12).

 53 Ibid., pp. 2-3.

 54 Ibid., p. 12.

 56 Bohr (1913b, p. 4).

 57 Ibid., p. 4-5.

 58 Ibid., p. 5.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 611

 At this stage, Bohr raises the question of the validity of the assumptions he intro

 duced, "and also of the application made of Planck's theory," however, deferring
 the discussion.

 A6. This leads to a first result apparently indicating, inter alia, the validity of the whole

 theoretical framework: by using the experimental values of e, m and h for the

 more bound state of the electron in the hydrogen atom, the values of ω, 2a and W

 are obtained, that "are of the same order of magnitude as the linear dimensions

 of the atoms, the optical frequencies and the ionization potentials."59

 A7. Finally, the theory is able to derive Balmer's law for the hydrogen spectrum. By

 determining the amount of energy emitted by the system when it passes from

 state ri to T2 according to (2.1), and assuming that in this process a homogeneous

 radiation of frequency υ is released with an amount of energy equal to hv, we
 obtain

 Inme

 v = -ρ—I --—I· (2-2)

 Cr<i)·

 When varying the quantum numbers ti and τ%, we get the ordinary Balmer series

 and the infrared series observed by Paschen. The agreement between this and

 the empirical formula is particularly good, as evidenced by the fact that for
 the so-called Rydberg constant there is a 5 % deviation between the theoretical

 [27τ me4/Λ3] and the experimental value, therefore "inside the uncertainty due to

 experimental errors in the constants entering in the expression for the theoretical
 value."60

 Having obtained a result that was supposed to represent a valid support to his

 theoretical approach, Bohr went back to the examination of the assumptions used

 which, however, comes down to a simple and also disappointing acknowledgment. For

 systems in which frequency is a function of energy, the use of Planck's hypothesis leads
 to conclusions incompatible with the observed homogeneity of the spectral radiation.

 Such an obvious result clearly shows the irrationality of Bohr's choice in following a
 path destined to end in paradoxical results. To this end, it is sufficient to reflect on die

 fact that (a) when the quantum condition for the harmonic oscillator is applied to the

 hydrogen atom, it translates into the hypothesis according to which to each state there

 should correspond the emission of a different number of quanta of energy and that (b)

 "as soon as one quantum is sent out the frequency [of the electron] is altered."61 So the

 very idea of the stability of stationary states no longer holds and an unbridgeable rift

 is caused between the properties of the spectra and the processes involving particles

 inside the atom. But such a bizarre behavior admits but one explanation: Bohr realized

 that the untenability of A4 and A5 would have entailed the inevitable abandonment of

 A7, one of his main objectives, that is to say, the theoretical derivation of the Balmer's

 law for the hydrogen spectrum.

 59 Ibidem.

 60 Ibid., p. 9.

 61 Ibid., p. 12.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 612 S. Petruccioli

 The acknowledged impossibility of a direct application of Planck's ideas opened

 the way to a new version of the theory that, by Bohr's own admission, shares with

 the previous one two principal assumptions: "(1) The dynamical equilibrium of the

 systems in the stationary states can be discussed by help of ordinary mechanics, while

 the passing of the systems between different stationary states cannot be treated on that

 basis. (2) The latter process is followed by the emission of a homogeneous radiation,

 for which the relation between the frequency and the amount of energy emitted is the

 one given by Planck's theory."62 Although the reference to Planck remains an essential

 requirement of the theory, in the new version Bohr shifts the heart of his reasoning. On

 the one hand, it still appears reasonable to assume that only a quantum approach to the

 processes of interaction between atoms and radiation can provide an expression for the

 energy released by the system as a function of the frequency of radiation. On the other

 hand, however, as mentioned above, major conceptual obstacles arise when trying to

 transfer the assumptions used for the energy of the harmonic oscillator—where ω is

 always equal to ν—to a system composed of orbiting electrons and radiation processes

 depending on discontinuous transitions between stationary states. Everything depends

 on the fact that, in this second case, there are no indications corroborating the existence

 of a simple relation between ω and v. A fact Bohr was well aware of, having observed

 that the assumptions used lead to the paradox, in terms of ordinary ideas, according

 to which the homogeneous nature of the observed radiation is not compatible with the

 mechanical properties of the system on which each radiative process depends.

 Even if the solution of the problem was no longer at hand, Bohr was nevertheless

 engaged in searching for a Planck-type theory. Therefore, the obstacles' only effect was

 that of forcing him to weaken the objectives of the theory and to use a simple formal

 analogy with the hypothesis of quantization of energy of the harmonic oscillator. In

 these terms, Bohr replaced A5 with a new hypothesis where the idea that there must

 be some relationship between the energy of the radiation emitted by the system and

 the frequency of motion of the electron was nevertheless maintained.

 B5. "Let us assume that the ratio between the total amount of energy emitted and the

 frequency of revolution of the electron for the different stationary states is given

 by the equation W = /(r) ■ hw, instead of by the equation [W = τ h{a>/2)]."63

 B6. Proceeding as in the previous case, we arrive at a new expression for W and ω

 and for the frequency of radiation

 2 nme4

 v = ~n^~  (/2(τ2) /2(τι)) · (2'3)

 B7. In order for this to be formally analogous to Balmer's law, it must be imposed for

 /(τ) = cr.

 B8. Then, the expression of frequency υ of the radiation relative to the passage of the

 system between two contiguous stationary states is obtained, with τι = Ν and

 T2 = Ν — 1, as well as that for the corresponding frequencies of revolution ω. For

 62 Ibid., p. 7.

 63 Ibid., pp. 12-13.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 613

 large values of N, the ratio between ojn and ω^-\ will obviously be close to 1, and

 always in the same limiting region "according to the ordinary electrodynamics,

 we should [...] expect that the ratio between the frequency of radiation [v] and

 the frequency of revolution [o>] also is very nearly equal to l."64 This requires

 that the constant c is equal to 1/2.

 Therefore we return, albeit through a different conceptual path, to the expression

 for the energy of the stationary state

 W  = ti(f) (2-4)

 which had been previously imposed by Bohr onto the atomic system as a direct appli

 cation of Planck's theory. In this case, however, the contradiction that had required the

 overcoming of the previous version of the theory seems to dissolve. It can be shown

 that (2.4) admits an interpretation totally independent from the idea, clearly devoid of

 any physical foundation, which assigns to each stationary state of an atomic system a

 different number of quanta of energy.

 To this end, Bohr takes into account transition processes involving non-contiguous

 states but for which the corresponding quantum numbers are large compared with

 their difference. It is easy to show that even under these particular conditions, the

 approximation that allows one to assign the value τ/2 to the function / still holds. Of

 course, for transitions between non-contiguous states, one will have ν = ηω, where η

 is the difference between the quantum numbers of the states involved in the process; a

 result that Bohr comments thus: "The possibility of an emission of a radiation of such

 a frequency may also be interpreted from analogy with the ordinary electrodynamics,

 as an electron rotating round a nucleus in an elliptical orbit will emit a radiation which

 according to Fourier's theorem can be resolved into homogeneous components, the

 frequencies of which are ηω, if ω is the frequency of revolution of the electron."65

 The effectiveness of the analogy with the classical point of view thus reveals the real

 meaning of the quantum condition for the energy of the individual atomic states: "The

 frequency of the energy emitted during the passing of the system from a state in which

 no energy is yet radiated out to one of the different stationary states, is equal to different

 multiples of ω/2, where ω is the frequency of revolution of the electron in the state
 considered."66

 At first glance, this might not seem a particularly significant step forward since
 the frequency of radiation is still determined by the characteristics of the motion of

 the electron in the state from which the radiative process originates, and in any case

 not free from the conceptual strangeness which had aroused the immediate ironic

 comment of Rutherford: "It seems to me that you have to assume that the electron

 knows beforehand where it is going to stop."67 But at least, in this case, the principle

 64 Ibid., p. 13.

 67 CW2 583.

 65 Ibid., p. 14. With reference to what I said in the introduction, this is the passage in which both Darrigol

 (1997, p. 549) and Kragh (2012, ρ 63) place the origins of the correspondence principle.
 66 Ibidem.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 614 S. Petruccioli

 according to which the homogeneous radiation is emitted with a single quantum of

 energy was still applied. If the system at the beginning of the process is in a state

 Ν, with frequency ω of electron motion, whether the final state of the transition be

 Ν' = Ν -η1 or Ν" = Ν -η" a single quantum of energy with frequency, respectively,
 equal to η'ω/2 and η"ω/2 will be issued. In other words, (2.4) can be read as

 W  =*(?)·

 where the frequency ν of the monochromatic radiation emitted is equal for each state

 to a half-integer multiple of the frequency ω of the electron in the initial state of the

 transition process. Bohr was forced to resort to a new and unorthodox application of

 Planck's original hypothesis, and he was convinced that he had succeeded in saving

 the theory since "we get exactly the same expressions as before for the stationary

 states, and from these by help of the principal assumptions [...] the same expression

 for the law of the hydrogen spectrum."68

 But the discussion did not end here and, as if to soften the evident dissatisfaction

 with the results just obtained, Bohr proposed a further analysis. Thus, Bohr's article

 ever more like a "daybook," contains a further outline, a scheme of barely sketched

 reasoning that represents in short the third version of the theory. Further on we shall

 analyze it in detail, but already in the few lines of this "private memo" the nature and

 the extent of the changes he had in mind can be envisaged, and certainly they were

 not marginal changes.

 It is not surprising for him to mean to return to "the agreement between the observed

 and calculated values of the constant entering in the expressions (2.2) for the Balmer

 series of the hydrogen spectrum";69 after all, this was one of the most interesting

 results of the theory. However, by his words, one does not understand which aspects

 he still considered problematic, and hence worthy of further investigation. What is

 quite clear is Bohr's intention to overturn the previous interpretative schemes in order

 to adopt a whole new approach, one from which it is possible to derive the value of R

 without that the need for the theory to concentrate on the existence of a more or less

 favorable application of Planck's theory.

 The new strategy abandons the idea of using such Planckian approach to obtain

 information on the expression for the energy of the nth state of the atomic system.

 The basis of this reasoning is completely different and concerns, on the one hand,

 the empirical law of the hydrogen spectrum and on the other, the hypothesis that

 single lines should correspond to a homogeneous radiation emitted during a transition

 between stationary states. Although any discussion of a formal nature was absent

 from the memo, Bohr was sure that in this way "we shall arrive at exactly the same

 expression for the constant in question as that given by (2.2), if we only assume (1) that

 the radiation is sent out in quanta Λ υ and (2) that the frequency of the radiation emitted

 68 Bohr (1913b, pp. 14).

 69 Ibidem.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 615

 during the passing of the system between successive stationary states will coincide

 with the frequency of revolution of the electron in the region of slow vibrations."70

 Basically, the new theoretical scheme required that the quantum hypothesis should

 be freed from any modeling contamination in order to go back to the key idea according

 to which the radiation is always emitted as a quantum hv. The fact that a relationship

 actually able to express the dependence of the radiation from the dynamic state of the

 electrons could be found was not considered by Bohr a particularly relevant problem.

 It concerned, in fact, a hypothetical and indefinable mechanism responsible for the

 radiative processes, the knowledge of which, however, would not have been of any

 help in the derivation of the Rydberg constant.

 At least two aspects deserve to be highlighted in Bohr's brief note. Firstly, the

 absence of any reference to the important 1910 article by Peter Debye on the derivation

 of the Planckian formula for thermal radiation. Secondly, his abandoning of the point

 of view of Planck as a necessary step for the construction of the atomic theory. The

 first debt owed to Debye was to be paid shortly after. The second question was to result

 in numerous changes of mind by Bohr, finding a natural and definitive placement only

 within the context of the correspondence principle. Bohr was moving in a sort of no

 man's land, and rather than pay attention to the formal rigor and to the consistency of

 his reasoning, he showed more interest in proposing alternative solutions in the hope

 that in the long run they would generate fruitful developments. In particular, this third

 and final version of the theory became the basic outline for the conference that Bohr
 was to hold on December 20,1913, at the Danish Society of Physics.

 2.3 A misleading analogy

 The conference concluded an extraordinary year. Only a few weeks had elapsed since

 the publication of the last part of the trilogy; Bohr's great article had certainly not

 gone unnoticed even if eliciting contradictory reactions. Some, like Max Born consid

 ered Bohr's hypothesis to be too "bold" and "fantastic" and, like many physicists in

 Gôttingen, was still waiting for more convincing experimental confirmation.71 Oth

 ers, such as Einstein and Sommerfeld, expressed their appreciation for the process of

 quantization and confessed that they had previously had similar ideas. Sommerfeld

 especially, although "rather skeptical about atomic model in general," wrote to Bohr

 that "the problem of expressing the Rydberg-Ritz by Planck constant h has for long

 time been in my mind."72 But the highest and probably unexpected acknowledgment

 was to be bestowed on the occasion of the annual meeting of the British Association

 for the Advancement of Science, which was held in Birmingham from September 11

 to 17,1913. A general discussion took place on September 12 on the issue of radiation,

 70 Ibidem.

 71 These words can be found in a letter written by Harald to Niels Bohr in the fall of 1913 while he was in

 Gôttingen, CW1567. The first reactions of Paul Ehrenfest, who would later become one of Bohr's strongest

 supporters, were very negative. In a letter of August 25,1913, he wrote to Sommerfeld "Bohr's work on

 the quantum theory of the Balmer formula [...] has driven me to despair. If this is the way to reach the goal,

 I must give up doing physics," quoted in Klein (1970, p. 278).

 72 Sommerfeld to Bohr, September 4,1913, CW2 123.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 616 S. Petruccioli

 and the initial speech was given by James Jeans who also gave a brief account Bohr's

 work stating that "[he] has arrived at a most ingenious and suggestive, and I think we

 must add convincing, explanation of the laws of spectral series."73

 Bohr took the conference as an opportunity for a critical reflection on the many hints

 he had littered along his monumental article. Right from the start, however, doubts and

 uncertainties seemed to have disappeared, his words revealing an unexpected clarity

 of objectives. On the one hand, Bohr admitted that in order to ensure a solid conceptual

 foundation to Rutherford's model, "there can be no question of a direct application of

 Planck's theory."74 On the other hand, he ruled out the possibility for the atomic theory

 to take advantage of hypothetical formal analogies with the Planckian equation for the

 energy of the harmonic oscillator: "When we consider how differently [this] equation

 is employed here and in Planck's theory it appears to me misleading to use this analogy

 as a foundation [...]."75 Indeed, with these words, Bohr demolished the assumptions

 of the first two versions of the theory and expressed the need for a firmer alternative.

 In his speech, Bohr illustrated a point of view able to overcome tentative interpreta

 tive schemes which had proved incomplete and contradictory. As already mentioned,

 he took up again the short note with which he had ended the discussion on the theo

 retical derivation of the Balmer formula. The core of Bohr's reasoning, now explicit,

 concerned the general validity of the quantum of energy. With this concept, in his view,

 it was not the case of some particular hypothesis being questioned, but of having "def

 initely parted with the coherent group of ideas on which the latter theory is based"76

 so one had to be ready to accept even radical changes in the body of knowledge of

 classical physics. This point of view was by no means obvious, as evidenced by the

 state of uncertainty that weighed on theoretical research; on the other hand, there were

 no valid reasons to support the thesis that "all cases of disagreement between the the

 oretical conceptions hitherto employed and experiment will be removed by the use of

 Planck's assumption regarding the quantum of the energy momentarily present in an

 oscillating system."77

 In these terms, the problem could have been solved in an inextricable vicious cir

 cle; the quantum represents a radical departure from ordinary physical ideas, but not

 all "non-classical" phenomena admit a Planck-type interpretation. Bohr could see,

 however, a way out in the already cited Debye article, in which the Dutch physicist

 had shown that, without any conjectures on the nature of the system that emits the

 radiation, and assuming only that the amount of energy emitted is always equal to

 hv, you get the correct expression of the law of thermal radiation.78 There was there

 fore another quantum approach, different from the Planckian one, to the study of the

 radiative behavior of the atom and the Debye scheme presented clear advantages. In

 the absence of reliable clues about the nature of the mechanism at the origin of the

 73 Jeans (1913, p. 379).

 74 Bohr (1914a), Eng. trans, in Bohr (1922b, pp. 1-19: 10) [also in CW2 283-301]. Here and hereinafter,

 the citations are taken from the English edition.

 75 Ibid., p. 14.

 76 Ibid., p. 10.

 Ibidem.

 Debye (1910).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 617

 radiation process, no one was forced to weigh the theory with assumptions destined to

 be largely arbitrary and in any case devoid of valid empirical evidence. Planck's quan

 tum hypothesis, reinterpreted à la Debye, in the case of the atom was but to suggest

 that each radiation process is accompanied by the emission of a quantum of energy

 hv. This assertion was reinforced by two important corollaries: (a) the spectroscopic

 laws are not able to provide any information on the values of the orbital frequencies

 of the electron; (b) if the spectrum of an element contains a line of frequency υ, the

 atom is able to emit a quantity of energy h ν such that

 Ει — E\ = hv, (2.6)

 where £2 and £1 are, respectively, the energies of the system at the beginning and

 at the end of the radiative process. With these assumptions, Bohr was able to show

 that the new theoretical scheme was compatible with Balmer's formula and therefore

 allowed to derive the expression of the Rydberg constant.

 From the comparison of the empirical law for the hydrogen spectrum and the

 quantum condition (2.6), he considered reasonable to assume that, by less than a

 constant, the energy of an nth stationary state was given by

 En = -—γ ; (2.7)

 nz

 consequently, the frequency of electron motion that is in that state would be

 2 2 fl3/l3c3

 ωη = ~2~4 T· (2·8)

 7Γ e4mn6

 Of course, this "quantum" relation gives an account of the element of discontinuity
 characteristic of the nuclear model of the atom, while hiding no conceptual Planck

 type contamination. In this regard, Bohr's words leave no room for interpretation. If

 the radiation is emitted in the form of a single quantum, the atomic system makes a
 transition between the states «ι and «2. to which are associated, via mechanical model,

 two different frequencies of motion ωη\ and ω„ι. For this reason, "we are not justified

 in expecting any simple relation between these frequencies of revolution of the electron

 and the frequency of the emitted radiation."79 In other words, the impossibility of using

 Planck's hypothesis constructively in the new theoretical context is confirmed.

 So Bohr could only go back to the limiting considerations already used in the first

 part of the "trilogy." According to (2.8), as η increases, ω decreases rapidly and the

 frequencies of two contiguous stationary states remain almost the same (ωη+\/ωη -*

 1); moreover, under the same limiting conditions and for contiguous states, (2.6) and

 (2.7) provide the following expression for the frequency of the emitted radiation

 79 Ibidem.

 2 Rc

 nJ

 v = -r. (2.9)

 Ώ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Assuming, then, by analogy with the law on thermal radiation that in the region of

 low frequencies there is a convergence between quantum hypothesis and the laws of

 classical electrodynamics, and we can then put υ = ω, from (2.9) and (2.8) we get the

 expression of the Rydberg constant

 618 S. Petruccioli

 2 n2e4m

 R = —. (2.10)

 Really not much is new, in formal terms, compared to what had been said in the

 trilogy, but an extraordinary step forward on a theoretical level. Indeed, Bohr obtained

 that result through an extremely simple interpretative scheme, supported only by the

 concept of stationary state and the idea that each radiative event depends on a dis

 continuous transition of the atomic system, and above all, the theory was no longer

 required to meet the typical conditions of a quantum approach à la Planck. All this,

 however, had a particularly high price: The results achieved do not lend themselves to

 any generalization and must remain strictly confined in the limiting zone. Only thus, in

 fact, conditions exist to affirm the existence of a numeric type of convergence between

 the frequencies of electron motion and those of the radiation, but without compro

 mising the discontinuous nature of the radiative processes. Any extrapolation of these

 results would be in any case arbitrary as "we cannot expect to obtain a corresponding

 explanation of the frequency values of the other stationary state."80

 In 1922, Cambridge University Press collected in a small volume Bohr's three

 essays on the application of quantum theory to the problems of atomic structure.

 The author's choice fell upon writings that in his opinion effectively represented "the

 different stages in the development of this theory."81 The first two were the conferences
 of 1913 and 1920 mentioned in the preceding pages, while the third, with nothing

 but a few marginal changes, was based on a Danish address, given before a joint
 meeting of the Physical and Chemical Societies of Copenhagen on October 18,1921.

 Bohr's introduction is very short, but in addition to the customary editorial notes,

 it contains opinions of major relevance. First, Bohr emphasizes the existence of a

 very close correlation between the views stated during the early part of the Berlin

 conference and in his speech of December 1913. In both cases, "no use is made of

 the new formal conceptions established through the later development of the quantum

 theory";82 what is common to both texts is therefore, according to Bohr, the absence

 of formal approaches related to the development of the first quantum theory—but on

 this we shall return later. Second, Bohr states very clearly that "the first germ" of the

 correspondence principle, introduced during the second part of the Berlin conference,

 is located right in the 1913 text. A few lines later, he explained what he meant by

 the expression "first germ." The seed that was to produce a deep theoretical revision

 and the beginning of a new and more fruitful research program a few years down the

 line, concerned no generic considerations regarding the limiting zone where there is

 a significant convergence between quantum conditions and classical laws. Nothing

 80 Ibidem.

 81 Bohr (1922b, p. ν).

 82 Ibidem.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 619

 like that. According to Bohr, the correspondence principle in the embryonic stages

 was in "the deduction of the expression for the constant of the hydrogen spectrum in

 terms of Planck's constant and of the quantities [e, m and c] which in Rutherford's

 atomic model are necessary for the description of the hydrogen atom."83 Only there

 and nowhere else, sketching a theory that, although not intended to have immediate

 developments, demonstrated the possibility of gathering positive results even outside

 of a rigidly Planckian conceptual perspective. At the end of an extraordinary year, he

 believed that this was the methodologically correct attitude.84 But, very soon Bohr

 was to retrace his own steps.

 2.4 Retracing his steps

 1913 had other major surprises in store for young Bohr. While he was preparing the text

 for the Society of Physics lecture, Rutherford informed him of an important discovery

 by Johannes Stark, at the time professor of physics at the Technische Hochschule in

 Aachen. Electric fields cause a separation of the lines of hydrogen and helium with

 a very similar effect to that highlighted by Zeeman with magnetic fields.85 In the

 letter, Bohr was requested to check whether his theory was able to account for these

 effects. Already on December 31, he announced to Rutherford that "I have succeeded

 in accounting, at least partly, for the experiment of Stark on the basis of my theory."86

 With words that reveal his obvious satisfaction, he claimed to have found a very simple

 and plausible explanation for the characteristic difference between both the Stark effect
 and the Zeeman effect, as well as for the doublets of lines that can be observed, for

 example, in the hydrogen spectrum. Such a rapid and successful conclusion of his

 work was possible because "the line of arguments used is exactly analogous to that

 used in my first paper."87

 The article containing these results, "On the effect of electric and magnetic fields on

 spectral lines," was written in a few days and published in the March issue of the Philo

 sophical Magazine.88 Bohr's expectations were, however, to be soon disappointed, as

 we read in a letter of "clarifications" that he sent to the editors of the magazine, but

 83 Ibid., pp. v-vi. John Heilbron implicitly seems to resume this opinion of Bohr's when he says that the
 same derivation of the Rydberg constant "which is only sketched in the trilogy, would become the most

 powerful, as it contains the seed of the 'Correspondence Principle' by which Bohr would seek to tease out

 the rules of the microworld by a comparison with calculations made using classical theory" Heilbron (2013,
 p. 176).

 84 Bohr considered this text to be an important stepping stone since, as he recalled years later, he was to use

 it as the basis for a number of important seminars held in Monaco and Gôttingen in the summer of 1914.

 "I went to Gôttingen in the summer of ' 14 [...] and there I gave a talk about the spectra from the point of

 view, or at any rate something like the points of view that I had put a half a year before in this paper in the

 Physical Society." Interview to Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn ... on November 7, cit., pp. 1-2.

 85 Rutherford to Bohr, December 11,1913, CW2 589. Stark's work, published by PreuBische Akademie

 der Wissenschaften, was announced in a brief note appeared in Nature, Stark (1913).

 86 Bohr to Rutherford 31 December 1913, CW2 591.

 87 Ibidem.

 88 Bohr (1914b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 620 S. Petruccioli

 that was never published.89 Despite its obvious limitations, Bohr's article is an impor

 tant contribution to the understanding of the events we are dealing with. Obviously,

 I am not referring to his attempt to explain the Stark and Zeeman effects, on which

 he would come back later with more luck. I am thinking of the general considera

 tions on the theory's foundations that prompted him, after a very short time, to review

 some of the conclusions contained in the end-of-year conference. In particular, here

 Bohr abandons any reservation about the heuristic validity of formal analogies with

 Planck's quantum hypothesis and especially does not exclude that we can generalize

 the results obtained in the limiting region. In fact, he intends to demonstrate that: (a)

 for any stationary state we have

 ~ hcûn. (2.11)

 dn

 and that (b) having "assumed that the motion of the particles in the stationary states of

 the system can be determined by help of the ordinary mechanics,"90 (2.11) is perfectly

 equivalent to

 T„ = jnho)n, (2.12)

 where Tn is the mean value of the kinetic energy of the particle on the nth state of

 the atomic system. In addition, in his view, there were good reasons to assert that it

 is possible to develop a theory that can unify under a single quantum hypothesis the

 radiation processes involving either a harmonic oscillator or an atom, at least in cases
 where you have simple periodic motions.

 To prove (2.11) Bohr moves from the observation that when η is large the quantum

 condition on the frequencies

 approaches

 v = \{En+x-En) (2.13)

 η

 ν = (2.14)

 h dn

 En = -4- (2-15)

 89 "The considerations were of a preliminary nature and their main intention was to emphasize certain

 principal features of the explanation of the problem in question." N. Bohr, Draft of a note to Phil. Mag.

 Concerning the Stark effect (unpublished), CW2 370—371: 371.

 90 Bohr (1914b, p. 510).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and this is trivially true if we assume, in accordance with the law on the spectrum of

 hydrogen, the energy of the nth state is

 In Bohr's opinion, this is enough to show that "the condition (2.11) holds, not only

 for large values of η but for all values of η ."91A result of extraordinary theoretical value

 that allows us to determine what should be the relationship between the energy and the

 frequency of an electron that is in a stationary state. (2.11) thus represents the necessary

 condition for the existence of states inside the atom, which, at least for some systems, is

 equivalent to Planck's quantum hypothesis for the harmonic oscillator. Unfortunately,

 Bohr's reasoning is not free from logical flaws casting a shadow on the very possibility

 of a generalization of (2.11). In fact, from a true premise, "values (2.17) energy and

 the frequency of a generic state meet the (2.11)," he derives a consequence—"(2.11)

 is valid for any value of n"—in contrast with the limiting conditions that ensure its
 existence.

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 621

 Taking into account that, under the same limiting conditions, ρ tends toward ω,

 (2.11) follows quite naturally from (2.14), which moreover has a significant empirical

 counterpart. By simply replacing En and ωη with the values obtained through "a

 mechanical interpretation of the above-mentioned stationary states," we return once

 more to the well-known theoretical expression of the Rydberg constant

 (2.16)

 So far, apart from some difference in notation, Bohr's reasoning does not differ

 significantly from the conference text. However, overcoming the limits he had then

 deemed insuperable, he now considers it reasonable to go further. By using (2.16)

 for R, the expressions of the energy and the frequency of a generic stationary state

 become, respectively:

 „ 2tr2e4m J 4 jrVm
 En~-^r ( }

 This was one of the many "stretches" that we find in the first formulations of the

 theory, and that in this case was probably used to legitimize the next step, in which

 Bohr showed the existence of a significant and complete analogy between the obtained

 result and the well-known Planckian relationship Ε = nhv. From (2.17), taking into
 account that in a stationary orbit, Ε is equal to the mean value of the total kinetic

 energy Τ of the particle, we obtain

 Tn = ^nhwn. (2.18)

 The equivalence of the latter with (2.11) was then demonstrated through the appli

 cation of Hamilton's principle to the system consisting of a particle moving on a closed

 orbit within a stationary field. Thus, even with a different itinerary, that analogy with

 Planck's ideas, that Bohr had rejected as devoid of any physical foundation and heuris

 tic efficacy in front of the members of the Society of Physics, was re-established. "In

 91 Ibidem.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 622 S. Petruccioli

 Planck's vibrators, the particles are held by quasi-elastic forces, and the mean value of

 the kinetic energy is equal to the mean value of the potential energy due to the displace

 ments. Consequently, (2.18) forms a complete analogy to Planck's original relation

 U = nhv between the energy U of a monochromatic vibrator and its frequency v."92

 There were thus good arguments to claim that the Planck-type condition for the

 stationary states—the ratio between the mean value of the kinetic energy of an orbiting

 electron and its frequency of revolution is equal to (1/2)hn—was derived from the

 particular coincidence that exists in the limiting region between quantum relations

 and classical laws. In addition, having extended the validity of (2.11) to the entire

 atomic system, Bohr could state that among all the mechanically possible states, those

 physically admitted must satisfy a condition rigidly similar to that originally used by
 Planck for the harmonic oscillator.

 3 A last attempt

 In October 1914, following an invitation by Rutherford, Bohr transferred to the Uni

 versity of Manchester for a readership. 1915 was to be a year of transition. Bohr had

 come back to address the problem of the absorption of particles a and β, and in July he

 had sent a long article to Philosophical Magazine representing "a direct continuation

 of the paper I wrote when I was here last time (Bohr 1913a)."93 But, as he wrote to

 Hans Hansen, "The whole thing is not very exciting." He was to go back to the topics

 of the quantum theory of the atom during the last months of his stay in Manchester,

 gathering the research results in two articles.

 The first one appeared in the September issue of the Philosophical Magazine with

 the title "On the quantum theory of radiation and the structure of the atom,"94 while the

 second was received by the same journal at the beginning of the following year and,

 as I anticipated in the introduction, was withdrawn by the author shortly before being

 sent to print. In the latter, Bohr had set himself the aim of developing a theory based

 on assumptions regarding the properties of atoms that escape the ordinary laws of

 mechanics and electrodynamics, as well as to verify whether it was possible to present

 said postulates in "a mutually consistent form."95 It was first necessary to circumscribe

 the field of application of the theory given its inability to account for the properties of

 an anyhow complex atomic system. Everything seemed rather to converge toward a

 drastic reduction of its validity range, which would have concerned only the class of

 periodic systems. John Nicholson had expressed strong reservations concerning the

 fact that some explanation of the spectra of complex elements could be provided by

 using the same assumptions introduced for hydrogen. And, although Bohr had not

 92 Ibid., pp. 510-511.

 93 Bohr to Hansen, 12 May 1915, CW2 516. Bohr's article dated July was published in the October issue:
 Bohr (1915b).

 94 Bohr (1915a). In this article, Bohr provides a correct interpretation of the famous Frank and Hertz

 experiment, around which an interesting debate developed, cfr. Kragh (2012, pp. 143-146).

 95 CW2 433.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 623

 accepted his criticisms,96 already in the September article he had reformulated one of

 the basic assumptions in a "more cautious form: The relation between the frequency

 and energy of the particles in the stationary states can be determined by means of the

 ordinary laws of mechanics if these laws lead to periodic orbits."97

 In this "unlucky" work, Bohr abandoned any strategy to verify the existence of

 favorable conditions for the use of quantum hypothesis to support the atomic model,

 undertaking on a much more ambitious project: to demonstrate the possibility of

 building an atomic theory along the lines of Planck's. It was a goal that he considered

 so important as to overshadow the fact that such a theory would still have spoken only

 of the simplest systems, such as hydrogen. Of course, if successful, it would be a useful

 starting point for generalizations up to the most demanding tasks of interpretation. And

 speaking of this project Bohr wrote to Oseen: "I have written a paper in which I have

 made an attempt to show that the assumptions of the theory can be put on a logical

 consistent form, which covers all the different kinds of applications [...] which assume

 a discontinuous distribution of the possible (stationary) states."98 So at the beginning

 of 1916, Bohr had sent to that famous journal a work that was supposed to mark a

 crucial step in his research program. In the article, Bohr addressed a wide range of

 topics systematically, which it is certainly not possible, and perhaps not even useful,

 to account for in this context. For our purposes, it is sufficient to represent the general

 structure of the theory and to rebuild the logical-conceptual framework within which

 Bohr hoped to place a coherent discussion of atomic phenomena.

 Everything starts from a fundamental postulate that Bohr calls "assumption A" in

 which the contrast between the notion of quantum discontinuity and the classic image

 of physical reality is expressed with great effectiveness. "An atomic system can exist

 permanently only in a certain series of states corresponding with a discontinuous series

 of values for its energy, and any change of the energy of the system including absorption

 and emission of electromagnetic radiation must take place by a transition between such

 states. These states are termed "the stationary states" of the system."99 Also due to the

 total absence of terms relating to some modeling representation,100 Bohr had reason to

 claim that it is "consistent with Planck's original assumption as to the possible values

 for the energy of an atomic vibrator."101 The foundations of the new project were thus

 laid down: the theory is supported by a single postulate fully compatible with Planck's

 quantum hypothesis, the effectiveness of which would therefore not be limited to appli
 cations of an essentially statistical nature. Indeed, Bohr used the word "consistent"

 96 "These calculations have been criticized by Nicholson (1914), who has attempted to show that the

 configurations chosen for the electrons in the atoms are inconsistent with the main principles of the theory,

 and has also attempted to prove the impossibility of accounting for other spectra by help of assumptions

 similar to those used in the interpretation of the hydrogen spectrum. Although I am quite ready to admit

 that these points involve great and unsolved difficulties, I am unable to agree with Nicholson's conclusions"
 Bohr (1915a, p. 399).

 97 Ibidem, my emphasis.

 98 Bohr to Oseen March 17,1916, cit.

 99 CW2 434.

 100 Unlike what we find in his earlier articles, see for example Bohr (1915a, p. 396).
 101  CW2 434.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 624 S. Petruccioli

 in such a strict sense as to enable him to reduce the assumption A to a simple vari

 ant of Planck's original concepts. This profound conviction was at the root of Bohr's

 rejection of the so-called "second Planck's theory," which the German physicist had

 formulated in those years and taken up in the new edition of Vorlesungen, published in

 early 1913.102 In Planck's later work—Bohr writes—assumption A is abandoned and

 replaced by the assumption "That an atomic system can exist permanently/or any value

 of its energy, and that merely the emission of electromagnetic radiation is discontinu

 ous·, such radiation being emitted only if the energy of the system has certain critical

 values and then always in finite amount."103 Planck had come belatedly to admit that

 the black body theory could not prescind from the idea of discontinuity, and in recent

 work had tried to minimize its impact, considered to be devastating, by confining the

 discontinuity to the emission processes alone.104 Although this solution, as Planck had

 shown, would allow him to obtain similar results in certain statistical applications, Bohr

 rejected it, judging it—among other things—contrary to the his quantum image of the

 atom. In particular, he was to demonstrate the incompatibility between theories based

 on the two different Planckian notions of discontinuity in the third paragraph of the

 article, concerning the probability of the various stationary states in a distribution of sta

 tistical equilibrium. I will not deal here with this aspect but rather focus on the first two

 paragraphs, in which Bohr addresses: (a) the conditions that must be satisfied in the sta

 tionary states and (b) the nature of the radiation that is emitted or absorbed during a tran

 sition between different states. In both cases, assumption A, to which Bohr attributes

 "an entirely negative character," needs to be supplemented by further postulates.

 3.1 The stationary states

 If we look at the atom through its modeling representation, assumption A reveals an
 evident inconsistency between the concept of stationary state and classical electro

 dynamics; this, however, does not mean that as long as we are dealing with periodic

 orbits, the dynamical equilibrium of a stationary state should not be described by the

 laws of mechanics, thus developing on this basis a "theory for the stationary states of

 periodic systems." Of course, according to Bohr, such a theory had to be consistent

 with the fundamental postulate, that is to say a Planck-type theory.

 The basic steps of Bohr's demonstration can be summarized schematically in these

 terms. Firstly, by applying Hamilton's principle to a mechanical system with constant

 frequency of vibration ω, we get the mean value of the kinetic energy (equal to that

 of the potential energy)

 Tdt (3.1)

 102 Planck (1913). On this see Kuhn (1978, chap. X).

 103 2 434, my emphasis.

 104 »of course my project can't be carried through without resort to hypotheses, and I fear that your hatred

 of the zero-point energy extends to the electrodynamic emission hypothesis that I introduced and that leads

 to it. But what's to be done? For my part, I hate discontinuity of energy even more that discontinuity of

 emission." This Planck wrote to Paul Ehrenfest in the spring of 1915; cit. in Kuhn (1978, p. 253).

 ·£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Always according to Hamilton's principle, in the case where we are concerned with

 small variations in the motion of a periodic system, themselves also periodic, we get

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 625

 This expression then allows us to state that the Planckian condition for the energy

 of a linear atomic oscillator with constant frequency ω, Ε = nha>, is equivalent to

 Τ f 1
 - = φ Tdt = -An (3.2)
 ω J 2

 dW = 2ωδ ( — ) (3.3)

 (E>

 where W represents the total energy equal to the sum of the energy of motion of the

 particle and the potential energy of the system. Finally, taking into account that for

 any orbit in dynamic equilibrium W must be constant and equal to E, from (3.3) it

 follows that, for systems with periodic orbital motions, "the total energy is the same

 for every state of the system which satisfies the (3.2) for the same value of n."105

 This is equivalent to saying that for periodic systems only stationary states that, in

 accordance with the laws of mechanics, comply to (3.2) are allowed and consequently,

 given the demonstrated equivalence, they satisfy Planck's expression for the energy

 of the harmonic oscillator. According to Bohr, this is "a necessary condition for the

 validity of assumption A."

 Therefore, there are no irreconcilable contradictions between the "quantum" con

 cept of stationary state and the classical description of the orbital motion of electrons,

 between a mechanical representation of the atom and assumption A; it is in fact the

 latter to establish that for periodic motions, the only states permitted are again those for

 which Planck's hypothesis is satisfied.106 So Bohr gets to a first important conclusion:

 "we might regard [this hypothesis] as a relation expressing certain characteristic prop

 erties of the distinctive motions of an atomic system." But the fact that in addition to

 this, Planck's hypothesis included another meaning concerning the radiative behavior

 of atoms was to have implications of such significance as to influence the fortunes of

 the article, but also, as we shall see, to suggest the formulation of the correspondence

 principle.

 105 CW2 436.

 106 Starting from the finding that "f /ω will remain constant for any small variation of motion, produced

 by external forces, for which W is unaltered" Bohr devoted ample space to the discussion on the role

 played by the invariant quantities in the quantum theory; however, they represented "a necessary condition

 for the application of ordinary mechanics to the stationary states of periodic systems"(ibid.). Of course,

 Bohr recognized the merits of Paul Ehrenfest in having achieved this result and for his formulation of the

 adiabatic principle. The latter, to which Bohr preferred to always refer to as the principle of mechanical

 transformability, played a crucial role together with the correspondence principle in the construction of the

 atomic theory up to the birth of quantum mechanics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 626 S. Petruccioli

 3.2 The nature of radiation

 The reference to Planck also informs the study of the radiative process that, according

 to the quantum postulate, is associated with a transition between stationary states of

 the atom. Such is the topic of the next paragraph, in which Bohr expressed his belief

 that, without attempting "to describe the mechanism of transition in any detail," it is

 possible to get a consistent theory of spectral lines by means of a formal generalization

 of Planck's original theory. The generalization which Bohr intends is the transferring

 to the atomic system of the condition that the frequency of any radiation emitted or

 absorbed by a harmonic vibrator of constant frequency is equal to the frequency of

 vibration of the particles. If in Planck's theory, on the basis of simple kinematic con

 siderations, this assumption is regarded as completely natural, things get complicated

 in the case of the theory of atomic spectra where a logical step that cannot be taken

 for granted is required. However, with a show of great optimism Bohr claimed that

 "we therefore get from [E = nhw] the following relation between the frequency of

 the radiation η and the amount of energy emitted during the passing of the system

 between two successive stationary states,"107

 En+i - En = hv. (3.4)

 Even if we limit ourselves to the formal aspect, here there's just nothing for granted,

 since in support of this conclusion it would be necessary for the following conditions

 to be simultaneously fulfilled: (i) ω„+ι = ωη = ω and (ii) ν = ω, which is difficult to

 sustain in the light of the "condition of reality" of the stationary states obtained earlier

 by Bohr. In fact, (3.2) does not provide any information concerning the relationship

 between the frequencies of motion corresponding to different values of energy, nor of

 course does it allow us to state that for every η (i) is satisfied. Failure to verify (i) implies

 the invalidity of (ii) and then of the very premise for the entire procedure. However,

 this did not prevent Bohr from stating, with evident surprise for the reader, that (3.4)

 "expresses Planck's original assumption of emission and absorption in quanta hv."m

 In fact, the validity of this statement was traced back again to the often cited 1910

 work by Debye, but what interested Bohr the most was the fact that Planck's original

 assumption could be regarded not only in relation to the properties of the stationary

 states but also as a statement about a property of the process of radiation.

 If the aim was the building of a general theory of spectra, the procedure of gen

 eralization needed additional steps because, as Bohr acknowledged a little later: "the

 frequency of vibration will not be equal for two successive stationary states,"109 i.e., it

 is not always true that ωη+ι = ωη = ω\ and (b) it is not even to be expected for there

 to be a simple relationship between the frequency of the monochromatic radiation and

 the frequency of vibration in the stationary states involved in the process of radiation;

 on the contrary, this is totally incomprehensible in the light of ordinary physical ideas.

 107 CW2443.

 108 Ibidem.

 109 Ibidem.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 627

 It is certain only, once again, that, in the low frequencies zone, ωη+\/ωη 1 and
 υ « ω; here, since condition (i) is satisfied, so is (ii).

 At this point, taking up a result from previous articles Bohr states that a necessary

 condition for the general validity of (3.4) is that when η is large dE/dn = o)h\ and,

 like two years before, he believes this relation to be true "not only in the limit but quite

 generally for any value of n."110 Then, the condition of reality of the states—(2.11) in

 the previous paragraph—was the result of a procedure burdened with obvious logical

 contradictions; now, Bohr succeeds in demonstrating this to be a direct consequence

 of the condition required by the laws of mechanics for states in dynamic equilibrium;
 in short, (2.11) ensues from (3.2).

 We could say that with this, the circle is closed. On the one hand, it had been

 possible to bring back to assumption A the two conditions, respectively, concerning

 the existence of stationary states and the processes of interaction between atom and

 radiation. On the other hand, there was an obvious logical compatibility between

 those conditions since both are dependent on the dE/dn = wh relationship between

 the energy and frequency possessed by the electron in a generic stationary state. On

 a closer look, this result was not at all surprising, if only one takes into account that

 that relationship had the extraordinary "power" to keep incompatible representations

 of reality together: the space-time description of the motion of electrons in a given

 state and the discontinuous evolution of the system accompanying every interaction

 with radiation. It was probably quite enough to assert that it was possible "to show

 that the assumptions of the theory can be put on a logical consistent form." But even

 in this case, as we shall see shortly, everything is not so obvious.

 Let us return again to the article's text in order to follow the last step in the formal

 generalization of Planck's theory to which Bohr had referred to at the beginning of

 the paragraph. If so far he had limited himself to considering only transitions between

 contiguous stationary states, Bohr now argues that the general condition for the energy

 of radiation is also valid in the case of transitions between two generic stationary states.

 En2 ~ En[ = hv ; (3.5)

 and, according to him, even in this case this is a generalization consistent with the

 initial hypothesis on the frequency of the radiation emitted by a harmonic oscillator.

 Obviously, from the quantum point of view nothing changes if the states involved

 in the process are or not contiguous: in these states, the frequency of the electron's

 motion is always different and, whatever the cause, the emitted radiation is always
 monochromatic. Also, for two generic stationary states, in the limit where n\ and

 «2 are large compared with their difference, the same quantitative convergence takes

 place as would be expected from the classical theory of radiation: we must merely

 expect u « («2 - «ι)ω, confirming the fact that "the motion of any periodic system

 which is not an harmonic vibrator can be resolved in harmonic terms corresponding

 with frequencies which are entire multiples of the frequencies of revolution ω."111

 Bohr believed, therefore, that there were good reasons to conclude that by using

 110 Ibid., p. 268.

 111 Ibid., p. 269.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 628 S. Petruccioli

 Planck's quantum ideas "it seems possible to construct a theory based on (3.2) and

 (3.5) which covers the spectrum of an harmonic vibrator as well as that of the hydrogen

 atom."112 Ultimately, it was the realization of a long-pursued objective: unify under

 the same theory and in the light of a system of assumptions and postulates formally

 compatible with each other, both the phenomena related to the thermal radiation and

 those regarding the spectra of the elements.

 Upon a closer look we discover, however, that his reasoning is by no means free

 from stretches and contradictions, and this poses a serious problem for the effective

 success of his attempt. A very clear confirmation is given from the examination of one

 of the key steps of his theoretical scheme—where Bohr had claimed that dE/dn = coh

 is a consequence of f /ω = 1 /2hn. In short, we can certainly say that (2.11) derives

 from (3.2) and (3.3) but in order to ensure compliance with the minimum standards

 of rigor we must assume that in (3.2) η is a continuous variable. Aware of this, Bohr

 used an expression, "if for a moment we consider η as a continuous variable,"113 that

 had a very strong theoretical implication: it contained the invitation not to take into

 account the discrete nature of atomic processes and to basically deny assumption A,

 the pillar of the whole theoretical system.

 Although Bohr had missed his target, we cannot deny that this attempt would,

 however, provide essential information for the reformulation of his research program.

 Undoubtedly, the new approach contained interesting changes compared with his pre

 vious not very convincing attempts; in particular, it brought the whole system of

 theoretical hypotheses down to a single postulate, an assertion concerning the nature

 and physical properties of the atomic system that Bohr considered to be the neces

 sary requirement for a Planck-type theory. From here, the theory could develop along

 the directions outlined by the two meanings in which Planck's hypothesis split when

 applied to the atomic system: one concerning the electron motion in a generic station

 ary state, the other the process of interaction with radiation. In the case of the stationary

 states, even if only for the simplest systems, a relationship between energy and fre

 quency was found such that could express the necessary condition for their existence.

 The study of the radiative process, on the other hand, had been much more complex

 and strewn with obstacles, in which apparently the conditions for a generalization of

 the Planckian concepts no longer existed.

 Bohr had not succeeded in his attempt and the question of how to reconcile these two

 aspects remained open, both being essential to a full understanding of the structure and

 physical behavior of atoms within a consistent theoretical framework. Nevertheless,

 he considered that article as a crucial step in the maturing of his theoretical point of

 view. In fact, it showed which were the insurmountable limits for an atomic theory

 required to meet the requisites of a Planck-type interpretative scheme and at the same

 time to respect the conceptual constraints imposed by the quantum postulate. If one

 stuck to a mechanical representation of the atomic system, this was the best possible

 outcome from a theory which was forced to entrust its potential interpretation to a

 weave of classical concepts and quantum hypothesis.

 112 Ibidem.

 113 Ibid. 268.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 629

 Bohr decided not to publish the article when the drafts were already on his table, and

 we cannot think the cause of such a drastic choice to have been a belated evaluation

 of the lackluster results of that work. As he wrote to Oseen, he was fully aware

 of the impossibility of developing a logically consistent Planck-type theory.114 It was

 precisely because of this "negative value," initially, that he had thought that in any case

 the article ought to be brought to the attention of the scientific community. Instead

 he was forced to change his mind when he realized that, with the publication of a

 new paper by Sommerfeld, entirely new horizons opened up for the quantum theory

 of the atom. Perhaps to make his choice less traumatic, Bohr spoke in his letters of a

 simple postponement of the publication, for the time necessary to make the changes

 and additions required in light of Sommerfeld's theoretical innovations.

 After a few years, the withdrawn paper was brought to the attention of readers

 in the German language version. In fact, Bohr had expressed some misgivings on

 whether to publish a collection of his articles, because of the great changes that had

 occurred in the meantime in the field of atomic physics. He thought, indeed, that

 those articles contained positions that "do not conform at all points to my present

 views of the problems treated."115 However, what led him to accept the publisher's

 project was the opportunity thus offered him to publish the "withdrawn paper" alone.

 The latter appeared as the tenth and last of the contributions collected in the volume

 Abhandlungeti tiber Atombau aus den Jahren 1913-1916 published in 1921. Here

 are all of Bohr's most important works, starting from the trilogy116 up to the choice

 of concluding the collection with the withdrawn paper, certainly not due to editorial

 requirements. With said choice he meant reaffirm that that "unlucky" contribution had,

 however, played an extremely important role in the process of scientific maturation,

 calling it a "connecting link between my first papers on the atomic problems and the

 later ones."117 In addition, Bohr considered it a good starting point for his preface,

 a couple of pages offering us an effective and striking summary. Of course, he does

 not present a critical analysis of the reasons that had hampered the implementation
 of a challenging project or actually demonstrated its impracticability. It was rather a

 different reading, aimed at highlighting the elements of continuity with a radically

 changed theoretical context in which, in Bohr's opinion, the correspondence principle

 assumed a central role. Witness the fact that in a large text of about 6,500 words
 Planck's name was virtually ignored.118

 114 Bohr to Oseen, March 17,1916, CW2 571-573: 572.

 115 Bohr (1921, p. iv).

 116 In fact, there was a lacuna and, in light of what we have so far gathered, it can be argued that it had

 not been a trivial oversight. In that collection, the conference of December 1913 was absent, a text that was

 the antithesis of the theoretical perspective of the withdrawn paper and where not surprisingly, as it will

 become clear in the next section, Bohr located the "first germ" of the correspondence principle.

 117 Ibid., p. v.

 118 The quotes are just two. The first one concerns Plank's oscillator brought forth as an example of a

 periodic system in the framework of the exam for Ehrenfest adiabatic principle (ibid. p. vi). The second

 one concerns a reference to the withdrawn paper in which "a preliminary attempt was made in the section

 in question to extend the assumption made by Planck about the a priori probability of a harmonic oscillator

 to systems of several degrees of freedom" (ibid. p. vii).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 630 S. Petruccioli

 4 "Instead of doing this ..."

 "My life from the scientific point of view passes of[f] in periods of over happiness

 and despair, of feeling vigorous and overworked, of starting papers and not getting

 them published, because all the time I am gradually changing my views about this

 terrible riddle which the quantum theory is. In the last years, things have in this

 respect of unsuccessful literary occupation come to a climax (I hope so at any rate)

 and I have been rewriting and rewriting again the paper on the principles of the theory

 of which we spoke already in England. Some time ago, when the paper was getting

 quite unmanageable, I resolved to divide it in four parts, and the first part was printed

 as separate copies some months ago."119

 This severe and merciless account is contained in a letter Bohr had sent on August

 15, 1918, to Owen Richardson, at the time professor of physics at King's College
 London. More than two years had passed since Bohr had refrained from publishing

 his article on the Philosophical Magazine and his optimistic predictions of the time

 had been undermined by an intellectual commitment that had proved to be particularly

 arduous. Quantum theory was a terrible puzzle, and the various attempts to shed light on

 its conceptual foundations had produced, after exhausting rewriting, a text which Bohr

 did not seem particularly happy about. Twenty months later, Bohr had the opportunity

 to present his ideas in the conference held at the Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft,

 following an invitation by Max Planck; his attitude had by now changed radically, all

 doubts and uncertainties about the new structure of the quantum theory atom dispelled.

 In front of that prestigious audience, he took up the line of thought from the pages of

 the withdrawn paper, in the aim of finally finding a consistent solution to the problem

 that had run his ambitious attempt into the ground. If that article had shown what the

 absolute limit for an atomic theory was, understood as a direct articulation of Planck's

 original hypothesis, it was perhaps time to remove this assumption. It was now clear

 to Bohr that quantum notions could be used constructively without imposing to the

 theory of atomic spectra the assumption of Planck's ideas as a privileged reference.

 After a long and bumpy research itinerary, he had in fact managed to collect enough

 evidence to say that the unsustainability of such a theoretical approach was due to

 the extraordinary complexity of the motions of atomic particles when compared to
 those of a Planckian oscillator. Therefore, the claim that "assumption A" should be

 consistent with Planck's original assumptions had to be abandoned as nothing more

 than a sterile reductionist condition, and the question that had to be posed was a

 completely different one: "how should Planck's result be generalized in order to make

 its application possible"?120 This question brought the focus back to that interpretive

 dichotomy regarding the two parts in which the Planckian condition breaks up, which

 Bohr had failed to recompose within the same interpretive scheme in the withdrawn

 paper. Now he was trying to present it again in decidedly more explicit terms: "Thus

 we might regard [Planck's] equation as a relation expressing certain characteristic

 properties of the distinctive motions of an atomic system and try to obtain the general

 119 Bohr to Richardson, August 1918 (CW3, pp. 14-15:14).

 120 CW3 244.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 631

 form of these properties. On the other hand, we may also regard [that] equation as

 a statement about a property of the process of radiation and inquire into the general

 laws which control this process."121 With different survey instruments, and especially

 giving up the search for a Planck-type theory, Bohr was convinced he would reach

 different results and prove that it was possible "in a purely formal manner to develop a

 spectral theory, the essential elements of which may be considered as a simultaneous

 rational development of the two ways of interpreting Planck's result."122

 The differences compared to the withdrawn paper are obvious. Then, the idea of

 constructing a formally consistent theory concerned the possibility of reducing the

 postulates regarding the stationary states and the radiative processes into a "mutually

 consistent form." Now, it is simply stated that the evidence on which the theory of

 spectra rests derives from a rational generalization of the two meanings assumed

 by Planck's result within the atomic model. Regardless of the adopted approach,
 the same question begged an answer, a question arising from the convergence that

 exists in the zone of high quantum numbers between classical electrodynamics and

 quantum conditions: what is the relationship between the motion of atomic particles

 and the nature of the radiation emitted in a process of transition, between a causal

 space-time description peculiar to the laws of classical physics, and the typically

 discontinuous nature of the processes regulating interaction between radiation and

 matter? In the withdrawn paper, Bohr had thought of translating this relationship into

 a simple mathematical equation between the energy and frequency of motion valid for

 any stationary state; in the Berlin conference, he connected the link between motion

 and radiation directly to the correspondence principle.

 Actually, the origin of that question was to be sought in the singular and conflictual

 coexistence between classical laws and quantum ideas that had been used to support

 the modeling of the atom and to ensure the conditions for its observability. In particular,

 the problem arose from the fact that, while the so-called frequency relation explains

 the monochromatic nature of the emitted radiation, the latter provides no "information

 about the motion of the particles in the atom, as is supposed in the usual theory of

 radiation."123 Everything we can deduce from the comparison between empirical laws

 and the frequency relation confirms that each process is associated with a change in

 radiative energy inside the atom; it was sufficient evidence to justify the assumption

 that when the atom does not interact with the radiation it is permanently located in

 certain distinctive states. In this regard, significant results were obtained which, while

 not diminishing the contrast between the ordinary physical ideas and the reality of

 atomic systems, they allowed "to develop a consistent theory on the assumption that

 the motion in these states can be described by the use of the ordinary mechanics."124

 One would think that in Bohr there was an unconditional and aprioristic acceptance

 of a mechanical picture of the atomic system, as Pauli and Heisenberg later harshly

 rebuked. But not at all. He saw, rather, in that theory the only instrument available at

 121 Ibidem.

 122 Ibidem.

 123 Ibid. 245.

 124 Ibidem.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 632 S. Petruccioli

 the time to describe the behavior of particles inside the atom; the very effectiveness

 of such a theory made him wonder whether even in a quantum context it was not

 possible, by analogy with ordinary electrodynamics descriptive ways, to establish some

 relationship between the nature of the radiation emitted by an atom and "the harmonic

 components occurring in the motion of the system." The concept of discontinuity

 ought to have suggested an attitude of great caution, ruling out in the first place for

 that relationship to be expressible in formally rigorous terms. But Bohr had on the

 contrary been long engaged in the realization of precisely such a goal, because clearly

 he was convinced that a theory built on the Planckian model ought to have provided

 a similar relationship to that for the energy of the harmonic oscillator for atomic

 systems too. Now, Bohr took note of the failure of this project, admitting that at best

 it was possible to assert the existence of "a far-reaching correspondence between the

 various types of possible transitions between the stationary states on the one hand

 and the various harmonic components of the motion on the other hand."125 The word

 "correspondence" was not chosen at random but arose from a scrupulous, and for

 some obsessive, attention to language that is one of the characteristic features of

 Bohr's theoretical approach. Indeed, with that term, he was able to express with great

 effectiveness the existence of an unusual logical relationship between two physical

 processes that by their very nature were irreducible to a single interpretive scheme, but

 thanks to that concept, according to Bohr, "the present theory of spectra is in a certain

 sense to be regarded as a rational generalization of the ordinary theory of radiation."126

 In order to illustrate the theory of spectra, Bohr once again used the example of the

 hydrogen atom and followed closely the approach developed at the conference that he

 had held many years earlier, in December 1913, at the Danish Society of Physics. He

 therefore took up again the expression of the frequency and the major axis in the nth

 stationary state, obtained from Balmer's empirical formula,

 3V 2 4 and 2an = —, (4.1)
 ns y ;Tle*m hK

 nV

 to address an important theoretical point which actually marks the transition from

 the old to the new research program. Bohr did observe that in order to derive the

 theoretical expression of the constant K, two distinct routes were possible. The first

 one, perhaps the simplest and apparently also the most obvious, was to compare the

 motions determined by (4.1) with Planck's formula for the harmonic resonator; this

 was the solution adopted since the "trilogy." The second, marked a turning point and

 was introduced by Bohr in the following way: "Instead of doing this I shall show how

 the value of Κ can be found by a simple comparison of the spectrum emitted with the

 motion in the stationary states, a comparison which at the same time will lead us to

 the principle of correspondence."127 It is not about choosing between two formally

 different procedures that allow us to achieve the same result—in fact, on balance, in

 125 Ibid. 246.

 126 Ibidem.

 127 Ibid. 247, my emphasis.

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 633

 the first case, we would get a value of Κ four times lower than in the second one.

 The difference here is deeper, directly involving aspects of conceptual and theoretical
 nature. In short, Bohr indicates a radical alternative: in the first case, one is forced to

 recognize the validity of Planck's formula for the stationary states of the atom; in the

 second, on the contrary, we simply exploit a general correspondence between spec

 trum and movement to translate it into a principle that leads the individual radiative

 processes back to the existence of certain mechanical properties of atomic particles.

 As in December 1913, from the Balmer formula:

 <4-2)

 Bohr developed some limiting considerations, this time taking into account transi

 tions between two generic stationary states with quantum numbers larger than their

 difference. According to (4.1), the latter can be approximated by

 , , 2π2e4m

 v~(n -η )w]j Khi . (4.3)

 where ω = ωη> = ωη». If, in general, Bohr notes, it is impossible to obtain a rela

 tion that makes the frequency of the radiation depend from that of revolution of the

 electrons, in the limiting area it is correct to expect that "the frequency of the radia

 tion emitted by a transition between two stationary states [...] will coincide with the

 frequency of one of the components of the radiation which according to the ordinary

 ideas of radiation would be expected from the motion of the atom in these states."128

 The frequency υ of the radiation emitted in the transition between the states n! and n"

 should be equal to that of the radiation which, according to classical theory, is pro

 duced by the corresponding tth harmonic component of motion, or from (η' - η")ω.

 And in order for this to occur, it is sufficient to impose the condition that the radicand

 in (4.3) be equal to 1 ; we therefore get

 ^ 2ττ2Λη
 Κ = —ρ—, (4.4)

 Despite the essential and irreducible difference existing between the ideas of quan

 tum theory and the ordinary theory of radiation, the coincidence between the experi

 mental and the theoretical value of the constant Κ was therefore interpreted by Bohr

 as a clue about the existence of a "connection between the spectrum and the atomic

 model of hydrogen"·,129 and that clue led directly to the correspondence principle.

 There are many points of contact with the text of the 1913 conference. Even at that

 time Bohr had ruled out the use of a direct application of the Planck's theory and had

 judged misleading the use of the analogy with that theory as a foundation; moreover,

 even then he had renounced to proposing a generalization of the results obtained in

 128 Ibid. 248.

 129 Ibid. 249, italics in the original.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 634 S. Petruccioli

 the limiting region. But it is interesting to discover that there is also a significant

 affinity with the procedure used to derive the theoretical expression of the Rydberg

 constant, which confirms the opinion Bohr had expressed in the preface to the CUP

 volume: the 1913 conference holds the first seeds of the correspondence principle,

 and they concern in particular "the deduction of the expression for the constant of

 the hydrogen spectrum." The theoretical expression of constant Κ is not achieved,

 as Bohr had long believed, by imposing a quantum condition on the atomic particles

 similar to that required for the Planckian harmonic oscillator. The reasoning needed

 to be overturned; that expression could be reached by requiring that, similarly as

 to what might be expected according to classical electrodynamics, there should be

 a convergence between radiation and movement in the limiting region, between the

 frequency of a line of the spectrum and one of the harmonic components in which

 the electron motion can be solved. The agreement between the experimental and

 the theoretical value of constant Κ provided thus an indirect confirmation that even

 for quantum processes there was some correlation between motion and radiation; a

 statement that is the necessary premise of the correspondence principle.

 The first step toward the formulation of the new principle consists in a generalization

 of the recently found correspondence between the different frequencies of radiation

 and the harmonic components of the motion. The term "correspondence" expressed

 with great effectiveness the idea that there was no way to mitigate the difference, even

 in the limiting region, between classical and quantum mechanisms of emission; Bohr,

 however, thought that "this correspondence between the frequencies determined by

 the two methods must have a deeper significance."130 In particular, he was certain that
 it would also cover the relative intensities with which each line is issued. If from the

 quantum standpoint the emission of the radiation, corresponding to the rth harmonic

 of the electron's motion, depends on a process of transition between states n' and n",

 for which n! - n" = r, it follows, according to Bohr, that "the relative intensity with

 which each particular line is emitted depends [...] upon the relative probability of the

 occurrence of the different transitions."131 The singular correspondence relationship,

 through which what is expected according to classical electrodynamics is extended

 to the quantum case, thus takes on a quite general meaning, which allows us to say
 that when we are dealing with large quantum numbers, the relative probability of

 a given transition must be "connected in a simple manner" to the amplitude of the

 corresponding harmonic component of the motion.

 By the second generalization, Bohr came to the enunciation of the principle of cor

 respondence where the essential elements of his new research program find an effective

 summary: (a) the knowledge that there is an irreducible contrast between the concept

 of quantum discontinuity and the ideas of classical physics and (b) the hypothesis that

 by a process of "rational transcription"132 we can use all the information provided by

 132 Bohr uses this expression in Bohr (1925, p. 849): "The correspondence principle expresses the tendency

 to utilize in the systematic development of the quantum theory every feature of the classical theories in

 a rational transcription appropriate to the fundamental contrast between the [quantum] postulates and the
 classical theories."

 130 Ibidem.

 131 Ibidem.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 635

 ordinary mechanics and electrodynamics for the construction of a consistent quan

 tum theory of the atom. Once acknowledged that in a limited region of the spectrum,

 a particularly striking connection can be struck between the two approaches to the

 processes of radiation, it was not at all risky to draw from it a general law regarding

 any transition between the atoms' stationary states: "Thus we shall assume that even

 when the quantum numbers are small the possibility of transition between two sta

 tionary states is connected with the presence of a certain harmonic component in the

 motion of the system."133 Naturally, Bohr was not able to say in the motion of which

 state the harmonic component was due to appear in order to be able to affect the occur

 rence of a transition process.134 Despite these obvious difficulties, a few months later,

 in front of the authoritative assembly of physicists gathered in Brussels for the third

 Conseil de physique Solvay Bohr expressed full satisfaction for the results achieved:

 "the examination of the atomic problems hitherto treated by means of the theory of

 multiply-periodic systems has given an unrestricted and convincing support for the

 above view, which may be referred to as the correspondence principle."135

 With this principle, he finally abandoned the idea that the conditions existed to

 exploit Planck's ideas in the study of atoms, both in the determination of the states

 and in the study of the physical processes in which they are involved. As we have

 seen, he was convinced that this was not the way forward and, as he wrote to Oseen, it

 was necessary to finally acknowledge that a Planck-type theory was impossible. The

 coincidence resulting for high values of η cannot be generalized, if by that is meant the

 establishing of some relationship that would make the nature of the radiation depend

 on the properties of the motion of electrons. This should be excluded on principle

 regardless of what we know about the mechanism, still shrouded in mystery, causing

 the radiative processes. The generalization Bohr was thinking of, and that found full

 expression in the principle of correspondence, was of a completely different nature. It

 concerned the idea that there might be some logical relationship between profoundly

 distinct and mutually incompatible theoretical contexts. In the limiting area, we do
 not discover that discontinuous quantum processes reacquire the well-known pecu

 liarities highlighted by the theory of classical electrodynamics and that a dependency

 between optical and mechanical frequencies is re-established. We discover, on the

 contrary, that for particular approximations of numerical order, the same physical

 process corresponds to a type of description that refers to different theoretical systems

 and conceptual apparatus; they have in the Planck h constant an insuperable separa

 tion element. The core of Bohr's reasoning consists therefore in assuming that this

 particular relationship, called "correspondence," could always be valid as requested

 133 Ibid. 250.

 134 In fact, in some later works, Bohr would try to solve the obvious difficulty arising from the fact that,

 outside of the limiting region, the "corresponding" amplitudes can be quite different in the two stationary

 states involved in the transition, coming also to suggest that the sought frequency was the mean value of

 the corresponding vibrations, calculated on a continuous series of hypothetical "intermediate states." It

 was the same ploy used by Ehrenfest to make it somewhat easier to explain the idea of correspondence to

 participants at the Solvay Conference. "This is the simplest way that can be imagined" claimed Ehrenfest

 during the discussion in reply to W. L. Bragg, who had asked how it was possible to define the average

 value of the corresponding frequency ω for a transition; Solvay III pp. 255-156), CW3 388-89.

 135 CW3 377, italics in the original.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 636 S. Petruccioli

 by the fact that "the possibility of the occurrence of a transition between two given

 states [is] conditioned by the appearance in the motion of the corresponding harmonic
 vibration."136

 If this is the meaning of the correspondence principle and if the idea of a relation

 of correspondence between motion and radiation is a way, alternative to Planck's

 idea, to establish a relationship between the energy and frequency of a harmonic

 oscillator, there are no grounds for searching the distant origins of that principle in

 the limiting considerations that accompanied the first wavering steps of Bohr's theory.

 The reconstruction contained in this article tells us something else: that the original

 research program hinged on the idea that it is possible to generate a quantum theory of

 the atom on Planck's model, would be revealed in time as highly regressive; that Bohr

 succeeded in avoiding that theory from crashing against insurmountable obstacles,

 renouncing the search for a Planck-type interpretation and assigning to the concept of

 correspondence the task of representing the "positive heuristics" of the new research

 program. I therefore consider that there are sufficiently founded arguments to speak of

 a correspondence principle in opposition to a Planck-type theory of the atom and just

 as many reasons to locate in the withdrawn paper of 1916 the turning point of Bohr's

 research project.

 As everybody knows, the formulation of the correspondence principle was greeted

 by most in the scientific community with skepticism and distrust, especially for the

 unusual and indefinable logical and linguistic tools at work within it. Someone might

 see in it an extreme attempt to disguise the theory's puzzles and frailty by resorting

 to complicated linguistic formulas and concepts at odds with traditional scientific

 rigor; ultimately, as Sommerfeld said, a magic wand. Yet that principle produced
 consequences that were to affect the subsequent development of Bohr's theoretical

 concepts significantly. That principle was to support a research program that became

 a crucial point of reference in many matters connected to the foundation of quantum
 mechanics; it exhausted its heuristic function in 1927 with the formulation of the

 principle of complementarity and the postulate on the essential discontinuity of the

 microscopic processes that Bohr placed as the basis of the quantum mechanics.137

 With this postulate, Bohr would finally unveil the real physical content of Planck's

 quantum hypothesis, acknowledging the crucial role it played in the construction of a

 new physics.

 136 Bohr (1923, in CW3 p. 376).

 137 In the first lines of the opening paragraph entitled "Quantum postulate and causality" Bohr asserts:

 "The quantum theory is characterized by the acknowledgment of a fundamental limitation in the classical

 physical ideas when applied to atomic phenomena. The situation thus created is of a peculiar nature, since

 our interpretation of the experimental material rests essentially upon the classical concepts. Notwithstanding

 the difficulties which hence are involved in the formulation of the quantum theory, it seems, as we shall

 see, that its essence may be expressed in the so-called quantum postulate, which attributes to any atomic

 process an essential discontinuity, or rather individuality, completely foreign to the classical theories and
 symbolized by Planck's quantum of action" Bohr (1928, p. 580).

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 637

 References

 506-524.

 30: 394-415.

 Bohr, Ν. 1913a. On the theory of the decrease of velocity of moving electrified particles on passing through

 matter. Philosophical Magazine 25:10-31.

 Bohr, N. 1913b. On the constitution of atoms and molecules, part I. Philosophical Magazine 26:1-25.
 Bohr, N. 1913c. On the constitution of atoms and molecules, part II. Philosophical Magazine 26:476-502.

 Bohr, N. 1913d. On the constitution of atoms and molecules, part III. Philosophical Magazine 26:857-875.

 Bohr, N. 1914a. Om Brintspektret. Fysisk Tidsskrift 12: 97-114.

 Bohr, N. 1914b. On the effect of electric and magnetic fields on spectral lines. Philosophical Magazine 27:

 Bohr, N. 1915a. On the quantum theory of radiation and the structure of the atom. Philosophical Magazine

 Bohr, N. 1915b. On the decrease of velocity of swiftly moving electrified particles in passing through matter.

 Philosophical Magazine 30: 581-612.

 Bohr, N. 1918a. On the quantum theory of the line-spectra, part I: On the general theory. Kongelige Danske

 Viedenskabern.es Skrifler, Naturvidenskabelig og matematisk Afdeling, 8 Roekke. IV. I: 1-36.

 Bohr, N. 1918b. On the quantum theory of the line-spectra, part II: On the hydrogen spectrum. Kongelige

 Danske Viedenskabernes Skrifter, Naturvidenskabelig og matematisk Afdeling, 8 Roekke. IV. I: 37-100.

 Bohr, N. 1920. Ober die Serienspektren der Elemente. Zeitschrift fiir Physik 2:423-469.

 Bohr, N. 1921. Abhandlungen iiber Atombau aus den Jahren 1913-1916. Braunschweig: Vieweg & Sohn.

 Bohr, N. 1922a. On the quantum theory of the line-spectra, part III: On the spectra of elements of higher

 atomic number. Kongelige Danske Viedenskabernes Skrifter, Naturvidenskabelig og matematisk Afdel

 ing, 8 Roekke. IV. I: 101-108.

 Bohr, N. 1922b. The theory of spectra and atomic constitution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Bohr, N. 1923. Inapplication de la théorie des quanta aux problèmes atomiques. In [Solvay III] 228-247.

 Bohr, Ν. 1924. On the Application of the quantum theory to atomic structure. Proceedings of the Cambridge

 Philosophical Society 24(Suppl): 1-42.

 Bohr, N. 1925. Atomic theory and mechanics. Nature 116(Suppl.): 845-852.
 Bohr, N. 1928. The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature 121(Suppl.):

 Bohr, N. 1961. The Rutherford memorial lecture 1958. Reminiscences of the founder of nuclear science

 and of some developments based on his work. Proceedings of the Physical Society 78:1083-1115.

 Bohr, N. 1972. Collected works, vol. 1, Early work (1905-1911), ed. J. Rud Nielsen. Amsterdam.
 Bohr, N. 1976. Collected works, vol. 3, The correspondence principle (1918-1923), ed. J. Rud Nielsen.

 Bohr, N. 1981. Collected works, vol. 2, Work in atomic physics (1912-1917), ed. U. Hoyer. Amsterdam.
 CW1 see Bohr, N. 1972.
 CW2 see Bohr, N. 1981.
 CW3 see Bohr, N. 1976.

 Darrigol, O. 1992. From c-numbers to q-numbers: The classical analogy in the history of quantum theory.

 Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Darrigol, 0.1997. Classical concepts in Bohr's atomic theory (1913-1925). Physis 34: 545-567.
 Darwin, C.G. 1912. A theory of the absorption and scattering of the α rays. Philosophical Magazine 23:

 Darwin, C.G. 1913. On some orbits of an electron. Philosophical Magazine 25: 201-210.

 Debye, P. 1910. Der Wahrscheinlichkeitsbegriff in der Theorie der Strahlung. Annalen der Physik 33:

 579-590.

 Amsterdam.

 901-920.

 1427-1434.

 Evans, E.J. 1913. The spectra of helium and hydrogen. Nature 92: 5.

 Eve, A.S. 1939. Rutherford. Being the life and letters of the RtHon, Lord Rutherford. Cambridge: Cambridge

 Geiger, H. 1912. Note on the scattering of a particles. Proceedings of the Royal Society 86: 235-240.

 Geiger, H., and E. Marsden. 1913. The laws of deflexion of a particles through large angle. Philosophical

 Heilbron, J.L. 2013. Nascent science. The scientific and psychological background to Bohr's Trilogy. In
 Love, literature and the quantum atom, ed. F. Aaserud, and J.L. Heilbron, 103-200. Oxford: Oxford

 University Press.

 Magazine 25: 604-623.

 University Press.

 <£) Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Heilbron, J.L., and Th.S. Kuhn. 1969. The genesis of the Bohr atom. Historical studies in the physical

 638 S. Petruccioli

 Jeans, J.H. 1913. Discussion on radiation. Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,

 sciences 1: 211-290.

 Birmingham (376-381).

 Oxford University Press.

 Press.

 Klein, M.J. 1970. Paul Ehrenfest. Vol. 1 : The making of a theoretical physicist. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 Kragh, H.2012.Me/s Bohr and the quantum atom. The Bohr model of atomic structure 1913-1925. Oxford :

 Kuhn, Th.S. 1978. Black-body theory and the quantum discontinuity, 1984-1912. Oxford: Oxford University

 Langevin, P., and M. de Broglie (eds.). 1912. La théorie du rayonnement et les quanta. Rapports et discus

 sions de la réunion tenue à Bruxelles du 30 octobre au 3 novembre 1911. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Lodge, O.J. 1913. President's address. Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,

 Birmingham (3-42).

 Marsden, H., and T.S. Taylor. 1913. The decrease in velocity of α-particles in passing through matter.

 Proceedings of the Royal Society 88:443-454.

 Mayer, F. 1913. Zerstreuung der α-Strahlen. Annalen derPhysik 41: 931-970.
 Moseley, H.G.J. 1913. The high-frequency spectra ofthe elements. Philosophical Magazine 26:1024-1034.

 Nicholson, J.W. 1912a. The constitution of the solar corona. I. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

 Nicholson, J.W. 1912b. The constitution of the solar corona. II. Monthly Notices ofthe Royal Astronomical

 Nicholson, J.W. 1912c. The constitution of the solar corona. III. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

 Society 72: 139-150.

 Society 72: 677-693.

 Society 72: 729-739.

 ical Magazine 27: 541-564.

 Nicholson, J.W. 1914. The high-frequency spectra of the elements and the structure of the atom. Philosoph

 Pais, A. 1994. Niels Bohr's times: In physics, philosophy, and polity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Petruccioli, S. 2006. Atoms metaphors and paradoxes. Niels Bohr and the construction of new physics.

 Petruccioli, S. 2011. Complementarity before uncertainty. Archives for History of Exact Sciences 65:591—

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 624.

 Planck, M. 1913. Vorlesungen tiber die Theorie der Wdrmestrahlung, 2nd ed. Leipzig: Barth.
 Rosenfeld, L. (ed.). 1963. Niels Bohr: On the constitution of atoms and molecules. Copenhagen: Munks

 Rosenfeld, L„ and E. Rudinger. 1967. The decisive years 1911-1918. In Niels Bohr, his life and work as

 seen by his friends and colleagues, ed. S. Rozental, 38-73. New York: Interscience.

 Rud Nielsen, J. 1976. Introduction in CW3 3-46.

 Rutherford, E. 1911. The scattering of a and β particles by matter and the structure of the atom. Philosophical

 Rutherford, E. 1912. The origin of β and γ rays from radioactive substances. Philosophical Magazine 24:

 Rutherford, E., and J.M. Nuttal. 1913. The scattering of a particles by gases. Philosophical Magazine 26:

 Magazine 23: 669-688.

 453-462.

 702-712.

 [Solvay I] La théorie du rayonnement et les quanta. Rapports et discussions de la Réunion tenue à Bruxelles
 du 30 octobre au 3 novembre 1911 sous les auspices de M. E. Solvay. 1912. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 [Solvay II] La structure de la matière. Rapports et discussions du Conseil de physique tenu à Bruxelles
 du 27 au 31 octobre 1913 sous les auspices de l'Institut international de physique Solvay. 1921. Paris:
 Gauthier-Villars.

 [Solvay III] Atomes et électrons. Rapports et discussions du Conseil de physique tenu à Bruxelles du 1er au 6

 avril 1921 sous les auspices de l'Institut international de physique Solvay. 1923. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1915. Zur Theorie der Balmerschen Serie. Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Akademie der

 Wissenschaften Munchen 425-458.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1916. Zur Quantentheorie der Spektrallinien. Annalen der Physik 51:1-94.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1919. Atombau und Spektrallinien. Braunschweig: Vieweg.

 Stark, J. 1913. Observation of the separation of spectral lines by an electric field. Nature 92: 401.

 Thomson, J.J. 1904. On the structure of the atom. Philosophical Magazine 7: 237-265.

 Thomson, J.J. 1913. On the structure of the atom. Philosophical Magazine 26: 792-799.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Correspondence principle versus Planck-type theory 639

 Thomson, J.J, (1921). La structure de l'atome. In [Solvay II] 1-74.

 Wilson, C.T.R. 1912. On an expansion apparatus for making visible the tracks of ionizing particles in gases

 and some results obtained by its use. Proceedings of the Royal Society 87: 277-292.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

