 

 

 

 

Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas: non-statistical arguments for a

new statistics
Author(s): Enric Pérez and  Tilman Sauer
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 5 (September 2010), pp. 561-612
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342431
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:38 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:561-612
 DOI 1 0. 1 007/S00407-0 1 0-0066-x

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas:
 non-statistical arguments for a new statistics

 Enríe Pérez • Tilman Sauer

 Received: 30 April 2010 / Published online: 16 July 2010

 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract In this article, we analyze the third of three papers, in which Einstein

 presented his quantum theory of the ideal gas of 1924-1925. Although it failed to
 attract the attention of Einstein's contemporaries and although also today very few

 commentators refer to it, we argue for its significance in the context of Einstein's

 quantum researches. It contains an attempt to extend and exhaust the characteriza-
 tion of the monatomic ideal gas without appealing to combinatorics. Its ambigui-
 ties illustrate Einstein's confusion with his initial success in extending Bose's results
 and in realizing the consequences of what later came to be called Bose-Einstein
 statistics. We discuss Einstein's motivation for writing a non-combinatorial paper,

 partly in response to criticism by his friend Ehrenfest, and we paraphrase its content.

 Its arguments are based on Einstein's belief in the complete analogy between the ther-
 modynamics of light quanta and of material particles and invoke considerations of
 adiabatic transformations as well as of dimensional analysis. These techniques were
 well known to Einstein from earlier work on Wien's displacement law, Planck's radi-

 ation theory and the specific heat of solids. We also investigate the possible role of

 Ehrenfest in the gestation of the theory.

 Communicated by Tilman Sauer.

 E. Pérez (И)

 T. Sauer

 Departament de Física Fonamental, Universität de Barcelona, с. Martí i Franquès 1 ,
 08028 Barcelona, Spain
 e-mail: enperez@ub.edu

 Einstein Papers Projects, Caltech 20-7, Pasadena, CA 91 125, USA
 e-mail: tilman@caltech.edu

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 562 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Abbreviations

 AEA Albert Einstein Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

 Unpublished correspondence quoted by permission

 AHQP Archive for History of Quantum Physics

 For a catalogue, see Kuhn et al. (1967)

 EHA Ehrenfest Archive, Rijksarchief voor de Geschiedenis van de

 Natuurwetenschappen en van Geneeskunde, Leiden, Netherlands
 For a catalogue, see Wheaton (1977)
 We quote from the microfilm version included in the AHQP

 HPE Huisbibliotheek van Paul Ehrenfest, Institut Lorentz, Leiden, Netherlands

 1 Introduction

 It has been said that Albert Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas, the
 conceptual innovation of Bose-Einstein statistics in the quantum physics of material

 particles, was his last "positive contribution" to statistical physics.1 It was presented

 in three papers published in 1924 and 1925.2 In these papers, Einstein made an impor-

 tant step in the quantization of the ideal gas, i.e., of a system of free, massive particles
 confined in a volume.

 The historical connections of Einstein's theory with earlier work by Satyendra Nath
 Bose, on the one hand, and with Erwin Schrödinger's wave mechanics, on the other
 hand, have already been widely discussed in the literature.

 Most historical commentary focuses on Einstein's first two papers, which indeed
 contain the most significant conclusions of the theory: a new distribution law for the

 energy, a new way of counting microstates, an analysis of fluctuations, and the pre-
 diction of what came to be known as the Bose-Einstein condensation phenomenon.

 The third paper, in contrast, has rarely been mentioned, and we have not found any
 work that would analyze it in some detail. Max Jammer,3 Friedrich Hund,4 Abraham

 Pais,5 Jagdish Mehra and Hans Rechenberg,6 and Olivier Darrigol,7 for example, cite

 the paper but do not comment on it, i.e., they refer to the list of all three publications,

 but limit their comments to the results of the first two papers only.8 Martin Klein, in a

 1 Born (1949, p. 175). In a similar vein, Pais takes the work on the quantum ideal gas to be the last valid

 achievement in Einstein's intellectual career, when he suggests that his fame was "based exclusively on
 what he did before 1925," in the infamous dictum about Einstein's later biography that "his fame would be
 undiminished, if not enhanced, had he gone fishing instead" (Pais 1994, p. 43).

 2 Einstein (1924, 1925a,b).

 3 Jammer (1966).

 4 Hund (1975).

 3 Pais (1982).

 6 Mehra and Rechenberg (1982, 1984).

 7 Darrigol (1991).

 ^ Springer

 8 Works that contain discussion of Einstein's first two notes but fail to mention the third paper include
 (Ezawa 1979).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 563

 reference article on Einstein and the wave-particle duality, does not even cite the third

 paper.9

 Agostino Desalvo, in a long paper, in which he analyzed different attempts of

 calculating the chemical constant and their relationship to the birth of quantum statis-

 tics, discussed Einstein's third paper, albeit only briefly. In fact, his comments suggest

 that the paper deserves closer attention:

 This paper usually receives less consideration than the former two. However, if

 one recalls the key role of thermodynamics in Einstein's thought and the discus-

 sion of thermodynamics requirements imposed on the theory of gas degeneracy

 (...) this paper appears to be a necessary complement to the other two.10

 Einstein followed an approach in this paper that was not based only on statistical
 considerations and that was closer to thermodynamics. He tried to find general con-

 ditions that any theory of the ideal gas would have to satisfy, mainly by establishing

 and exploiting analogies with radiation, where the displacement law at least provided
 some hints as to what the radiation law should look like.1 1

 Paul Hanle, in a general survey of Schrödinger's research on statistics of ideal
 gases prior to the formulation of wave mechanics,12 represents another exception.
 To be sure, his comments are not any more explicit than Desalvo's. He suggested
 one should understand Einstein's third paper as a response to Paul Ehrenfest's objec-

 tions against the reality of the condensation phenomenon. But he also suggested that
 Ehrenfest was not the only addressee and that Einstein took "Ehrenfest's criticism as

 symptomatic of skepticism toward the theory among his colleagues."13

 In summary, Einstein's third paper has received very little attention from historians.
 Neither did it receive a lot of attention at the time of its publication. We hardly have

 found references to it by contemporaries, and references to the paper are scarce even

 by Einstein himself.

 From a historical point of view, the fact that Einstein wrote a non-combinatorial

 paper after expounding his new theory of the quantum ideal gas in two prior arti-
 cles points to a deeper conceptual problem. There are indications that Einstein him-
 self may not have realized the full implications of the new way of counting, despite
 his earlier work on black-body radiation. For example, Daniela Monaldi has argued

 in a note on the prehistory of indistinguishable particles that "neither Bose nor
 Einstein showed any awareness that they were inaugurating the statistics of indis-

 tinguishable particles."14 Such observations raise a methodological problem. Indeed,

 9 Klein (1964). He did cite the third paper in an interesting article on Ehrenfest's contributions to the

 development of quantum statistics (Klein 1959a,b).

 ,u Desalvo (1992, p. 526). His emphasis.

 1 1 In the bibliography compiled by Margaret Shields for the book Albert Einstein : Philosopher-Scientist

 this paper is described as follows: "A general condition is deduced which must be satisfied by every theory
 of a perfect gas" (Schilpp 1949, p. 716). The phrase is almost a literal quote from Einstein's paper. See
 footnote 66.

 12 Hanle (1977).

 13 Ibid., pp. 176-177.

 14 Monaldi (2009, p. 8).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 564 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 careful reading of Bose's paper as well as of Einstein's first two notes do not, it seems

 to us, allow a modern reader to decide whether Einstein or Bose were fully aware, at
 the time, of the conceptual implications of their new way of counting. We do have,

 however, parts of an epistolary exchange between Einstein and the Viennese physicist

 Otto Halpern. 15 The correspondence was initiated by Halpern in response to Einstein's

 note, and in it we find a very explicit discussion of the new combinatorics, both by
 Halpern and by Einstein. While it therefore seems that Einstein became aware of the

 implications of the new conceptual implications of Bose-Einstein statistics, at least,

 in the period between the publication of the first and the second paper, we also have

 explicit criticism by his colleague Paul Ehrenfest, which points to the fact that the new

 way of statistics was rejected just because of these novel implications.

 As we will elaborate in this article, the implications of indistinguishability were

 discussed at the time under the label of "loss of statistical independence."

 For a historical reconstruction of the emergence of one of the core conceptual inno-

 vations of quantum theory, it is therefore of interest to take a close look at Einstein's

 third paper on the quantum ideal gas, precisely because it set out to justify this new
 theory without making use of the new combinatorics.

 Our interest in the non-statistical paper on the quantum ideal gas arose initially from

 our interest in Paul Ehrenfesťs adiabatic hypothesis and, more generally, in his work.

 In the third paper, Einstein used an adiabatic transformation as a part of a process

 designed to provide an argument to support his new theory of the quantum ideal gas.
 Indeed, as we will show, a detailed analysis of the paper suggests other interesting
 relations to Ehrenfesťs research. It is well known and has been observed before16 that

 Einstein mentioned his good friend in the second paper, but only in relation to the

 question of loss of statistical independence of the particles.17 The discovery of a man-

 uscript of that second paper in the professional library of Ehrenfest in Leiden18 further

 kindled our interest in what appears to have been a debate between the two physicists

 in the - more or less - six months of gestation that preceded this third contribution by
 Einstein on the quantum ideal gas.

 In view of all this, our intention is to analyze the content of the third paper without

 any further analysis of the pair that preceded it, since they have already been studied

 in detail.19 We will try to account for its gestation period, in particular as regards the

 role that Ehrenfest would have taken in it and also compare it with previous and later

 reflections by Einstein himself. Finally, we will formulate some conjectures as to why
 this paper met cold reception despite its historical and systematic interest.

 In the title of this essay, we refer to the third paper as containing "non-statistical

 arguments." More accurately, it should state "non-combinatorial arguments." In a cer-
 tain sense, as we will see, it does contain some statistical results, insofar as it deals

 with the distribution function of the kinetic energy among the molecules. However,

 19 See, for instance, Navarro (2009) and references therein.

 15 See footnote 5 1 .

 16 Pais (1982, p. 430).

 17 See footnote 37.

 18 Huijnen and Kox (2007).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 565

 Table 1 Chronology of the presentation and publication of Einstein's quantum theory of the monoatomic
 ideal gas (QTMIG) and some related facts

 4 June 1924 Bose writes to Einstein

 ca. 2 July 1924 Bose's paper (translated by Einstein) received by Zeitschift für Physik

 10 July 1924 Einstein's first paper on QTMIG presented to the Prussian Academy (PA)

 20 September 1924 Einstein's first paper on QTMIG published (Einstein 1924)

 December 1924 Einstein's second paper on QTMIG signed

 Bose's paper published (Bose 1924)

 8 January 1925 Einstein's second paper on QTMIG presented to PA

 29 January 1925 Einstein's third paper on QTMIG presented to PA

 9 February 1925 Einstein's second paper on QTMIG published (Einstein 1925a)

 5 March 1925 Einstein's third paper on QTMIG published (Einstein 1925a)

 that function is not analyzed starting from the microscopic constituents of the system,

 but deduced from its macroscopic properties. What Einstein really omitted completely

 in this paper is any argument of combinatorics. We have kept the word 'statistical' in
 the title because it was the consideration of the kind of dependence among molecules

 which Einstein tried to avoid. It was a non-statistical paper in the sense that the way
 the microstates had to be counted was not discussed.

 In Table 1 we have gathered some of the relevant dates for what follows and to

 which we will refer throughout the paper.

 2 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas

 Some time in June 1924, Einstein received a letter from a Bengali physicist,

 Satyendra Nath Bose, who asked him politely to translate - if he believed it was worth
 it - and forward for publication a paper on the hypothesis of light quanta, which he
 had attached.20 Einstein complied and translated and sent to Zeitschrift für Physik

 Bose's subsequently famous paper.21 To the published paper, he added the following

 commentary:

 In my opinion Bose's derivation of the Planck formula signifies an important
 advance. The method used also yields the quantum theory of the ideal gas, as I
 will work out in detail elsewhere.22

 20 See Blanpied ( 1 972) and Wali (2006). The editors of Philosophical Magazine had earlier rejected Bose's
 manuscript.

 21 Bose (1924).

 22 "Bose's Ableitung der Planckschen Formel bedeutet nach meiner Meinung einen wichtigen Fortschritt.
 Die hier benutzte Methode liefert auch die Quantentheorie des idealen Gases, wie ich an anderer Stelle

 ausführen will" (Bose 1924, p. 181). An English translation of Bose (1924) can be found in Theimer and
 Ram (1976, p. 1056).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In Bose's paper we find, for the first time, a derivation of the factor

 566 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 cJ

 (I)

 starting from the quantization of energy (c is the speed of light in vacuum, V the vol-

 ume). This expression gives the number of cells corresponding to frequencies between

 v and v + dv or, in wave-theoretical terms, the number of modes with frequency in

 that same range. With the average energy of a resonator of frequency v (or of a normal

 mode) it constitutes Planck's black-body radiation law for the energy density r:

 X . 87 tv2 hv

 r(v, X T) dv . = - 5

 c e*r - 1

 (k is Boltzmann's constant and T the temperature). While several different ways had
 been found to derive the average energy of a resonator based on Planck's quantum
 hypothesis, the prefactor had previously been derived only classically, without invok-

 ing the concept of quantization. Thus, in his 1916 paper Einstein remarked about the
 prefactor:

 In order to obtain the numerical value of constant a [defined earlier as p =
 av3l/(exp(- hv/kT) - 1)] one would have to have an exact theory of electro-

 dynamic and mechanical processes. For the time being we must use Rayleigh's

 limiting case of high temperatures, for which the classical theory applies in the
 limit.23

 In order to obtain this factor, Bose divided the six-dimensional phase space of a light

 quantum into cells of (hyper)volume Л3. He then calculated the probability of a mac-

 roscopic state, taking as a microstate only the number of quanta that were contained in

 each cell, disregarding any information as to which individual quanta were contained
 in which cell. With that move, and by just applying the orthodox methods inherited
 from Ludwig Boltzmann, he was able to derive Planck's radiation law.

 We will not give any more details about Bose's bold idea and his paper because it
 is discussed at length elsewhere.24 Nowadays, Bose's discovery is mostly presented
 as a striking example of serendipity, since it seems that its author was not fully aware
 of the significance of the step he was taking.25

 Einstein was aware of the significance, as is evident from the swiftness with which

 he translated and submitted Bose's paper, and from the footnote that he attached to

 it and that we have quoted above. In fact, before receiving Bose's manuscript he had

 23 "Um den numerischen Wert der Konstante a zu ermitteln, müßte man eine exakte Theorie der elek-

 trodynamischen und mechanischen Vorgänge haben; man bleibt hier voraufìg auf die Behandlung des
 Rayleigh'schen Grenzfalles hoher Temperaturen angewiesen, für welchen die klassische Theorie in der

 Grenze gilt" (Einstein 1916b, p. 53). Note that Einstein's notation in this quote is inconsistent with the one

 that we use throughout. In this article, we use r to denote the distribution function for radiation and p for
 material gases.

 24 See, e.g., Klein (1964) and Bergia (1987).

 25 See, e.g., Delbrück (1980), Pais (1982, pp. 424-428) and Bergia (1987).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 567

 recently returned himself to an investigation of the theory of light quanta. On 24 April

 1924, Einstein gave a presentation in the plenary session of the Prussian Academy of

 Sciences "about the present state of radiation problem."26 Only a few weeks before

 receiving Bose's manuscript, he wrote to a friend:

 As regards scientific work, I am pondering almost exclusively the quantum prob-
 lem and I now believe to be really on the right track, if it is certain. The best
 I had achieved in these matters in recent times was the work of 1917 in the

 physikal. Zeitschrift . My new efforts aim at unification of quanta and Maxwell's

 field. Among the experimental results of recent years, it is only the experiments

 by Stern and Gerlach and the experiment by Compton (scattering of Röntgen

 radiation together with a change of frequency) that are of any significance. The

 first one proves the independent existence of the quantum states, the second one

 proves the reality of the momentum of light quanta.27

 Therefore, Bose's manuscript was timely: After the experimental successes by

 Arthur Compton and Peter Debye, which seemed to confirm that light quanta have
 momentum as well as energy;28 after the spectacular discovery of Otto Stern and

 Walther Gerlach, for many physicists - Einstein among them - the most striking and

 convincing demonstration of quantization;29 and shortly after Einstein's return to his

 own research on light quanta. Probably for this reason it took him so little time to pre-

 pare a presentation in which he applied Bose's method to an ideal gas.30 He presented
 it at the Prussian Academy on 10 July, only a month after Bose had signed his letter.31

 26 Sitzungsberichte Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse , 1924,

 p. 179. The abstract of the Sitzungsberichte indicates the content of Einstein's talk: "Statistical proper-
 ties of radiation. Discussion of Bothe's theory of multiple quanta and of attempts by the author to solve

 the quantum problem by means of overdetermined systems of equations" ("Statistische Eigenschaften der
 Strahlung. Betrachtung über Bothes Theorie der mehrfachen Quanten und über Bemühungen des Verfas-
 sers, das Quantenproblem durch überbestimmte Gleichungssystem zu lösen.") The reference to Einstein's

 own work presumably is to Einstein (1923). The abstract in the Sitzungsberichte is preceded with a little
 star (see also the manuscript for the abstract, AEA 05-187, available at www.alberteinstein.info), which

 indicates that the report was not intended for publication, at least not by the Academy. This implicit use of a

 star for titles and abstracts of presentations to the Academy listed in its Sitzungsberichte had been common
 since 1902. In earlier issues of the Sitzungsberichte , the meaning of the star had been made explicit at the

 bottom of the page, but during the year 1902, the explicit footnote attached to the star began to be dropped.

 27 "Wissenschaftlich hänge ich fast ununterbrochen dem Quantenproblem nach und glaube wirklich auf

 der richtigen Spur zu sein - wenns gewiss ist. Das Beste was mir da in späterer Zeit gelungen ist, war die
 Arbeit von 19 17 in der physikal. Zeitschrift. Meine neuen Bestrebungen gehen auf Vereinigung von Quanten
 und Maxwell'schen Felde. Von den experimentellen Ergebnissen der letzten Jahre sind eigentlich nur die

 Experimente von Stern und Gerlach sowie das Exp. von Compton (Zerstreuung der Röntgenstrahlung mit
 Frequenzänderung) von Bedeutung, deren erstes die Allein-Existenz der Quantenzustände, deren zweites
 die Realität des Impulses der Lichtquanten beweist". Albert Einstein to Michele Besso, 24 May 1924. In
 Speziali (1972, p. 202), (French paperback edition, p. 120)

 28 See, e.g., Mehra and Rechenberg (1982, pp. 512-532) for a historical discussion.

 29 See ibid., pp. 422-445 for a historical discussion.

 30 Einstein (1924).

 ^ In a comparable situation, Einstein surprised his colleague David Hilbert with a swift calculation of
 the anomalous advance of Mercury's perihelion after giving up his Entwurf -equations and reverting to

 generally covariant field equations, see Hilbert to Einstein, 19 November 1915 (Schulmann et al. 1998,
 Doc. 149): "If I could do the calculations as rapidly as you, the electron would have to surrender and the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In this paper we find the density of states of (kinetic) energy E for a molecule of

 568 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 mass m of an ideal gas:

 27ГTT(2m)2£:2úř£,, (3)

 V 3 i

 №

 which is the analog of (1): It gives the number of phase cells of a single molecule
 corresponding to energies between E and E + dE. Following Bose's derivation,
 Einstein maximized the probability of a certain distribution of molecules in phase
 space, which he had previously divided into cells of volume h 3. He also took into
 account only how many molecules were in each cell, not which, and introduced the

 constraint of the total number of particles, a condition that is not invoked in the case

 of light quanta. He obtained the average occupation number of a state with energy £,
 and also the equation of state of the ideal gas:

 2 £

 P=-3V №

 (/? is the pressure and E the mean energy of the gas). He commented on this result

 with the remark: "We obtain the notable result that the relation between kinetic energy

 and pressure is exactly the same as in the classical theory, where it is derived from the

 virial theorem."32 We will see below that in the third installment of his theory Einstein
 tried to take advantage of this coincidence.

 In this seminal paper, Einstein also showed how classical results can be obtained

 by an expansion of expressions corresponding to the new theory in power series of a
 parameter A., defined as

 Л3 N

 3 3 TT' (5)

 ттЪ(2лткТ)ъ 3 3 v

 and by keeping only the first term (A. <& 1). He wrote some expressions that allowed

 him to see the differences between both theories to that order of approximation. For
 instance, for the average energy of the system he found33:

 £ = ^kT -0.1768A3^(2wm*rHj (6)

 Footnote 3 1 continued

 hydrogen atom would have to produce a letter from home excusing it from not radiating." The background
 for Einstein's achievement was, of course, that he had done before detailed calculations of the perihelion
 problem in the context of the Entwurf -theory, which he could readily assimilate to the case of the new field
 equations, see Earman and Janssen (1993) for a detailed discussion.

 "Es ergibt sich also das merkwürdige Resultat, dass die Beziehung zwischen der kinetischen Ener-
 gie und dem Druck genau gleich herauskommt wie in der klassischen Theorie, wo sie aus dem Virialsatz
 abgeleitet wird" (Einstein 1924, p. 264).

 We correct the wrong numerical factor 0.0318 that appears in the paper. Einstein himself corrected this

 mistake in the last paragraph of his next paper, without, however, pointing it out, see Einstein (1925a, p. 1 3).
 Desalvo and Navarro have already noted this omission (Desalvo 1992, p. 524; Navarro 2009, pp. 200-201).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 569

 Einstein pointed out that contrary to what happens in the ordinary theory, the new

 expression for the entropy of the gas is perfectly compatible with Nernsťs principle,

 in the sense that the entropy vanishes at zero temperature. In fact, in Einstein's theory,

 at zero temperature, all molecules are in the same cell, leaving only one microstate
 possible.

 At the end of the paper we find an interesting comment on a question that had been

 and still was widely discussed by his predecessors in the study of the quantum ideal

 gas: The Gibbs' paradox.34 In Einstein's theory the entropy of the gas is extensive and,

 like the classical entropy, additive with respect to different components. If the mixture

 of two different gases implies an increase of entropy, the mixture of the same gas (at

 equal density), on the other hand, does not. According to Einstein, this prevents one
 from imagining a continuous variation of the differences between gases.

 In the second installment Einstein proposed a solution to this question.35 The sec-

 ond paper was signed in December and read at the Academy's meeting of 8 January

 1 925. Since the presentation of the previous paper, Einstein had plenty of time ponder-

 ing and discussing the subject with his colleagues. The second paper presents further
 detailed analysis of the consequences implied by the theory expounded in the first
 paper. Einstein emphasized this fact by numbering both equations and paragraphs in
 consecutive order with the first one (the second paper begins with the sixth paragraph

 and with the 24th equation).36 The most famous results of Einstein's theory are con-

 tained in this paper. In this paper indeed, Einstein took the theory considerably further
 than Bose had done.

 First, Einstein discussed an unusual consequence: the condensation at low tem-

 peratures or, in other words, the saturated gas. Einstein considered, for the first time,
 the case of a gas in which, below a certain critical temperature (that depends on N
 and V), the number of particles in excited states is limited. In the next section, he
 discussed the loss of statistical independence of the molecules in a famous passage

 where Ehrenfest's name appears:

 Mr. Ehrenfest and other colleagues have raised the criticism that in Bose's theory

 of radiation and in my analogous theory of ideal gases the quanta or molecules
 are not treated as statistically independent entities without explicit mentioning

 of this feature in our respective papers. This is entirely correct.

 And the passage continues:

 If the quanta are treated as statistically independent regarding their localiza-
 tion, one obtains Wien's law of radiation; if one treats the gas molecules in an

 ^ Einstein only refers to "a paradox" ("ein Paradoxon") and does not identify it as Gibbs' paradox. We
 have no evidence for assuring that Einstein knew Gibbs' paradox. However, Ehrenfest did, see footnote 1 50
 Moreover, Schrödinger had recently published a paper in the Zeitschrift für Physik entitled "Isotopie und
 Gibbsches Paradoxon" (Schrödinger 1921). It is more than likely that Einstein had heard about it before

 writing this paragraph.

 35 Einstein (1925a).

 36 "pgr convenience, I write the following formally as a continuation of the paper cited ( Der
 Bequemlichkeit halber schreibe ich das Folgende formal als Fortsetzung der zitierten Abhandlung. )
 (Einstein 1925a, p. 3).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 570 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 analogous way, one arrives at the classical equation of state, even if one proceeds

 in exactly the same way as Bose and I have done.37

 Then, Einstein elucidated this issue analytically, but he left in the dark what kind of

 dependence it is that affects the behavior of molecules in the new statistics. He pointed

 out something that he had already suggested in his previous paper: In classical the-
 ory the entropy expression forces one to choose between two different conditions to

 be fulfilled, that is, Nernsťs principle or the extensivity of entropy. In the new the-
 ory, the two conditions are satisfied at the same time. Einstein considered this fact a

 strong support of the deep analogy between radiation and gas on which his theory was
 founded:

 For these reasons I believe that one has to prefer the conception (a) (i.e., Bose's

 statistical approach) even if this preference over others cannot be justified apri-

 ori. This result in itself lends support for the belief in the deep essential similarity

 between radiation and gas in that the same statistical conception that leads to
 Planck's formula produces the agreement between gas theory and Nernsťs the-
 orem when applied to ideal gases.38

 Also in this paper, we find the first appeal by Einstein to a certain duality in terms

 of the thesis by Louis de Broglie. After analyzing the energy fluctuations of an ideal

 gas, he described the ideas of the French physicist aimed at overcoming the opposi-
 tion between waves and particles. The great impact this reference by Einstein to de

 Broglie's work had on the research of Schrödinger has been noted on many occasions,
 as Schrödinger never failed to recognize it.39 Appealing to the wave field that would

 accompany each particle, Einstein proposed to solve the paradox with which he had

 closed the previous paper: The interference will only take place in gases composed of
 molecules of equal mass.

 Finally, Einstein suggested two effects of his theory that were possibly accessible

 to experimental verification. The first one is a decrease in viscosity. The undulatory

 behavior of the molecules should lead to diffraction effects that might provoke, in gases
 of low-mass elements such as helium or molecular hydrogen, a dramatic decrease

 in the friction coefficient of the gas. But after calculating the size of the required

 37 "Von Ehrenfest und anderen Kollegen ist an Böses Theorie der Strahlung und an meiner analogen
 der idealen Gase gerügt worden, daß in diesen Theorien die Quanten bzw. Moleküle nicht als voneinander

 statistisch unabhängige Gebilde behandelt werden, ohne daß in unseren Abhandlungen auf diesen Umstand
 besonders hingewiesen worden sei. Dies ist völlig richtig. Wenn man die Quanten als voneinander statistisch

 unabhängig in ihrer Lokalisierung behandelt, gelangt man zum WlENschen Strahlungsgesetz; wenn man
 die Gasmoleküle analog behandelt, gelangt man zur klassischen Zustandsgieichung der idealen Gase, auch
 wenn man im übrigen genau so vorgeht, wie BÖSE und ich es getan haben" (Ibid., p. 5).

 8 "Aus diesen Gründen glaube ich, dass der Berechnungsweise a) (d.h. Böses statistischem Ansatz) der

 Vorzug gegeben werden muss, wenn sich die Bevorzugung dieser Berechnungsweise anderen gegenüber
 auch nicht a priori erweisen lässt. Dies Ergebnis bildet seinerseits eine Stütze für die Auffassung von der
 tiefen Wesensverwandtschaft zwischen Strahlung und Gas, indem dieselbe statistische Betrachtungswe-
 ise, welche zur Planckschen Formel führt, in ihrer Anwendung auf ideale Gase die Übereinstimmung der
 Gastheorie mit dem Nemstschen Theorem herstellt" (Ibid., p. 7).

 39 See Klein (1964) and Schrödinger (1926a). Also, Schrödinger to Einstein, 23 April 1926. English trans-
 lation in Przibram (1967, p. 26).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 57 1

 apertures, Einstein discards standard diffraction experiments for this effect. Second,

 he proposed to use the statistics of a saturated gas to account for the problem why the

 electronic contribution to the specific heat of metals is so low. However, in this case,

 Einstein admits that the difficulties in applying this idea are so big that it can hardly

 be considered a proof of his theory.

 We regard Einstein's second paper on the quanta a milestone in the history of quan-

 tum physics, not only because of the unusual amount of new results it contains but
 also because in a certain sense it closed the circle that was initiated by Einstein him-

 self 20 years earlier with his heuristic hypothesis of light quanta. He was a pioneer in

 emphasizing the dual nature of radiation in 1909. In 1925, with a completely analogous

 procedure, he in turn demonstrated the validity of his proposal for the ideal gas.

 In short, Einstein developed the analogy between gas and radiation, knowing that

 despite the evidence he could adduce to support the theory, it was unsure whether his

 theory was the true theory. In his own words:

 The interest in this theory derives from the fact that it is based on the hypoth-
 esis of an extended formal similarity between radiation and gas. According to

 this theory, the degenerate gas differs from the gas of mechanical statistics in
 an analogous way as the radiation according to Planck's law differs from the
 radiation according to Wien's law. If one takes Bose's derivation of Planck's
 radiation formula seriously, then one cannot ignore this theory of the ideal gas

 either; because if it is justified to conceive of the radiation as a gas of quanta, then

 the analogy between a gas of quanta and a gas of molecules must be a complete
 one.40

 We finish this brief summary with this quote in order to emphasize the continuity

 of Einstein's strategy. In the third paper, Einstein insisted on this analogy in order to

 obtain new arguments for the validity of the theory, but in this case, as he wrote to

 Ehrenfest, arguments that were independent from the "incrimininated statistics."41

 3 Ehrenfesťs role in the prehistory of the third paper

 We will argue that Einstein's third paper is implicitly a response to Ehrenfesťs skep-
 ticism toward Einstein's new theory. When did Ehrenfest learn about Einstein's new

 theory? Einstein first communicated to his friend the discovery in a letter:

 The Indian Bose gave a beautiful derivation of Planck's law including its con-
 stant on the basis of the lose light quanta. Derivation elegant, but essence remains

 obscure. I applied his theory to the ideal gas. Rigorous theory of 'degeneracy.'

 ^ "Das Interesse dieser Theorie liegt darin, daß sie auf die Hypothese einer weitgehenden formalen
 Verwandschaft zwischen Strahlung und Gas gegründet ist. Nach dieser Theorie weicht das entartete Gas
 von dem Gas der mechanischen Statistik in analoger Weise ab wie die Strahlung gemäß dem PLANCKschen
 Gesetze von der Strahlung gemäß dem WiENschen Gesetze. Wenn die BoSEsche Ableitung der
 PLANCKschen Strahlungsformel ernst genommen wird, so wird man auch an dieser Theorie des idealen
 Gases nicht vorbeigehen dürfen; denn wenn es gerechtfertig ist, die Strahlung als Quantengas aufzufassen,
 so muß die Analogie zwischen Quantengas und Molekülgas eine vollständige sein" (Einstein 1925a, p. 3).

 41 Einstein to Ehrenfest, 8 January 1925 (AEA 10-097).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 No zero point energy and above no energy defect. The Lord knows whether it's
 like this.42

 572 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Einstein presented the first installment on July 10, and this letter was signed on the

 12th. At the end of month, the two friends could have discussed the matter in person,

 since Ehrenfest stopped over in Berlin for some days in his voyage toward Petersburg.

 However, during those days Einstein was not in Berlin.43 Ehrenfest took part in the
 fourth congress of the Russian Society of Physics (this was his first visit after the

 Revolution and after he moved to Leiden in 19 12).44 In Petersburg, Ehrenfest did not
 present his friend's new theory, but probably he talked about it with some interested

 physicists, as Joffé or Krutkow. On the 18th of September, in his presentation on the

 "theory of quanta," he referred to the struggle that was taking part "in the heart of

 every physicist" between corpuscular and undulatory theories.45 Joffé himself spoke
 the same day about the "light atoms."

 There is also no evidence that Ehrenfest met Einstein on his return trip to Leiden

 at the end of September or beginning of October46 (after having spent a few days

 in Moscow to see in situ the center of the communist state). Nevertheless, according
 to a letter written in October 9 by Ehrenfest to Joffé,47 we must suppose that those
 days Einstein was visiting Leiden (in fact, in the previously mentioned letter of 12

 July, Einstein already announced a meeting at the "beginning of October"). This is the
 excerpt of Ehrenfesťs letter to Joffé that we are interested in:

 My dear friend!

 Precisely now Einstein is with us. 1 . We coincide fully with him that Bose's dis-
 gusting work by no means can be understood in the sense that Planck's radiation

 law agrees with light atoms moving independently (if they move independently
 one of each other, the entropy of radiation would depend on the volume not as

 in Planck, but as in W. Wien, i.e., in the following way: к log VE!hv).

 No, light atoms placed in the same cell of the phase space must depend one on the

 other in such a way that Planck's formula is obtained. Now we will clarify this
 question in a polemic manner. I, Krutkow and Bursian will publish in the next

 42 "Der Inder Bose hat eine schöne Ableitung des Planckschen Gesetzes samt Konstante auf Grund der lo-
 sen Lichtquanten gegeben. Ableitung elegant, aber Wesen bleibt dunkel. Ich habe seine Theorie auf ideales

 Gas angewendet. Strenge Theorie der, 'Entartung.' Keine Nullpunktsenergie und oben kein Energiedefekt.
 Gott weiss, ob es so ist." Einstein to Ehrenfest, 12 July 1924 (AEA 10-089). French translation published
 in Balibar et al. (1992, p. 166).

 43 Einstein was in Switzerland on 29 July (AEA 143-159), returning to Berlin around 18-20 August (AEA
 1 20-908) after also visiting Lautrach (AEA 1 20-907).

 44 See Frenkel (1971, p. 88).

 45 Ehrenfest (1924). The text we quote appears in Hall (2008, p. 244). We wish to thank Karl Hall for
 sending us the text of the résumé of Ehrenfesťs talk.

 46 Again, Einstein was out of town, arriving in Vienna on 22 September (AEA 92-097) and travelled to

 Leiden via Innsbruck (AEA 143-163) and Lucerne (AEA 84-567). Nevertheless, Ehrenfest may have visited
 Einstein's wife and step-daughters on his stopover in Berlin, see, e.g., (AEA 143-168).

 47 Ehrenfest to Joffé, 9 October 1924, in Moskovchenko and Frenkel (1990, pp. 171-172).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 573

 number of Z. Physik a few considerations against, and simultaneously Einstein
 will give them answer in the same issue.48

 Unless we are missing a letter, it is obvious from this document that Ehrenfest and
 Joffé had already discussed about Bose's "disgusting" work. This appellative can be
 understood as one of the first symptoms of Ehrenfesťs future reluctance (which did

 not imply ignorance) toward the new mechanics; Ehrenfest did not hesitate to qualify

 it, some months later, as a "sausage- machine-physics-mill."49

 We have not been able to confirm whether Iurii A. Krutkow (1890-1952) and

 Viktor R. Bursian (1886-1945) - as the quoted letter suggests - went to Leiden with

 Ehrenfest on his return trip. We know that Krutkow enjoyed a scholarship from the
 Rockefeller foundation which allowed him to work in Western Europe in 1925 and

 1926, which he did for some time together with Born in Göttingen.50 In any case, as
 far as we know, the "considerations," which Ehrenfest referred to in this letter were

 never published.

 It is very likely that Einstein referred to these debates in Leiden in the comment

 in his 1925 paper in which he referred to Ehrenfesťs objections. This does not mean
 that the "others" Einstein mentioned were the Russian friends of Ehrenfest. At least,

 the Austrian physicist Otto Halpern had pointed out to Einstein the lack of statisti-
 cal independence of the molecules in the new approach. He sent Einstein a detailed

 explanation of how the statistical independence of the elements under consideration
 had statistical implications. As he himself says, he based his reflections on Ehrenfesťs
 and Krutkow's previous works. In his response, Einstein - who admits Halpern had
 "illuminated very clearly a point of essential significance" - ^distinguishes between

 (1) All distributions of the individual quanta over the "cells" are equally probable

 (2) All different quantum-distribution-pictures over the "cells" are equally probable

 two hypotheses:

 (Wien's law).

 (Planck's law).

 And he continued:

 Hypothesis 2 doesn't square with the hypothesis of the independent distribution
 of individual quanta - but expresses, in the language of the theory of existing

 quanta - a mutual dependence of the latter among each other.

 Without experience one cannot decide between (1) and (2). The concept of
 independent atom-like quanta calls for (1), but experience demands (2). Bose's
 derivation therefore cannot be regarded as a genuine theoretical justification

 of Planck's law, but only as a reduction of that law to a simple, but arbitrary

 statistical elementary hypothesis.

 48 His emphasis.

 ^ "Wurstmaschine-Physik-Betrieb," Ehrenfest to Einstein, 26 August 1926 (AEA 10-142). English trans-
 lation in Mehra and Rechenberg (1984, p. 278).

 50 See Frenkel and Josephson (1990).

 51 "Sie haben (...) einen Punkt von wesentlicher Bedeutung klar beleuchtet". Einstein to Halpern, Sep-
 tember 1924 (AEA 12-128). Published in French translation in Baiibaret al. (1992, pp. 179-180).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 574 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Referring to his own extension of Bose's results to material gases, Einstein wrote:

 This therefore also entails the implicit presupposition of certain statistical depen-

 dencies between the states of the molecules, a presupposition which the gas the-

 ory as such does not suggest. It would therefore be all the more interesting to
 know whether real gases behave according to this theory.52

 Einstein's next visit to Leiden took place only in February of the following year,

 when he participated in the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of Lorentz's doc-

 torate.53 On that occasion he spent only a few days in Leiden54 and the prevailing
 agitation probably made it difficult for the friends to discuss the matter calmly.55

 But a possible earlier meeting could have taken place in Berlin, where Ehrenfest

 spent some time in the beginning of November. This is suggested by a letter written

 by Ehrenfest, in which, however, he does not say anything related to the question of

 the gas. But Einstein did comment on the subject in his next letter, dated on November

 29, in which he mentioned the condensation phenomenon:

 I am investigating the degeneracy function more thoroughly with Grommer. With
 a certain temperature the molecules "condense" without attractive forces, i.e.,

 they pile up at the velocity zero. The theory is beautiful but does it also have

 some truth? I want to try whether one can also relate this to the dependence of
 the thermo forces at low temperature.56

 Everything seems to indicate that these days they hardly discussed. Einstein com-

 plained about that in another letter:

 52 "(1) Alle Verteilungen der individuellen Quanten ueber die 'Zellen' sind gleich wahrscheinlich
 (Wien'sches Gesetz).

 (2) Alle verschiedenen Quanten-Verteilungs-Bilder ueber die Zellen sind gleich wahrscheinlich
 (Planck'sches Gesetz).

 Hypothese 2 passt nicht zur Hypothese der unabhaengigen Verteilung individueller Quanten, sondern

 drueckt - in der Sprache der Theorie existierender Quanten - eine gegenseitige Abhaengigkeit der letzteren
 von einander aus.

 Unabhaengig von der Erfahrung kann zwischen (1) und (2) nicht entschieden werden. Die Vorstellung
 unabhaengiger atomartiger Quanten verlangt (1), die Erfahrung jedoch velangt (2). Böses Ableitung kann
 also nicht als eine eigentliche theoretische Begruendung von Planck's Gesetz angesehen werden, sondern

 nur als dessen Zurueckfuehrung auf eine zwar einfache, aber willkuerlich statistische ElementarHypothese.
 (...) Es bedeutet dies also ebenfalls die implicite Voraussetzung gewisser statistischer Abhaengigkeiten
 zwischen den Zustaenden der Molekuele, fuer welche die Gastheorie als solche keine Anhaltspunkte lief-
 ert. Es waere also umso interessanter zu wissen, ob sich die wirklichen Gase gemaess dieser Theorie
 verhalten" (Ibid.).

 ^ Since that year the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences awards the Lorentz Medal.

 See Einstein to Ehrenfest, 8 January 1925 (AEA 10-098): "Da ich aber im März nach Argentinien muss

 und hier in Berlin Vorlesung in diesem Semester halte, muss ich gleich wieder zurück von Leiden".

 55 It was presumably during this short trip that Einstein gave Ehrenfest the manuscript of the second paper
 that was found in Ehrenfest's personal library, see HPE, Document EB22.

 56 "Ich untersuche mit Grommer die Entartungsfunktion der Gase genauer. Von einer gewissen Temperatur
 an "kondensieren" die Moleküle ohne Anziehungskräfte, d.h. sie häufen sich bei der Geschwindigkeit null.
 Die Theorie ist hübsch, aber ob auch was Wahres dran ist? Ich will versuchen ob man den Verlauf der

 Thermokräfte bei tiefen Temperaturen damit in Zusammenhang bringen kann". Einstein to Ehrenfest, 29
 November 1924 (AEA 10-093).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 575

 The thing with the quantum gas turns out to be very interesting. It seems to

 me more and more that something deep and true is hiding there. I am looking

 forward to - arguing about this with you.57

 We guess they talked only after Einstein had presented the second paper of
 his theory in Berlin. Writing to confirm his participation at Lorentz's jubilee (and of

 his inability to stay longer than a few days), dated January 8 (precisely the day of his

 second presentation in the Academy), Einstein communicated to his friend that he had

 found a new way to justify the theory:

 I will then completely convince you about the gas-degeneracy-equation, I found

 another sound if only not totally complete approach to it, free of the incrimi-

 nated statistics. But how to set up a mechanics that leads to something like this?

 Presently I am plagueing myself roughly following Tetrode's, the invisible, pre-

 scription (Zeitschr. f. Physik 1922). There is something genial about this man.58

 Note the third installment was read by Einstein on 29 January. According to this
 letter, we conclude that when he read the second one he had already thought about

 how to justify his theory with non-statistical arguments based on the displacement law.

 Note that up to this point neither Ehrenfest nor Einstein considered Bose's derivation
 a "theoretical foundation" of Planck's law.

 4 The third, non-statistical paper

 On 29 January 1925, Einstein presented the third and last paper of his quantum theory

 of the monatomic ideal gas to the Prussian Academy for publication in its Proceedings.

 This time, the sections and equations were not labeled consecutively with those of the

 preceding paper. Below we will return to this question in more detail, but these exter-

 nal aspects already suggest that the third contribution represents a path disconnected

 from the previous treatments. Or, at least, it seems Einstein wanted to present it this
 way. In this section, we will paraphrase Einstein's arguments, closely following his

 original paper.

 4.1 Introduction and approach

 Einstein stated in the beginning that his theory was justified on the assumption that a

 light quantum differs, apart from polarization, from a material gas molecule only in

 57 "Die Sache mit dem Quantengas macht sich sehr interessant. Es kommt mir immer mehr vor, dass da viel
 Wahres und Tiefes dahinter steckt. Ich freue mich, bis wir darüber- streiten können." Einstein to Ehrenfest,

 2 December 1924 (AEA 10-095).

 "Ich werde Dich dann völlig überzeugen von der Gas-Entartungs-Gleichung, ich habe noch einen sicher-

 en, aber allerdings nicht ganz vollständigen Zugang zu ihr gefunden, frei von der inkriminierten Statistik.
 Aber wie die Mechanik aufstellen, die zu so was führt? Gegenwärtig plage ich mich ungefähr nach dem

 Rezept Tetrodes (Zeitschr. f. Physik 1922), des Unsichtbaren. Es ist etwas Geniales an diesem Mann".
 Einstein to Ehrenfest, 8 January 1925 (AEA 10-097). Einstein is referring to Tetrode's proposal of extend-

 ing classical mechanics, which was published in 1922, see Tetrode (1922).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 576 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 the vanishing of its rest mass. This assumption was not taken for granted by many of

 his colleagues, nor had many researchers already accepted the statistical method used

 by Bose and by him. Einstein admitted that this method was "not at all free of doubt"

 ("keineswegs zweifelsfrei") and that it was only justified a posteriori by its success in

 the case of electromagnetic radiation. Consequently, in the third paper, he was looking

 for new arguments in support of the new theory.

 Nevertheless, this approach would follow his general heuristics of exploiting the

 gas-radiation analogy:

 Here we plan to engage in considerations, in the field of gas theory, that are
 largely analogous, in method and outcome, to those that lead, in the field of

 radiation theory, to Wien's displacement law.59

 The results of these considerations will be restrictions on the form of the distribution

 function

 p = p(L,/cT, V,m) (7)

 (L is the kinetic energy, к the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, V the volume
 and m the mass of the molecules).

 Einstein began by defining the subject of his investigation: consider a mole of an
 ideal gas contained in a volume V at a temperature T whose molecules have mass m.
 The distribution law will be of the form

 Here dn designates - for fixed temperature, volume and mass - the number of mole-

 cules, whose Cartesian components of the momenta are in the range (p' . . . p' + dp' ,

 P2 - P2 + d/?2> Ръ - Ръ -H d/73). Due to the isotropy of the problem, these compo-
 nents will appear in the argument of the distribution function p only in the combination

 (8)

 L = 2m + p2 + ft2). (9)

 i.e., p will depend only on the kinetic energy L. Within this approach, knowledge of
 p means knowledge of the equation of state, because

 . . .there can be no doubt that the pressure is obtained by mechanical calculation
 based on the collisions of the molecules with the wall.60

 On the contrary, Einstein did not assume that collisions between molecules be gov-
 erned by the laws of mechanics. He asserted that if that would be the case, one would

 "Es handelt sich hier darum, auf dem Gebiete der Gastheorie Betrachtungen anzustellen, welche in

 Methode und Ergebnis weitgehend analog sind denjenigen, welche auf dem Gebiet der Strahlungstheorie
 zum WiENschen Verschiebungsgesetzführen" (Einstein 1925b, p. 18).

 *** ". . .nicht daran zu zweifeln ist, daß für den Druck die mechanische Berechnung aus den Zusammenstößen
 der Moleküle mit der Wand maßgebend ist" (Ibid., p. 19).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 577

 arrive at Maxwell's distribution law and the classical equation of state. In fact, as we

 will see, he neglected interactions among molecules, as is appropriate for an ideal gas.

 4.2 Incompatibility with quantum theory

 Before beginning the analysis, Einstein commented again on Nernsťs principle. How-

 ever, he did not consider the delicate question of the factor N' (required for S to be an

 extensive quantity in classical theory), but this time he focused on the dependence of

 the entropy on volume which is contained in the additive term

 к log V . (10)

 S = K'ogW , (11)

 According to the Planckian formulation of Boltzmann's principle,

 and ever since Planck's first works on quantum theory, W had always been taken to be a

 positive integer denoting the number of ways a certain macroscopic (thermodynamic)
 state can be built up microscopically. Therefore - Einstein added - , it made no sense
 if W contained additive constants. In his opinion, if one takes into account Nernsťs

 principle, the Planckian formulation (11) becomes almost a necessity: At absolute zero

 temperature thermal agitation ceases, and then there is only one possible microscopic

 configuration. That is, at absolute zero, one has:

 W='=ïS = 0, (12)

 which precisely implies that Nernsťs principle is satisfied. Although he did not state
 it explicitly, it seems Einstein was refining his previous arguments on this subject.
 Remember that the extensivity of S in the classical theory required the addition of a

 constant. In the new theory this is not the case.

 What Einstein really wanted to emphasize is that this interpretation implies that the

 entropy cannot be negative. If we consider the Sackur-Tetrode equation of state of an

 ideal gas,61

 f (2 жткТу V 5

 * = f (2 жткТу _ V + _J. 5 „3,

 we see that, if the volume is small enough, the entropy would be negative. Does this

 mean that real gases, contrary to what is implied by Nernsťs theorem, can have neg-

 ative entropies? No. It simply means that the classical theory of ideal gases can only
 be taken as valid under certain conditions. This is in analogy, so Einstein, to the case
 of Wien's radiation law.

 This expression does not appear in Einstein's paper, see Pathria (2007, p. 24).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 578 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 4.3 Dimensional analysis

 According to its definition, (8), the distribution function p is dimensionless. Starting

 from that, Einstein derived some of its properties assuming that Planck's constant, A, is

 the only dimensional constant contained in p (he did not take into account Boltzmann's

 constant because he assumed that it would always appear in conjunction with temper-
 ature; in other words, he avoided selecting a specific temperature scale). Therefore,

 one can deduce, "in a well known way," as Einstein remarked,62 that p must be of the
 form:

 / L т(¥тУкт'

 ' = * (ïr- L -ne- т(¥тУкт' J • <14>

 Ф is a universal, but unknown function, which depends on two dimensionless vari-

 ables; it must satisfy the relation:

 V f

 ^Jpd<t> f = N, (15)

 where

 L+dL

 L

 dO = J dp'dp2dpi = 2ж(2т)ъ L?dL (16)

 (this is the same expression as (3) in Einstein's first paper, but without a contribution

 from position coordinates and without division by A3). Nothing else can be said about

 p on the basis of dimensional analysis alone. But the number of arguments for p can

 be reduced from two to one variable, without introducing additional "questionable"
 assumptions. Einstein proposed two of those:

 1 . The entropy of an ideal gas does not change in an "infinitely slow adiabatic" (sic)

 2. The required velocity distribution is valid for an ideal gas also in an external field

 compression.63

 of conservative forces.

 Einstein argued that these two properties should be valid disregarding collisions.
 But the neglect of intermolecular collisions made their assumption unprovable, even

 if they would be "very natural." In support of both, he announced they would lead not
 only to the same result, but also to a result according to which Maxwell's distribution

 law is valid in the region where quantum effects can be neglected.

 62 "in bekannter Weise," ibid., p. 20.

 "bei unendlich langsamer adiabatischer Kompression" (Ibid., p. 20).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 579

 4.4 Adiabatic compression

 Einstein considered a gas with isotropic velocity distribution confined in a parallel-

 epipedal container with sides of length /1 , /2, and /3. Since collisions of the molecules

 against the walls are elastic, they do not change the velocity distribution, which is

 stationary. The distribution has the form:

 d n = Ф, (17)

 hò

 where p is an arbitrary function of the kinetic energy L. Although he did not state it

 explicitly, Einstein did not take up the result here that he had derived using dimen-

 sional analysis - (14) - in the previous section. He simply started out from an isotropic
 distribution law. For an (infinitesimal) adiabatic compression that satisfies

 Ali^Ah = Al1='_AV^
 /1 /2 /3 3 V '

 (the symbol A indicates that the process is adiabatic), the distribution will stay of the
 form (17), but what will it be? The kinetic energy variation will be64:

 1 2 AV

 AL = - (1/7, 'A'px I + ... + ...) = -rL - . (19)

 m 3 V

 Since an adiabatic transformation does not change the number of molecules, it can

 As to the entropy, Einstein surmised that it would be of the form:

 ^ Einstein wrote S instead of Л for the variation of p¡ in this equation. We think this is a typographical
 mistake. See Einstein (1925b, p. 21).

 it follows that:

 ¿(Vdd>) = 0. (21)

 be easily seen that:

 Ap = 0. (22)

 a e у
 - = Sip, L)d<t>, (23)
 к hô

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Since, according to (12), we have

 Ad<t> = 2n(2m)i ^ ÙAdL + ^L'^ALdL^ , (20)

 where s is an unknown function. In adiabatic processes one has:

 In a next step, Einstein imposed the condition that in thermodynamic equilibrium

 the entropy is a maximum with respect to variations of p , keeping fixed the number

 of particles and the total energy. The calculation gives:

 580 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 and, therefore, according to (21):

 AdS = 0, (24)

 0 = As = -Ap + -AL. (25)

 ds д s

 dp д L

 Finally, using (22), it follows that s is only a function of p alone,

 s = s(p). (26)

 - = AL -h В, (27)
 dp

 where A and В do not depend on L. Since s only depends on p, its derivative will do
 so, too, and Einstein could write:

 p = ty(AL + B). (28)

 VkT f

 TDS = -p- / (Dj)dO. (30)

 Applying the chain rule and taking into account the invariance of the total number

 of molecules Einstein obtained:

 J L(Dp)(i -KTA)d<t> = 0, (31)

 that is:

 Springer

 A - TŤ <32>

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In order to determine A, Einstein now considered the process of an infinitesi-
 mal isopycnic warming, i.e. a warming that does not alter the density of molecules

 (a transformation of constant volume in this case). Let £ be the energy of the gas and
 let D symbolize this process, then

 D£ = p J L(Dp)d Ф (29)

 will be equal - according to the thermodynamic relation between entropy and
 energy - to:

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 581

 Returning to expression (28), the functional dependence of the energy density with

 kinetic energy is:

 >=*(£+e)- <33>

 4.5 Ideal gas in a field of conservative forces

 The other path taken by Einstein with the aim of reducing the number of arguments
 for the distribution function appeals to its stationarity. Consider a gas in dynamic

 equilibrium in an external field of conservative forces whose single-particle potential

 energy П depends on the position of molecules. In addition to neglecting the collisions
 between them, Einstein assumed that "the motion of the individual molecules under
 the influence of the external field follows classical mechanics." The condition, which

 p must satisfy to be stationary, is:

 „/э<рА) ЭС£Й)'
 ■f-V 3 p, )

 (. Xi are the position variables). If we make use of the equations of motion the stationarity
 condition reads:

 y-Xi uX¡ + y-Pi dpi = 0. (35)

 uX¡ dpi

 It follows that p is constant along phase trajectories. Since, as a consequence of the

 problem's isotropy, the momenta p¡ will only appear in the argument in the combina-

 tion of the kinetic energy L, p must be of the form:

 p = vi /*(L 4- П), (36)

 with Ф*, again, a universal, but unknown function.

 Hence, the volume dependence on the distribution function will only come about

 through П.

 4.6 Conclusions

 The results of the previous sections, (33) and (36), are:

 p = Ф (h, m, + ß j (37)

 p = L + П) (38)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 В and П are universal functions that depend on 1гутукТ and V . Ф and Ф* are universal
 and dimensionless functions. Taking into account also (14), Einstein derived:

 582 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 ,=ф+х(^)).

 Here Ф and x are universal functions of dimensionless variables. Both are related

 by equations (15) - the number of particles - and (16) - the density of states - , and

 the problem was therefore reduced to finding the function Ф.

 In the last paragraph, Einstein looked at the case in which the constant h disappears

 from d n, i.e. at the classical limit. He defined:

 Nh 3 L

 и =

 (mxTpV kT

 From (8) and (40) we see that h will disappear if and only if j¡i/r does not depend
 on u. In this case, let '¡r(y) be the resulting function. With a suitable choice of the

 function x (denoted in this particular case by ф) it can be achieved that:

 '¡r(v + ф{и)) = uy¡r(v). (41)

 Differentiating first with respect to и and then with respect to v, it can be seen that

 log ^ must be a linear function. It is then easy to see that must be the exponential
 distribution law, i.e., Maxwell-Boltzmann's law65:

 J(V) = (42)

 *<»> = ^rz 7- (43)

 Summarizing, Einstein pointed out that two aims have been achieved:

 First, we found a general condition (Eq. 39), which has to be satisfied by any
 theory of the ideal gas. Second, it follows from the above that the equation of

 state which I derived will not be changed by either adiabatic compression or by
 the existence of conservative force fields.66

 65 Although in the paper this is not the case, we think that this expression must have a bar on the top, as
 we write. Equation 43 involves another mistake. We will discuss this question below.

 66 "Erstens ist eine allgemeine Bedingung (Gleichung ( 1 8» gefunden worden, der jede Theorie des idealen

 Gases genügen muß. Zweitens geht aus dem Obigen hervor, daß die von mir abgeleitete Zustandsgieichung
 durch adiabatische Kompression sowie durch konservative Kraftfleder nicht gestört wird" (Einstein 1925b,
 p. 25).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In contrast, Einstein's statistical theory had produced the expression:

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 583

 5 A displacement law for gases

 The novelty of Bose's approach was its statistical (microscopic) reasoning. At a ther-
 modynamic (macroscopic) level, Bose did not obtain any new results, since it was
 precisely Planck's radiation law that was being derived. On the contrary, for ideal

 gases there existed no such distribution law that had to be derived, only a distribution
 law that was valid in the classical limit. Schematically, the situation was as follows:

 Combinatorics Thermodynamics-Statistical

 Distribution (-* indicates
 the classical limit)

 Radiation Bose Planck's radiation law -►

 Rayleigh-Jeans' (Wien's
 displacement law is always

 valid)
 Gas Bose-Einstein Einstein's distribution law

 - ► Maxwell-Boltzmann's

 distribution law

 Einstein's theory thus implied developments at both levels. Indeed, the situation
 was similar to what had taken place some 25 years ago in the study of electromag-
 netic radiation. At the end of the nineteenth century, neither the radiation law nor the

 mechanism that is responsible for producing the thermodynamic equilibrium were

 known or, more precisely, they were known but had led to both empirically and the-
 oretically wrong results. However, at the macroscopic level there was a guide post:

 Wien's displacement law. It restricts the arguments of the radiation law:

 r(v, 7")dv = (£) àv. (44)

 Therefore, once the spectrum is known at a certain temperature, it may be extrap-
 olated to other temperatures. The derivations of Wien's law - there were several67

 - always made use, at some point, of the second law of thermodynamics and, specifi-

 cally, of the connection between states of equilibrium that were related by an adiabatic

 compression of the radiating cavity, i.e., by an infinitely slow compression in which
 the work transforms completely into internal energy. Max Planck - who also gave a
 demonstration in his Lectures on Heat Radiation 68 - justified the form of the quantum

 hv appealing to that law.69

 It is therefore not surprising that Einstein looked for analogous guide posts for
 derivations of the new distribution law. Nor it is surprising that he used an adiabatic

 transformation. He himself had suggested in his famous paper of 1905 on energy

 See, for instance, (Wien 1894) and (Lorentz 1901).

 68 Planck (1988, pp. 314-332).

 69 See Planck (1900). In Planck (1958, vol. 1, p. 703).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 quanta that one could use an adiabatic compression to reduce the argument of the
 spectral entropy density (p(r, v)y which was defined as follows:

 584 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 00

 о

 S=v J <p(r, v)dv (45)

 ( S is the entropy of radiation, r the density of radiant energy):

 One can reduce (p to a function of a single variable by formulating the asser-

 tion that adiabatic compression of radiation between reflecting walls does not

 change its entropy. However, we shall not enter into this, but will immediately
 investigate how the function (p can be obtained from the black-body radiation
 law.70

 In 1905 Einstein did not elaborate on the argument because he was interested in other

 properties of <p. Probably, he did not dwell on this result because it was well known

 by his colleagues. One can show that:

 SnV л / r '

 <p{p,v) = -3- (46)

 which is another way of enunciating Wien's displacement law. In 1925 Einstein may
 have recalled his own procedure of 20 years earlier.

 In our opinion, it was Paul Ehrenfest who gave the most detailed analysis of the

 radiation law and its derivations. Although his analysis was published over various

 articles, here we want to refer specifically to a paper of 1 9 1 1 , which we have discussed

 in more detail in other places.71 It will be useful to bring it up again here in order to
 comment on Einstein's non-statistical paper.

 In his paper, Ehrenfest set out by listing the conditions that the radiation law nec-

 essarily needs to satisfy. Since these conditions comprise the quantum aspects of the
 radiation law, analogous conditions should hold for the new distribution law p that
 Einstein was trying to justify. Ehrenfesťs first three conditions were:

 1. The entropy does not change in an adiabatic compression.
 2. The radiation law satisfies the displacement law.
 3. The classical limit is obtained in the region where v/T is small.

 Three more conditions were related to the violet region (large v/T ) and required

 the avoidance of the so-called ultraviolet catastrophe (a divergence in the total energy),
 and, on the other hand, expressed analytically the behavior of Wien's and Planck's
 radiation laws.

 70 "Es kann <p auf eine Funktion von nur einer Variabein reduziert werden durch Formulierung der Aussage,
 dass durch adiabatische Kompression einer Strahlung zwischen spiegelnden Wanden, deren Entropie nicht
 geändert wird. Wir wollen jedoch hierauf nicht eintreten, sondern gleich untersuchen, wie die Funktion <p
 aus dem Strahlungsgesetz des schwarzen Körpers ermittelt werden kann" (Ibid.).

 71 Ehrenfest (191 1). See Navarro and Pérez (2004, 2006).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 585

 What did Einstein have at his disposal in 1925 to ensure the validity of his material

 gas distribution law? Initially, it was only the third condition, i.e., the fact that his

 law produced the Maxwell-Boltzmann's distribution law in the classical limit. But at
 low temperatures (or high densities) he did not have anything comparable to Wien's or

 Planck's radiation laws. In this region, only Nernsťs theorem supported the expression

 for the entropy obtained by Einstein.

 Hence, conditions 1 and 2 were not available. As we have said before, in a certain

 sense, they are both related, and it should be noted here that Ehrenfest listed them sep-

 arately because his analysis aimed at drawing conclusions at the microscopic level,
 where the (mechanical) adiabatic invariants play a crucial role. Einstein in 1925, in
 contrast, was not interested in mechanical invariants because his research remained at

 the thermodynamic level. According to this scheme, the problem of electromagnetic
 radiation served Einstein as a guide to explore the case of the degenerate ideal gas.72

 He justified the additivity of the entropy (23) with respect to those portions of gas with

 different kinetic energy d L, as follows:

 This hypothesis is analogous to the one used in radiation theory, according to

 which the entropy of the radiation is composed additively from quasi-monochro-

 matic parts. It is equivalent to the assumption that one may introduce semi-per-
 meable walls for molecules of different ranges of velocity.73

 This is consistent with his justification of writing the total entropy as an integral

 over the spectral entropy density (Eq. 45 above) in 1905 (the analog to Eq. 23):

 ...radiations of different frequencies are to be viewed as separable from each

 other without expenditure of work and without supply of heat . . ,74

 It is curious to see how in Ehrenfesťs 1911 paper the direction of the justification

 was just the opposite than in Einstein's 1925 paper. His approach was inspired by gas

 theory:

 We determine, for given total energy, the "most probable" distribution of oscil-

 lations over all possible ranges of excitations according to the same procedure
 that Boltzmann had used to determine, for given total energy the "most proba-
 ble" distribution of molecules for a mixture of gases consisting of many kinds

 of molecules over all possible ranges of velocity. The eigen frequencies of one

 72 The degenerate gas had been defined in opposition to a perfect gas. As far as we know, it was Nernst
 who first introduced this terminology, referring to gases at low temperatures, in which their translational

 contribution to specific heat tended to disappear, see Desalvo (1992, p. 493).

 73 "Diese Hypothese ist in der Strahlungstheorie jener analog, daß die Entropie einer Strahlung sich aus
 der der quasi-monochromatischen Bestandteile additiv zusammensetze. Sie ist äquivalent der Annahme,
 daß man für Moleküle verschiedener Geschwindigkeitsbereiche semi-permeable Wände einführen dürfe"

 (Einstein 1925b, p. 21).

 7^ "...Strahlungen von verschiedenen Frequenzen [sind] als ohne Arbeitsleistung und ohne Wärmezufuhr
 voneinander trennbar anzusehen ..." (Einstein 1905, p. 137).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 586 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 and the same frequency range dv here play the same role as the molecules of
 one and the same substance.75

 In 10 years the reference system and the unknown system switched their roles.

 Such was the confusion into which quantum discoveries had brought physics at the

 beginning of the century.

 Note that albeit both analogies are not the same they are equivalent. Einstein justi-

 fies expressions (45) and (23) as follows. The fact that one can write the total entropy

 as a summation of all monochromatic or mono-kineticoenergetic entropies means that

 total entropy is additive with respect to frequency (resp. kinetic energy). Ehrenfest,
 on the other hand, compares different frequencies with different substances, as the

 entropy of a mixture is also additive with respect to its components. In both cases

 entropy of radiation is the summation of monochromatic entropies.

 The analogies invoked by Einstein do not end here. Although, as we have said, he

 used the idea of an adiabatic compression to derive something like a displacement law

 for ideal gases, the whole approach nevertheless rested on dimensional analysis. This
 approach was modeled on that in a 1909 paper on radiation, in which Einstein himself
 had given a derivation of the displacement law.

 Einstein had argued that the distribution function can depend only on two dimension-
 less quantities (cf. Eq. 14):

 5.1 Dimensional analysis

 L kT
 _ and ,47)

 He did not present the arguments for his claim in any detail, but it is not very dif-
 ficult to guess what they were. We must remember that Buckingham's theorem (the
 consequences of which, as we will argue, were certainly known to Einstein, if not

 by this name) states that the difference between the number of quantities that are
 assumed to play a role in the physical system under consideration, on the one hand,

 and the number of fundamental variables involved, on the other hand, gives the num-
 ber of independent dimensionless monomials which can be constructed.76 In our case

 the fundamental variables are mass (Af), time (7) and length (L), and the quantities
 supposed by Einstein to be arguments of the distribution function p are

 L : kinetic energy [L] = ML2T~2

 75 "Es wird bei gegebener Totalenergie die „wahrscheinlichste" Verteilung der Eigenschwingungen über
 alle möglichen Erregungsbereiche nach demselben Verfahren bestimmt, nach welchem BOLTZMANN die -

 bei gegebener Totalenergie--,, wahrscheinlichste"Verteilung der Moleküle eines aus vielen Molekülsorten

 bestehenden Gasgemisches über alle möglichen Geschwindigkeitsbereiche bestimmte. Die Eigenschwing-
 ungen eines und desselben Frequenzbereiches dv spielen dabei die Rolle der Moleküle einer und derselben
 Substanz" (Ehrenfest 191 1, pp. 94-95).

 76 Buckingham (1914). For historical accounts of dimensional analysis, see, e.g., Bridgman (1922),
 Carneiro (2000) and Magagno (1971).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 587

 kT : temperature (multiplied by Boltzmann's constant), [кТ] = ML2T~ 2

 V: volume, [V] = L3
 m: mass of the molecules, [m] = M

 The choice of quantities that play a role in the problem is the crucial point in
 any dimensional analysis, since the result critically depends on it. Einstein chose the

 quantities that appear in the distribution law for the classical ideal gas. That is

 1 ( hl V .--V Vàpidp2dp3

 dBcta - V'2^ã) ( e .--V v (48)

 <*»

 Taking into account also Planck's constant [ h ] = ML2T~X - the distinguishing mark

 of any quantum phenomenon-77 in the distribution function of the classical gas, albeit

 not in dn, it follows from Buckingham's П theorem that only two independent dimen-
 sionless monomials can be constructed. One possible pair is the one that Einstein

 proposed, see Eq. 47. But this choice is not unique. One could also have:

 or:

 1 л mVÌL
 - an" л - (50)

 L J m2ViK T L
 7f J Ã* <5I)

 Once the first monomial has been chosen and after excluding from the second one

 the kinetic energy (for the reason we have explained), the number of possibilities
 reduces drastically. We now have a problem with four quantities (three quantities and
 one constant) and three fundamental variables. Thus, in this way, Einstein's result (47)
 can be considered univocal. Note that the two monomials (47) can also be derived from

 the form of the classical density (49). Let's now jump to the end of Einstein's paper.

 77 Of course, the constant h did not appear in the classical expression for dn . However, once the phase space

 had been quantized, one could relate h with the volume of a microstate. Only in this way can h appear in the
 classical distribution function, (49). As in the statistical works prior to early quantum developments, what

 was significant was the quotient of the phase space volumes, the later appearance of h did not retrospectively
 contradict classical statistical developments.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (Note that the number of particles N does not play a role in these considerations,
 since it is dimensionless.) In order to have only one monomial, one needs to impose

 an additional condition. Most likely, Einstein simply decided to choose the monomial

 that was compatible with the classical result (49). It has the advantage of being a
 natural one: since the influence of the kinetic energy L in the density function has to

 be weighted by the temperature кТ , both have to appear together in one of the two
 monomials.

 After having reduced the number of arguments of the density function to a single

 588 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 parameter,

 L (mViKT'
 кТ+Х' h2 )' C 5)-

 Einstein showed that this result is in agreement also with other constraints. He looked

 at what happens if one assumes that Planck's constant does not appear in the expression
 for d я, and he obtained Maxwell-Boltzmann's distribution law. There is a mistake in

 testing that his theory also satisfies this dependence, but the mistake is inconsequential.

 Einstein wrote that the density can be written as

 -ir-, (53)
 етт - 1

 which is not true. Nevertheless, his theory satisfies the conclusion of the dimensional
 argument, since p is:

 - Г

 L Í I m(^YKT 5-^Гт '
 exp FT L + X Í -Ц m(^YKT з

 Hence, his conclusion is correct but not the reasoning.

 To conclude, note that, in fact, the result achieved by Einstein in Eq. 39 does not

 lead to a true displacement law. This law was named this way because it implied that
 the maximum of intensity satisfied the relation

 Vmax * / с c'
 ~Y~ = const- * (55) / с c'

 Therefore, the maximum displaces in proportionality with temperature. Due to the
 form of the argument in Eq. 52, this simple statement cannot be made in the case

 of molecules. The simple state of affairs in the case of radiation is a consequence of
 the non-conservation of - or else the lack of sense of the concept of - the number of
 particles.

 Let us now take a look at earlier considerations which may have inspired Einstein
 and which had helped him before when he was trying to find his way on slippery
 ground.

 5.2 Einstein's deduction of Wien's displacement's law in 1909

 In January 1909, the editors of the Physikalische Zeitschrift received the manu-

 script of one of the subsequently more celebrated papers by Einstein. In it, and in

 the talk he gave in Salzburg in September of the same year, Einstein suggested and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 589

 emphasized for the first time the essential dual nature of radiation - corpuscular and

 undulatory - , starting from a fluctuation analysis of radiation momentum.78 This

 paper must be situated in a context where the physics community had not yet realized

 the implicit contradictions with classical physics inherent in Planck's radiation law.79

 It was only after 191 1 - after the first Solvay conference - when the position hitherto

 taken by a small minority would become the received opinion: That it would be neces-

 sary to undertake a deep revision of the existing physical theories in order to account

 for the quantization that Planck had introduced by his black body radiation theory.
 In 1909, Einstein was one of the first physicists who had become clearly aware

 of the exceptional nature of the situation and suggested that perhaps the break did
 not have to be as traumatic as it may have seemed at first sight. He argued that one
 should relate to each other Planck's quanta and electricity quanta. The latter did not

 arise either in any natural way from Maxwellian electromagnetic theory, and maybe

 a modification of this theory could account for both instances of quantization. In sup-

 port of the feasibility of this idea, Einstein invoked some dimensional considerations

 published by James H. Jeans "a few years ago." Although he did not cite the precise

 source, it is beyond doubt that Einstein referred to the paper "On the laws of radiation,"

 published by the British physicist in 1905.80

 In it, Jeans gave a derivation of the displacement law, in which he outlined a dimen-

 sional argument that allowed him to write the constants that appear in this law and
 in Stefan's law depending on known universal constants. In other words, he excluded
 from his consideration Planck's constant. With this derivation, Jeans was trying to

 advance a new argument for his claim that the problem of specific heats and the black-

 body problem were both caused by the fact that thermodynamic equilibrium was not
 established. For this reason, the equipartition of energy could not be applied in the

 theoretical analysis of either system. In addition, he also argued for the electronic

 origin of radiation.

 Thus, Jeans proposed that electron trajectories are the source of the spectrum (and

 of its universality), taking up an old idea by Hendrik A. Lorentz.81 According to
 Jeans, the radiant energy per volume at temperature T and wavelength к depends on

 the following constants82:

 V: speed of light,
 e : electron charge,
 m: electron mass,

 R: gas constant (the mean kinetic energy of a single particle is ' RT),
 K: inductive capacity of the ether (Coulomb's law, F = K~xq'q2r~2).

 78 Einstein (1909b). The presentation in Salzburg was transcribed in Einstein (1909a).

 79 Kuhn (1978).

 81 Lorentz (1903).

 80 Jeans (1905). See Stachel (1991, p. 549, note 60), where the editors also point out that, in contrast to

 Einstein's argument, Jeans did not use the Planck constant Л, nor does he consider the ratio /с.

 8^ We omit the dependency on some "specific constants" of the body that do not play any role in what
 follows.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 As a dimensional basis, he took length L, mass Л/, time t , inductive capacity К , and

 590 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 temperature Г83:

 À: L,
 Г: 7'
 V: Lt~'

 e-.

 m: M,
 R: L2Mr2T~'
 К: K.

 Since there are fí ve dimensional units and seven quantities, Jeans was able to construct
 two independent dimensionless monomials. But which ones he chose, is one of the
 dark spots of his argument. The key step of his derivation was that one of the two
 monomials that he constructed, c' = RTm~l V~2, is of order 10~8 (at 100°C); he
 used this fact to justify his claim that the radiation law depends only on the other
 monomial, which he chose as:

 XRTK

 C2 = -5-. eL (56)

 -5-. eL

 A few months later, Ehrenfest published a short note in the Physikalische Zeitschrift ,

 in which he criticized Jeans's argument.84 Indicating that he could not follow the
 reasoning at various steps, he focussed only on the arbitrariness of the choice of the

 pair of monomials and showed by means of a slightly different choice of monomials,

 c'' = ci, c' 2 = c2c'^y how Jeans's reasoning may lead also to a different result,
 i.e., not to the displacement law. The British physicist did not accept the criticism.85

 In his view, Ehrenfesťs counterexample did not square with his proposal. Ehrenfest

 wrote another reply, defending himself against Jeans' counter-attack and repeated his
 criticism of the dimensional argument.86

 In 1 909, in his article "Radiation Theory" for the Encyklopädie der Mathematischen

 Wissenschaften , Wilhelm Wien referred to Ehrenfesťs refutation of Jeans's argument
 like this:

 Another derivation of the displacement law is given by J.H. Jeans. But there is an

 uncontrollable approximation in it, which must be introduced as a hypothetical

 assumption; therefore, Jeans's derivation cannot be regarded as a proof of the
 displacement law.87

 As pointed out already in Ehrenfest (1906a), there is a typographical error in Jeans (1905, p. 548), who

 has the dimension of R as LMt~2T~l.

 84 Ehrenfest (1906a).

 85 Jeans (1906).

 86 Ehrenfest (1906b).

 Springer

 87 "Eine weitere Ableitung des Verschiebungsgesetzes gibt J.H. Jeans. Doch kommt in ihr eine nicht
 kontrollierbare Vernachlässigung vor, welche als hypothetisch Annahme einzuführen ist; daher kann die

 Jeansschc Entwicklung nicht als Beweis für das Verschiebungsgesetz angesehen werden" (Wien 1909).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 59 1

 Although we cannot give further evidence, it appears that Jeans finally admitted the

 weakness of his argument. His result may be understood as a piece of circumstantial
 evidence or as an illustration, not as a genuine derivation. Some years later, in his
 famous Report on Radiation and the Quantum-Theory of 1914, Jeans had changed
 his attitude toward quantum theory and did not mention this result.88 What makes
 this omission even more significant is that Jeans here defended practically the same

 argument that Einstein gave in 1909 - which we will discuss at once - , but without

 quoting him:

 Any attempt to refer back the atomicity of e to the structure of the ether simply

 discloses the fact that the fundamental equations of the ether are not yet fully

 known; it implies that if they were fully known they might be expected to con-

 tain the quantity e , and this is perhaps the same thing as saying that they would

 contain the quantity h. It may be that if the equations of the ether were fully

 known they would be seen to involve the quantum-theory.89

 For Jeans the possibility of associating the atomicity of the charge with the quantum

 of energy was still alive in 1924, when he published the second edition of his Report

 The quoted text remained unchanged after a decade of further developments of quan-

 tum theory.

 As we have said, Einstein took up Jeans's demonstration in his 1909 paper on the

 radiation problem but modified it at some points. The most important difference is
 that he did not assume that the radiation density would depend on the electron mass.

 This difference renders Ehrenfesťs objections invalid, because now there is, according

 to the П theorem, only one possible dimensionless monomial. (This does not mean
 Einstein was aware of the controversy that his colleagues had maintained; we have

 not found any evidence in this respect.91)

 In a cavity filled with gas molecules, radiation, and ions - the latter allow the energy

 exchange between the former - , the quantities that - according to Einstein - should

 be included as arguments of the spectral density are:

 RT/N : energy of a molecule (dimensionally speaking),

 c: speed of light,

 e: quantum of electricity,

 v: frequency.

 Only attending to the dimensions of the density of radiant energy r, which are92

 M L~x T~l , it can be seen that r must have the form:

 el 3 i / Nel v '

 г = 7"*Ыт)- el 3 i / Nel v ' <57)

 88 Jeans (1914).

 89 Ibid., p. 81.

 90 Jeans (1924).

 91 See also Einstein to H.A. Lorentz, 30 March 1909 (Klein et al. 1993, Doc. 146), where Einstein also

 refers to Jeans's argument. Einstein and Ehrenfest met in person only a few years later, in 19 12, see Klein
 (1985, Chap. 12), and also Sauer (2007, pp. 172-175).

 Einstein wrote p instead of г and € instead of e. Now [e] = L ' M ' T

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 592 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 This is the only possible combination to establish a dimensionless relation for r with
 the quantities considered by Einstein. Expression (57) is none other than Wien's
 displacement law, cp. Eq. 44. Comparing now this result with Planck's radiation
 law,

 av2 1

 ' = Thv-s-t L e<T - ] (58)

 L e<T - ]

 (a is a dimensionless factor, cp. Eq. 1), Einstein arrives at:

 e 2 R

 h = - and к = - . (59)

 с N

 He then observed that the first relation differs from the known results by three orders

 of magnitude, which in his opinion can be attributed to dimensionless factors. Simi-

 lar to the way Jeans did it, he speculated about the possibility of reducing the "light

 quantum constant Л" to the "elementary quantum of electricity e " and thus about the
 unnecessariness of introducing new universal constants.

 In a letter Einstein wrote to Lorentz in 6 May 1909, he regarded it as highly signifi-

 cant that the displacement law could be obtained through dimensional considerations,

 and insisted again on the existence of a relation between e and Л.93 But after reading
 Einstein's paper, Lorentz responded that he did not regard a discrepancy of three orders

 of magnitude an insignificant one nor did he agree that the radiation law, which should

 give evidence of the properties of the ether, should include the electronic charge.94
 But that was precisely Einstein's bet in that state of ignorance and confusion about
 quantum phenomena.

 Thus, in his 1909 analysis of the radiation problem dimensional analysis provided

 an argument for strengthening a thesis shored up by Einstein in conjunction with other

 fundamental arguments, such as fluctuation analysis. But it appears that Lorentz, whom

 he admired deeply, had convinced Einstein of the weakness of the dimensional argu-
 ment to the effect that he forgot about it. A little more than 2 years later, just before

 attending the first Solvay conference, in autumn 1911, Einstein responded to a ques-
 tion by Michele Besso as to whether he had ever come across a situation where one

 had to choose between the quantum of action and e2 in order to introduce "natural
 units." Einstein responded that one knew that the ratio was a factor of 900 but that he
 had never come across this in dimensional considerations, as far as he remembered.95

 And in Brussels, he spent no time on this question in his presentation, although the

 93 A. Einstein to H.A. Lorentz, 30 March 1909 (Klein et al. 1993, Doc. 163).

 94 H.A. Lorentz to A. Einstein, 6 May 1909 (Klein et al. 1993, Doc. 153).

 95 Einstein to Michele Besso, 1 1 September 191 1, in Klein et al. (1993, Doc. 283). The reference to what
 it is that Einstein did not remember is unclear in the original German. It could be the factor 900, but more

 likely it is a response to Besso's question: "Der Unterschied zwischen e2 und h ist ja Faktor 900. Ist mir
 noch nicht bei Dimensionalbetrachtungen begegnet, soviel ich mich erinnere."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 593

 relation between e and h appeared more than once during the meeting.96 In 1916
 Arnold Sommerfeld introduced in the quantum debates the constant of fine structure,

 « = «»>

 he

 which contains, in a sense, the numerical relation among e , h and с.97

 Just before going to Brussels to attend the Solvay meeting, Einstein appealed again

 to dimensional analysis in a paper that was not directly related to radiation. In it, he

 admitted that, in general, discrepancies in numerical values should be of the order of

 unity. However, he admitted exceptions.

 5.3 Einstein on the quantum theory of solids

 In 1907, Einstein had been a pioneer in applying quantum theory to the study of solids.

 Following his seminal work, Walther Nernst and his collaborators in Berlin demon-
 strated the wisdom of Einstein's speculations, at least in a broad sense. However, in

 191 1, it was clear that the theoretical curve deviated from the experimentally observed

 data at very low temperatures. Einstein then wrote two new papers with an attempt to
 leave aside the monochromatic normal modes that had characterized his first approach

 to the problem.98 (Shortly before, Nernst and Lindemann had proposed an alterna-
 tive formula, which Einstein quoted in his 1911 papers.) These new developments in

 the field of crystalline solids culminated in 1912 with the appearance of the famous
 contributions by Peter Debye, on the one hand, and by Max Born and Theodor von
 Kármán, on the other.

 In the second paper of 191 1 , Einstein tried to argue that solids must present a set of

 frequencies related to the coupling among different forced motions of the atoms. In
 the third and fourth paragraphs we find two other instances of dimensional analysis.

 Here Einstein used it to derive an expression for the proper frequency of an atom

 in a solid, which he had given already in his earlier paper. He obtained a satisfactory
 result, since the dimensionless coefficient, which still had to be determined, is of the

 order of unity (both in the case of his formula and in the case of the Nernst-Lindemann
 formula). In addition, he used the opportunity to show that Lindemann's formula for

 the melting temperature of a solid also is in agreement with dimensional arguments.

 96 Langevin and Broglie (1912, pp. 75-76, 131).

 97 In the late 1940s, Pauli concluded his contribution to the Schilpp volume Albert Einstein Philosopher-

 Scientist with a comment on Einstein's 1909 paper. He observed that "the present form of quantum mechan-

 ics is far from anything final, but, on the contrary, leaves problems open which Einstein considered long

 ago." In the 1909 paper, Pauli continued, Einstein "stresses the importance of Jeans' remark that the elemen-

 tary charge e , with the help of the velocity of light c, determines the constant e2 / с of the same dimension

 as the quantum of action h (thus aiming at the now well-known fine structure constant 2jt e2 / he)" But the

 development of physics had not produced an understanding of the elementary charge flowing from a quan-

 tum theory. The determination of the fine structure constant therefore, was "certainly the most important
 unsolved problem of modern physics" (Schilpp 1949, p. 158).

 98 Einstein (191 la) and Einstein (191 lb). These papers are discussed in Bridgman (1922).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the last section, Einstein tried to find an expression for the thermal conductivity

 К . Using the dimensional method described earlier in the same paper, he arrives at
 the following functional dependence":

 594 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 v /md2v2'

 к-с?Ы-) v /md2v2' m)

 (m is the mass of an atom, d the interatomic distance, v the oscillation frequency

 and С a constant). In order to determine the function (p Einstein appealed to recently
 published measurements by Arnold Eucken, which indicated a dependency of К with

 the inverse of temperature. Accordingly, the final expression should be:

 _mdv3

 К = С--. (62) '
 кТ '

 This combination of dimensional analysis with an empirical law (referred only to one

 of the involved quantities) represents, in our opinion, an interesting example of how
 fruitful this procedure can be.

 In this section we have shown another example - the third - in which Einstein used

 a suitable analyzing method for exploring new territories. Therefore, he used dimen-

 sional analysis in radiation, solids, and gases.

 We conclude our analysis of Einstein's use of the method of dimensional analysis

 with a comment on Tatiana Ehrenfest, who, in fact, published a number of papers
 on this problem. Indeed, in August 1925 she signed a paper, which contains explicit
 criticism of Einstein's use of dimensional analysis in 1909 and which was communi-

 cated to the Philosophical Magazine by her husband. In her paper, Tatiana Ehrenfest

 juxtaposed the method of dimensional analysis with what she called the "theory of

 similitudes," the latter being based on a mathematical analysis of transformation prop-
 erties of differential equations. In her comparison, she criticized the use of dimensional

 analysis in physics as being often misunderstood in its deductive power. The theory
 of similitudes, in contrast, she commended for being capable of producing definite
 and reliable results, provided two rules were followed. According to these rules, one
 needs to consider all "fundamental equations" and one must not introduce "conditional

 equations" except those that follow from the transformation properties of the funda-
 mental equations. In her concluding paragraph, she attributed value to the method of

 dimensional analysis only in the case that the theory of similitude is not applicable:

 However, if the fundamental equations of the two problem are unknown, of the

 two methods there remains only dimensional analysis. It must never be forgot-
 ten that in such cases one advances only gropingly, and without experimental or

 theoretical proof from another quarter one can never be completely certain of the
 results. Dimensional analysis combined with proof of this kind may be viewed

 as a systematic method for determining whether in the given problem new and

 unknown fundamental equations take part which are non-homogeneous relative

 99 Einstein wrote r instead of кТ.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 595

 to the quantitites considered; i.e., which involve dimensional coefficients or new
 variables.100

 Interestingly, she added a footnote here at the end of her paper, in which she referred

 to Einstein's 1909 paper as providing "a pretty example of such an application of

 dimensional analysis." However, the reference is not to the example that we have dis-
 cussed above, but to another instance in this paper, in which Einstein used a "simple

 dimensional consideration."101 In this example, he argued that according to a dimen-

 sional argument the mean squared energy fluctuation €2 comes out non-classically.

 It appears likely that she added the reference to Einstein's paper as an afterthought.

 Despite the praise implicit in the final footnote, she referenced the paper once more
 in a footnote that she added to a statement where she pointed out that by "erroneously

 [. . .] overlooking one or another of the fundamental equations" or else by "forgetting"

 interdependencies of the variables, "there may be projected an illusory definiteness
 of solution." The footnote here says: "This is the case in the example analyzed by

 Einstein. Footnote of the final paragraph."102

 We may extend Tatiana Ehrenfest's praise and criticism of Einstein's use of dimen-
 sional analysis in 1909 to the example we have discussed above. In an explicit exam-
 ple that she discussed in her paper, she criticized Lord Rayleigh to have used an
 unwarranted additional conditional equation, i.e., relating temperature to the average

 molecular kinetic energy, in violation of the second rule for proper use of the theory

 of similitudes: "The equation by which temperature is defined as the average kinetic

 energy of the molecules is not one of the fundamental equations of the problem; it
 relates quantities (molecular velocity and molecular mass) which do not occur in any
 of the fundamental equations."103

 It is quite possible that Tatiana Ehrenfest added the reference to Einstein's 1909

 paper at the suggestion of her husband. In any case, we note that the Ehrenfests had
 a sophisticated understanding of the intricacies of the dimensional analysis and had
 well-informed and critical opinions on the status of the results based on dimensional
 considerations, including those put forward by Einstein. However, it is significant

 for our purposes that nothing is said in Tatiana Ehrenfest's paper about Einstein's
 dimensional analysis of 1925.

 5.4 The adiabatic transformation and the field of conservative forces

 Let's go back to the paper of 1925. In it, Einstein pointed out that the dimensional anal-

 ysis with his initial assumptions has produced only his research - expression (14) - ,
 but that it is possible to go further without making "doubtful hypotheses."104 He pro-

 posed two independent assumptions, which both lead to the same result. He analyzed

 101 "einfache Dimensionalbetrachtung" (Einstein 1909a, p. 189).

 100 Ehrenfest (1926).

 102 Ibid., p. 266.

 103 Ibid., pp. 268-269.

 "ohne Setzung irgendwie zweifelhafter Hypothesen" (Einstein 1925b, p. 20).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 596 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 how the distribution function p is modified by an adiabatic compression and by an
 external field of conservative forces. Referring to both assumptions, he wrote:

 . . .but they are very natural, and their correctness is made more probable more-

 over by the fact that they lead to the same result and that they lead to Maxwell's

 distribution in the limiting case of vanishing quantum influence.105

 In order to calculate the change of (kinetic) energy during the adiabatic compression,

 Einstein resorts to the variation of the molecules' momenta in their collisions against
 the (mobile) walls. Desalvo found it "remarkable" that starting from such assump-
 tion "Einstein obtained the correct dependence of kinetic energy on volume."106 He

 apparently referred to the use of the relation between the change in kinetic energy
 and the change in the volume, i.e., to expression (19). To obtain it, Einstein made an
 intermediate step, in which he wrote

 A'Pi ' = -IPil-p-« (63)

 h

 He claimed that this expression is obtained "easily" by applying the laws of elastic
 collisions. The calculation proceeds indeed straightforwardly from the consideration

 of energy and momentum consideration for the case of a material particle bouncing off

 an infinitely heavy moving piston.107 It is in this way how, invoking the laws of elastic

 collisions, a correct expression for the dependence of the kinetic energy on volume

 can be obtained.108 However, in the previous installments of his quantum gas theory,
 Einstein had already deduced that the relation between pressure and energy density

 for the quantum gas was the same as that in the classical gas (see Eq. 4). Starting from

 this result, one can immediately calculate the variation of kinetic energy with volume,
 without using (63). Only in this sense was the use of elastic collisions by Einstein
 justified in the non-statistical paper.

 Picking up the comparison we proposed earlier with Ehrenfest's paper, it must be

 noted that Ehrenfest - in 1911 but also in the subsequent years in which he devel-

 oped his idea - always referred to adiabatic transformations as pertaining to mechani-
 cal systems. Starting from mechanical variations he established connections between
 (and sometimes discovered) allowed quantum motions. Then, once he had a hold on

 the possible motions of the system, he calculated the most probable distribution of
 states among them and, postulating that this was the state of equilibrium, introduced
 the notion of temperature. The ideal gas has no mechanical invariants, since those
 can only be defined properly for periodic motion.109 The adiabatic transformation

 105 ". . .dieselben sind aber sehr natürlich, und ihre Richtigkeit wird außerdem noch dadurch wahrscheinlich
 gemacht, daß sie beide zu demselben Ergebnis führen, und daß sie in dem Grenzfalle verschwindenden

 Quanteneinflusses zur MAXWELLSCHEN Verteilung führen" (Einstein 1925b, p. 20), our emphasis.

 106 Desalvo (1992, p. 525).

 107 Very similar considerations were applied by Hilbert in his use of Ehrenfest's adiabatic hypothesis for
 the derivation of the black-body energy density, see Sauer and Majer (2009, pp. 484-500).

 108 For an elementary discussion of adiabatic compression at both the thermodynamic and the molecular
 level, see Miranda (2002).

 109 See Pérez (2009).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 597

 considered by Einstein in 1925 is directly applied to a macroscopic system, i.e., to
 a thermodynamic system, in an analogous way as he proposed to do it - but did not
 elaborate on - in 1905 with black-body radiation.110

 It would be wrong to say that Einstein made use of Ehrenfesťs adiabatic hypoth-

 esis in this paper, since that would imply - at the very least - that one had identified

 connected allowed quantum motions. His procedure is closer to the demonstrations of

 Wien's displacement law in the late nineteenth century.

 More significant is what Einstein assumed in the second path to reduce the number

 of arguments of the density function. Ignoring again collisions between molecules, he
 assumed that their motions be governed by Hamilton's equations, i.e., that they follow
 the laws of classical mechanics. In this case, the stationarity of the density function

 implies, as was known, its dependence on the Hamiltonian, i.e., on the sum of kinetic

 and potential energy. This result is generally known as Liouville's theorem. Thus, the

 analysis of the system in an external field allowed Einstein to say something about the

 dependence of the density on the volume.

 Note that due to the failure of the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory to account for many-

 electron systems, or to the surprising result provided by the experiment of Stern and
 Gerlach (in the analysis of which Einstein and Ehrenfest themselves had contrib-
 uted111), in early 1925 the validity of Hamiltonian mechanics was seriously ques-
 tioned. For this reason, it is surprising that Einstein assumed for free particles the

 validity of classical mechanics. Schematically, these are Einstein's assumptions in

 this respect:

 Interactions between molecules and Classical elastic collisions

 container walls

 Interactions between molecules Not taken into account
 Free motion of the molecules According to classical mechanics

 These assumptions constitute the definition of an ideal gas. They are, in other words,

 the necessary assumptions needed to obtain - in statistical mechanics - the relation
 between total kinetic energy and pressure provided by the virial theorem. Therefore,

 in utter contradiction to his original intention - and, probably, in awareness of this
 contradiction - Einstein, it seems, left only one possibility open to right the wrong:

 statistics. Only in the particular way of counting states, in the transition from mechan-
 ics to thermodynamics, could differences between classical and quantum ideal gases
 be placed.

 However, there was another possibility: to build a new mechanics. The first assump-

 tion listed in the table was valid in Einstein's theory. The second assumption represents

 the definition of an ideal gas. Finally, the third and last assumption did not play a deci-
 sive role; without it, and using only dimensional analysis, very similar conclusions
 could be obtained. But Einstein did not make explicit in the paper any conclusion of
 this kind.

 1 10 See Einstein (1905) and the discussion above.

 1 1 1 Einstein and Ehrenfest (1922).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 598 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 6 An ignored attempt

 Let us now discuss the immediate contemporary reactions to Einstein's non-statistical
 paper. First discussions around the question as to how to apply quantization to ideal
 gases go back to papers by Otto Sackur in 1911, and Hugo Tetrode in 1912.1 12 The

 subject gained attention again in the 1920s, in the course of the developments of theory

 and also due to the appearance of a widely discussed paper by Ehrenfest and Trkal. 113

 The justification of the factorial N' in the partition function was a most widely debated

 issue. We are not going to analyze this episode here, but refer interested readers to
 works we have already cited.114

 Among the physicists who immediately reacted to the appearance of the series of

 papers by Bose and Einstein, Desalvo mentions Adolf Smekal and Pascual Jordan.1 15

 Their respective papers were received by Zweitschrift für Physik in early July 1925. 116

 We find in both papers a favorable disposition toward the new statistics.

 On Smekal, a physicist well versed with statistical problems (and also an expert

 in the meaning and applications of adiabatic transformations), Einstein's third article

 did not seem to have left any impression. In his paper, he even affirmed that the com-

 patibility of any statistical treatment with the second law of thermodynamics needs

 the adiabatic invariance of statistical weights.117 But neither with this point nor with
 others did Smekal make any explicit reference to Einstein's recent use of adiabatic

 processes. In an extensive article written for the Encyklopädie der Mathematischen

 Wissenschaften , completed shortly before, he expressed his opinion that the success

 of the Bose-Einstein approach would be decided by future experiments, i.e., that only

 future research might corroborate or reject it. 1 18 This would seem to be a suitable place

 to mention Einstein's non-statistical arguments in support of the theory, but there is

 not a single word about them (Smekal gives the reference to Einstein's third paper,
 but he does not give details nor even refers to any of its content).

 The same is true for Jordan, whose interest was focussed on the application of

 Einstein's new results to the study of the equilibrium between matter and radiation (he

 also made use of the probability transitions introduced by Einstein (1916a, b). Jordan

 also cited the third paper but did not engage with its argument.

 From Jordan we have available his direct testimony, obtained by Kuhn for the

 Archive for History of Quantum Physics. 119 The German physicist recalled that,

 during the first half of 1925, there were not many Göttingen physicists particularly

 interested in Einstein's new gas theory, similar to the way it had happened 20 years
 before with the hypothesis of light quanta. Nevertheless, during Ehrenfest's annual

 119 Interview with P. Jordan by T.S. Kuhn, 18 June 1963. Microfilm transcription in AHQP/OHI-3.

 1,2 Sackur (191 1) and Tetrode (1912a, b).

 113 Ehrenfest and Trkal (1920).

 114 For instance Darrigol (1991) and Desalvo (1992).

 1,5 Desalvo (1992, pp. 529-531).

 1 16 Jordan (1925) and Smekal (1925).

 117 Smekal (1926).

 118 Smekal (1926, p. 1214).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 599

 visit to Göttingen he provoked a debate about the new statistics. It is likely that in a

 presentation,120 besides explaining his own analysis of the fluctuations (which a little

 later would turn into a publication, and which Jordan would translate into the quan-
 tum - matrix - formalism121), Ehrenfest elaborated on various aspects of Einstein's

 theory, such as the loss of independence of molecules or the abrupt increase of concen-

 tration in the fundamental state below a certain temperature. We do not know whether

 he mentioned any of the arguments of Einstein's third non-statistical paper.

 Planck and Schrödinger were more involved in the debates around the ideal gas

 and its quantum theory. Both authors published papers soon after the appearance of
 those by Einstein. Planck presented a communication to the Prussian Academy on 2

 February 1925, less than a month after Einstein had presented his third paper.122 Far

 from being a reaction to Einstein's theory, Planck recapitulated his previous works, in

 response to the experimental results by Stern and Gerlach. According to his opinion,

 the experiments with silver ions had proved that under certain conditions only certain

 paths in phase space were admissible. With this statement, he was renouncing the kind

 of quantization that he had defended in his second theory, where only the emission

 process was quantized, but not the absorption nor the mechanical motion itself.

 At the end of his paper, Planck commented on Einstein's theory, pointing out its

 prediction of a loss of statistical independence of molecules. He neither criticized nor

 supported the new approach, and limited himself to the remark that the experiments

 will put it into its right place. But he also pointed out that it would imply a "fundamental
 modification" of the current ideas on the nature of molecules.

 Some months later, and after he had presented on July 23 to the Academy a paper

 by Schrödinger on the statistical entropy definition for the ideal gas,123 Planck went
 back to the question of the entropy of an ideal gas and to Einstein's new theory.124

 Here, as in his last paper on the subject published in Zeitschrift für Physik , Planck only

 referred to the definition of entropy, that is, to the problem of counting and assigning

 probabilities.125 But in these papers, with which Planck closed a long series of works

 dedicated to the study of the ideal gas under the new light of the quantum theory, there

 is not a single reference to the theoretical tests proposed by Einstein in his third paper.

 Something similar happened in the case of Schrödinger.126 Recall that it had been

 Einstein's theory, and the ensuing epistolary exchange between both physicists, which

 had turned Schrödinger's attention to de Broglie's work. The most significant paper of

 Schrödinger, for our present concern, is "on Einstein's gas theory."127 In it, he arrived
 at the same results achieved by his colleague, but he applied Boltzmann's statistics to

 waves à la de Broglie, i.e., he treated particles as excitations. In the interesting paper

 121 See Born et al. (1926), Ehrenfest (1925), and Duncan and Janssen (2008)

 126 About Schrödinger's work on quantum statistics of ideal gases (and also about Planck's), see Hanle
 (1977).

 120 See footnote 142.

 122 Planck (1925b).

 123 Schrödinger (1925).

 124 Planck (1925a).

 125 Planck (1926).

 127 Schrödinger (1926b).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 that Planck presented on his behalf to the Prussian Academy on July 23, Schrödinger

 recognized that the compatibility of Bose-Einstein's distribution with Nernsťs theo-

 rem was an important point in favor of the new theory.128 In this paper, Schrödinger

 analyzed different entropy functions which had been used in the past or were being
 used at the moment.

 600 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Einstein himself argued in favor of his theory appealing to the third paper in a letter,

 with which he answered some of Schrödinger's criticism. Schrödinger's letter, on the

 other hand, showed that he had not understood the new way of counting which was

 implicit in Bose's statistics.129 In his response Einstein had to point out:

 In Bose's statistics, which I use, the quanta or molecules are regarded as not
 independent of each other. [...] I failed to emphasize clearly the fact that here

 a new kind of statistics is employed, which for the time being is justified by
 nothing but its success.130

 And about the third, non-combinatorial paper, he wrote:

 In a third paper, which is currently in press, I lay out considerations that are inde-

 pendent of statistics and that are analogous to the derivation of Wien's displace-

 ment law. These latter results have convinced me completely of the correctness
 of the road to follow.131

 Once again, Einstein tried to underline the independence of statistics of the argu-

 ments in his paper. We will see in the following section that this was also the way he
 presented them to Ehrenfest.

 As far as we have been able to determine, none of the major journals contain papers

 that called attention to the last installment of Einstein's new theory of the quantum

 ideal gas, not even in Zeitschrift für Physik , where many of the most relevant papers
 of theoretical physics of those days were published. We think one should bear in mind

 Jordan's verdict about those days: The statistical treatment of the ideal gas was not

 anything that particularly worried the physicists.132 A superficial consultation of other
 journals seems to confirm this statement.

 Neither was there a presentation especially devoted to quantum statistics during
 the fifth Solvay conference in 1927 (Fermi-Dirac statistics had been born the previ-
 ous year).133 In fact, as we will discuss below, it was Einstein who had been asked

 by Lorentz to give a talk on that subject but he declined the invitation a few months

 128 Schrödinger (1925).

 129 See Schrödinger to Einstein, 5 February 1925 (AEA 22-001).

 130 "In der von mir verwendeten Bose'schen Statistik werden die Quanten bzw. Moleküle nicht als vonein-
 ander unabhängig behandelt. [...] Ich verabsäumte es, deutlich hervorzuheben, dass hier eine besondere

 Statistik angewendet ist, die durch nichts anderes als durch den Erfolg vorläufig begründet werden kann".
 Einstein to Schrödinger, 28 February 1925 (AEA 22-002). For a French translation of this letter, see Balibar
 et al. (1992, p. 194).

 131 "In einer dritten Arbeit, die gegenwärtig im Druck ist, werden Betrachtungen gegeben, die von der
 Statistik unabhängig sind und der Abi. des Wienschen Verschiebungsgesetzes analog sind. Diese letzten
 Ergebnisse haben mich von der Richtigkeit des eingeschlagenen Weges fest überzeugt" (Ibid.).
 132 See footnote 1 19.

 133 NN (1928), for an account of the 1927 conference, see Bacciagaluppi and Valentini (2009).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 601

 before. Einstein's third paper on quantum ideal gas theory did not have any effect.

 Nor did the papers that preceded it and that even today constitute the most known and

 celebrated part of his theory cause an immediate avalanche of reactions.

 7 Einstein, Ehrenfest, and the Bose-Einstein statistics

 Let us now look at Ehrenfesťs role for Einstein's non-combinatorial paper. There are

 different reasons that make it worthwhile to investigate it. The reference to Ehrenfest

 in the second paper indicates that both colleagues had discussed the new theory after

 the publication of its first installment, in July 1924. 134 This reference is not surprising,
 because in 1924 Einstein and Ehrenfest had a very close relation, both professionally

 and personally; in fact, since 1920 Einstein had been an official visitor staying in
 Leiden, coming from time to time to Leiden as a teacher.135 Moreover, many of the

 questions Einstein's theory put on the table had been and still were subject of interest
 to Ehrenfest.

 As we have already said, Ehrenfest had penetrated into the analysis of the implicit
 statistics in Planck's radiation law, comparing it with that underlying in Wien's.136

 Iuri A. Krutkow, one of Ehrenfesťs students from his Petersburg years, had elucidated

 this contraposition, during one of his stays in Leiden together with Ehrenfest, even

 more in a polemic he maintained in Physikalische Zeitschrift with the Polish physicist

 Mieczyslaw Wolfke.137 The contraposition presented by Einstein in 1925 between
 Boltzmann's and Bose's statistics strongly recalls these papers of the Russian physi-
 cist.

 In general, it was Ehrenfest who had extracted more information from Wien's dis-

 placement law in his quantum researches than anyone else. It has been observed that it

 was precisely the analysis of Wien's law that had led him to the adiabatic hypothesis. 138
 In Einstein's third paper the main character is Wien's displacement law.

 In addition, in 1905 Ehrenfest maintained the polemic with Jeans on the dimensional

 derivation of the displacement law we have analyzed in Sect. 5.2, which inspired Ein-
 stein's own derivation in 1909. Hanle suggests, commenting on the statistical works

 of Schrödinger prior to the formulation of wave mechanics, that what we are calling
 here Einstein's third paper might be interpreted as a response specifically designed to

 convince Ehrenfest of the suitability of the new theory. Although Hanle maintains that

 Ehrenfesťs attitude should be taken as representative of that of other physicists, the

 third paper would be constituted, according to this interpretation, by a new series of

 arguments put together in order to convince Ehrenfest of the plausibility of the obtained

 results. This opinion is supported by documentary evidence in some letters.139

 135 See Klein (1985) and van Delft (2006) and the Introduction to Kormos Buchwald et al. (2006, pp.
 xlii-xlvi).

 134 See footnote 37.

 136 See Sect. 5 above.

 137 Krutkow (19 14a, b).

 139 See footnote 58.

 138 Klein (1985) and Navarro and Pérez (2004, 2006).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 602 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Not any less important is the talk Ehrenfest gave in Göttingen at the beginning of

 the summer of 1925. Among other things, he spoke about the new statistics of Bose

 and Einstein. According to Jordan, Ehrenfest showed himself to be skeptic of the new

 method.140 His presence - presumably during June - left its mark in more than one

 physicist. Max Born referred to it in a letter to Einstein:

 ...your brain, heaven knows, looks much neater: its products are clear, simple,
 and to the point. With luck, we may come to understand them in a few years'

 time. This is what happened in the case of your and Bose's gas degeneracy sta-
 tistics. Fortunately, Ehrenfest turned up here and cast some light on it. Then I

 read Louis de Broglie's paper, and gradually saw what they were up to. I now

 believe that the wave theory of matter could be of very importance.141

 In a note in a well-known paper of 1926, in which Born together with Jordan and

 Heisenberg developed the matrix mechanics formulation of quantum theory, the
 authors also refer to this talk: "P. Ehrenfest, Lecture in the Göttingen seminar on

 the Structure of Matter, Summer 1925. The contents of this lecture were of great
 assistance to our present considerations."142 According to the context in which this

 footnote appears, we can assume that Ehrenfest presented the fluctuation analysis he
 published a few months later.143

 Nevertheless, we can see in their correspondence that both Einstein and Ehrenfest

 also rejected the proposal by Bohr, Kramers and Slater. On 9 January 1925, Ehrenfest
 wrote to his friend:

 If Bothe-Geiger should find "statistical independence" of electrons and scattered

 light quantum, it would prove nothing. But if they find dependence, then it is a

 triumph of Einstein over Bohr. This time I believe (but only this time!) firmly in
 you, that is I would be glad if dependence would be made evident.144

 Two days later, Einstein responded to a previous letter by Ehrenfest, commenting

 on the fluctuation analysis of a vibrating string with which Ehrenfest had discussed

 the dual nature of the radiation suggested first by Einstein in 1909 145 :

 I forgot in my letter to express my agreement with the statistical consider-

 ation about the fluctuations of the energy of the subvolume according to the

 140 See footnte 1 19.

 "Dein Gehirn sieht, weiss der Himmel, reinlicher aus. Seine Produkte sind klar, einfach und treffen

 die Sache. Wir kapieren es dann zur Not ein paar Jahre später. So ist es uns auch mit Deiner Gasentartung
 gegangen. Glücklicherweise erschien Ehrenfest hier und hat uns ein Licht aufgesteckt. Daraufhabe ich die

 Arbeit von Louis de Broglie gelesen und bin allmählich auch hinter Deine Schliche gekommen. Jetzt glaube
 ich, dass die 'Wellentheorie der Materie* eine sehr gewichtige Sache werden kann". Born to Einstein, 15
 July 1925 (AEA 8-177). English translation in Born (2005, p. 83).

 142 Born et al. (1926). English translation in van der Waerden (1967); the quote is on p. 380, note 2.

 143 Ehrenfest (1925).

 "Falls Bothe-Geiger „statistische Unabhängigkeit" von Elektron und gestreutem Lichtquant finden

 beweist es nichts. Falls sie aber Abhängigkeit finden ist es ein Triumph von Einstein über Bohr.- Diesmal

 glaube ich (ausnahmsweise) fest an Dich, würde mich also freuen wenn Abhängigkeit evident gemacht
 würde." Ehrenfest to Einstein, 9 January 1925 (AEA 10-100).

 145 Ehrenfest (1925).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 603

 understanding of standing waves. It would probably be good to publish this at

 some point.146

 Ehrenfest followed his friend's advice and sent it for publication in August. As
 mentioned above, its content must have been the core of the talk he gave in Göttingen
 that summer.

 In this paper, Ehrenfest calculated, in different ways, the energy fluctuations of the

 simple system of a string held fixed in its two ends. In all cases, he used the normal
 modes with which he had analyzed the black-body radiating cavity more than 10 years
 before. Thus, he showed and demonstrated a conclusion to which Leonard Ornstein

 and Frits Zernike had already come earlier: Einstein had supposed that the entropy

 was an extensive quantity, which is incompatible with a pure wave treatment (because

 of overlapping of the waves). We will not analyze Ehrenfesťs paper here (he already
 referred to "Bose-Einstein's statistics" and also alluded to the concept - but not the

 name - of a phonon), but we will refer to recent works that have put it in direct relation

 to a later analysis by Jordan in which many historians place the origin of quantum

 electrodynamics.147 The contradiction demonstrated by Ehrenfest turned, in the hands

 of Jordan and his quantum mechanical approach, into one of the first demonstrations of

 complementarity. Both terms in the fluctuation expression, which Einstein had attrib-

 uted in 1909 to corpuscular and undulatory components respectively, were shown to
 be necessary consequences of the new mechanics.

 In Ehrenfesťs paper we see what remained of the old project of publishing a note

 with Krutkow and Bursian. It is only a footnote:

 The words of the paper by S.N. Bose, Planck's Law and the Light Quantum

 Hypothesis [réf.], readily create the impression as though Planck's radiation law
 could be derived from the assumption of independent light corpuscles. But this is

 not the case. Independent light corpuscles would correspond to Wien's radiation
 law.148

 It seems that Ehrenfesťs influence on Einstein's research during those days was

 not very significant. From the available evidence we cannot exclude the possibility
 of additional meetings before the presentation of the second paper, but also in this

 case it would not appear that there existed a very close collaboration between the two
 friends. To confirm this impression, we have consulted the Paul Ehrenfest Archives,

 particularly his correspondence and notebooks.

 We have found no evidence of Ehrenfesťs concern with the problem of the quan-

 tum ideal gas in those months of 1924 and 1925. In his notebooks there are scarcely
 any annotations on this subject. There are many notes on what appears to be the

 146 "Ich vergaß, Dir in meinem Briefe zuzustimmen zu der statistischen Betrachtung über die Schwank-
 ungen der Energie des Teilraumes nach der Auffassung der stehenden Schwingungen. Es wäre wohl gut,
 dies einmal zu publizieren". Einstein to Ehrenfest, 1 1 January 1925 (AEA 10-102).

 147 Duncan and Janssen (2008).

 148 "Der Text der Arbeit von S.N. Bose, Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese [réf.] erweckt leicht

 den Eindruck, als ob sich das Plancksche Strahlungsgesetz aus der Vorstellung unabhängiger Lichtkorpus-
 keln ableiten ließe. Aber das ist nicht der Fall. Unabhängige Lichtkorpuskeln würden dem Strahlungsgesetz

 von W. Wien entsprechen" (Ehrenfest 1925, p. 364, note 1). Ehrenfesťs emphasis.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 604 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 calculations for his paper of 1925 on fluctuations.149 These series of annotations date

 back to mid-December 1924. Among them we find references to "Einstein's fluctua-

 tions" and to the comments of Tatiana to which he referred in the paper.

 In the lists of points that indicate something like topics to be treated next we can

 find references to light quanta, e.g., in this one:

 hv- corpuscles
 8Q/T in Quantumth.[eory]

 Radiat.[ion] Fluctuations]
 1 /N' <-> Gibbs Paradox
 - ► Bose

 150

 . . . ,

 In any case, there is not an alluvium of annotations related to the new way of count-

 ing introduced by Bose. Certainly, there are isolated annotations on Bothe's works or

 on Gibbs's paradox and the N ¡-factor, but nothing more.

 Let us recall again that the combinatorie observations that Einstein did in his second

 paper on gas theory did not need any extensive of sophisticated calculations, at least

 for Ehrenfest, who was deeply convinced that only some kind of dependence among
 quanta might lead to Planck's law. We would not be surprised if the way, in which

 Einstein demonstrated the peculiarities of the new statistics was suggested to him by
 Ehrenfest. But we have no evidence for this possibility.

 On the contrary, nothing seems to indicate that Ehrenfest collaborated closely with

 Einstein in the months between the arrival of Bose's letter and the publication of the
 third paper.151 According to him, in those days:

 About my scientific things, all goes so incredibly bad, that I would be very happy
 if I could already retire!152

 (Ehrenfest was 46 years old). The density of annotations in his notebooks is indeed

 not very high; but then annotations could have been done in notebooks that no longer
 exist, and Ehrenfest's tendency to underestimate both his capacities and his achieve-
 ments is notorious.

 149 See ENB: 1-28 and ENB: 1-29, from April 1923 to December 1926. In EHA, microfilms AHQP/EHR-4
 and AHQP/EHR-5.

 150 ENB: 1-29, probably around 24 December. In EHA, microfilm AHQP/EHR-5.

 151 In a letter he wrote in May 1927, Ehrenfest asked Einstein for offprints of subsequent papers to the
 second one of the theory of the quantum ideal gas. The non-statistical paper is then the first one he had no

 offprint of. However, we do not think this coincidence is significant. Ehrenfest to Einstein, 16 May 1927
 (AEA 10-164).

 152 Ehrenfest to Joffé, 16 February 1925. In Moskovchenko and Frenkel (1990, p. 186).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 605

 8 A rightfully forgotten paper?

 This question has two opposite answers, depending on whether one refers it to the

 reception that Einstein's work had in the months immediately after its publication, or

 to the attention it has received in later years by historians of quantum physics.

 In the first case the oblivion seems understandable. The practically immediate

 appearance of the revolutionary contributions of 1925 to quantum theory eclipsed

 any possible interest of Einstein's paper. The arguments it contains only concern the

 ideal gas from a thermodynamic perspective. But, what is more important, it includes

 hypotheses that were in open contradiction with the course quantum researches had
 taken. Many physicists had rejected already the laws of mechanics, and Einstein
 assumed their validity for describing the motions of the gas molecules.

 The papers of the twenties that refer to Einstein's theory usually mention all three

 installments. This indicates that, in spite of the almost complete lack of comments
 on it, its existence was known. We are inclined to think that it simply was not of

 any interest to Einstein's colleagues. Einstein justified the considerations of the non-

 statistical paper with the deep dissatisfaction over the statistical route by which he
 had arrived at the new distribution function. However, the problem was not whether

 his colleagues saw Bose's statistics favorably, but that in the following months the
 physicists' ideas around the quantum issues changed substantially. Bose's statistics,

 in spite of implying a way of counting that was incompatible with classical statistics,
 led to an already accepted result. This was much more than could be said of other

 attempts of explaining, for example, the Zeeman effect or the multielectronic spectra.

 This state of affairs appears to be what Niels Bohr was referring to in a postscript he

 added to a paper, after learning about the result of the Bothe-Geiger experiments, in

 July 1925:

 The renunciation of space-time pictures is characteristic of the formal treat-

 ment of problems of the radiation theory and of the mechanical theory of heat
 attempted in recent papers by de Broglie and Einstein. Especially in consid-
 eration of the perspectives opened up by these papers, I have thought that the

 discussion presented in the preceding paper might be of some interest, and I have

 therefore decided to publish the paper without change, although the endeavor

 underlying it may now seem hopeless.153

 Although the Bothe-Geiger results supported the light quanta hypothesis before
 the BKS theory, Bohr insisted on the necessity of giving up the "space-time" pic-
 tures. As an example, he gave precisely Einstein's theory of the quantum ideal gas.
 But Bohr's attitude toward Einstein's quantum theory was biased. He mentioned de

 Broglie's dissertation and only the first two papers of Einstein's theory. This omission

 might be deliberate, since the third paper does not fit in that "renunciation" that Bohr
 alluded to. Einstein's paper begins as follows:

 Motivated by a derivation of Planck's radiation formula, which was given
 by BOSE and which is based stringently on the hypothesis of light quanta, I

 153 Bohr (1925). English translation in Stolzenburg (1984, p. 206).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 606 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 recently formulated a theory of the ideal gas. This theory appears justified, if one

 proceeds on the assumption that a light quantum differs (apart from its property

 of polarization) from a monatomic molecule essentially only by the vanishingly

 small rest mass of the quantum.154

 As we have seen, Einstein also assumed the validity of Hamilton's equations for the

 mechanical motion of the gas molecules. Therefore, Einstein took as a starting point
 what the Danish physicist propagated to "renuncíate."

 In retrospect, Einstein's initial suspicion about Bose's statistics will turn into one

 of the first symptoms of his later distancing himself from quantum mechanics. For

 this reason we find no justification for the neglect of Einstein's paper by historians of

 physics. Perhaps we are dealing here with Einstein's last attempt to contribute posi-
 tively to the construction of the quantum theory, for which he had done so much. In

 addition, this paper closed the circle he initiated in 1905 with the hypothesis of energy

 quanta. First, the analogy was going one way, now, finally, it was also going the other
 way. The statistical dependence among light quanta which had limited the analogy
 with an ideal gas now was found also among molecules. Hence, for the first time the
 analogy was complete.

 In the months before the fifth Solvay conference, which was devoted to photons and

 electrons, Einstein declined Lorenz's invitation to give a talk on quantum statistics.

 This happened a bit more than 2 years after his trilogy on the ideal quantum gases was
 published. These are Einstein's words:

 I recall having committed myself to you to give a report on quantum statistics
 at the Solvay congress. After much reflection back and forth, I come to the

 conviction that I am not competent [to give] such a report in a way that really
 corresponds to the state of things. The reason is that I have not been able to

 participate as intensively in the modern developments of the quantum theory as
 would be necessary for this purpose. This is in part because I have on the whole

 too little receptive talent for fully following the stormy developments, in part

 also because I do not approve of the purely statistical way of thinking on which
 the new theories are founded.155

 154 "Angeregt durch eine von BOSE herrührende Ableitung der PLANCKschen Strahlungsformel, welche
 sich konsequent auf die Lichtquantenhypothese stützt, habe ich neulich eine Quantentheorie des idealen

 Gases aufgestellt. Diese Theorie erscheint dann als berechtigt, wenn man von der Überzeugung ausgeht, daß
 ein Lichtquant (abgesehen von seiner Polarisationseigenschaft) sich von einem einatomigen Molekül im
 wesentlichen nur dadurch unterschiede, daß die Ruhemasse des Quants verschwindend klein ist" (Einstein
 1925b, p. 18).

 155 "Ich erinnere mich, dass ich Ihnen gegenüber die Verpflichtung übernommen habe, am Solvay-Kon-
 gress ein Referat zu halten über Quanten-Statistik. Nach vielem Hin- und Her-Überlegen komme ich aber

 zu der Überzeugung, dass ich nicht fähig bin zu einem solchen Referat, das wirklich dem Stande der Dinge
 entspricht. Der Grund liegt darin, dass ich die moderne Entwicklung der Quantentheorie nicht so intensiv

 habe mitmachen können, wie es hiezu nötig wäre. Das kommt teilweise daher, dass ich überhaupt receptiv
 zu wenig begabt bin, um der stürmischen Entwicklung völlig zu folgen, teilweise auch daher, weil ich

 innerlich die rein statistische Denkweise, auf denen die neuen Theorien beruhen, nicht billige." Einstein to
 Lorentz, 17 June 1927 (AEA 71-153). In Pais (1982, pp. 431-432).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 607

 In that last year Born had proposed the probabilistic interpretation of the wave func-

 tion. Surely Einstein was thinking of that result, but arguably he must also bear in mind

 that the only possible characterization of the quantum ideal gas was still statistical.

 Ehrenfest shared this rejection. He had noticed several years ago what now appeared

 clearly in Einstein's theory: If the particles were treated as statistically independent
 ones the law observed and confirmed in the laboratory could never be derived. But

 if anything appears with clarity after examining the correspondence between the two

 friends, and also their publications, it is that not for a glimpse they conceived anything

 similar to the indistinguishability of the particles. That is to say, they always thought

 in terms of a certain "statistical dependence." What did not even cross their minds was

 to think that the way of counting introduced by Bose - and, in a certain way, already

 by Planck - could be, in fact, a new way of counting.

 This is more noticeable if we remember the thesis argued by Don Howard.156

 According to him, Einstein was also aware, since 1909, that statistically independent

 quanta would never lead to Planck's radiation law. Until he received Bose's letter and
 manuscript, he had never applied the analogy from quanta to molecules. Therefore,
 indistinguishability was far from being born in 1924. Furthermore, Howard claims
 that it was entanglement which mainly worried Einstein in the new mechanics, not

 probability. Expressions used by Einstein, like "incriminated statistics" or "purely
 statistical way of thinking" as well as the goal of the non-statistical paper we have

 analyzed support this claim.

 However, Einstein became more and more convinced of the good sense of his

 approach to the quantum ideal gas. He was interested in new experimental results
 to test the quantum corrections.157 Only the statistical side deserved contemptuous

 comments by his author. As he told to Ehrenfest, he tried to ensure the macroscopic

 (thermodynamic) facts in order to build - or to have an intuition of - the mechanics
 behind them. Only a new mechanics would square with an ideal gas with such odd

 properties.

 But Einstein's paper also displayed an ambiguity, which also would contribute
 to his colleagues' lack of interest in his third paper on the subject. The ambiguity
 comes to the fore in his questioning the very concept of ideal gas, and this questioning

 was precisely the idea under analysis. For instance, in the introduction to the paper,
 Einstein announced he would not assume that collisions between molecules are gov-

 erned by mechanics. In fact, what he did in the paper is, to neglect them, as corre-

 sponds to an ideal gas. But neither Einstein nor Ehrenfest appear to have given up the
 expectation that Bose's counting could conceal some kind of "quantum influence,"
 which prevented one from talking properly of an ideal gas; Einstein considered some
 kind of "thermal forces."158 The waves, and particularly the way in which de Brog-

 lie introduced them in the quantum treatments, might allow a recomposition of the

 puzzle into which the ideal quantum gas had turned. Einstein's initial preference for

 156 Howard (1990).

 158 See footnote 56.

 157 See Einstein to Kamerlingh Onnes, 4 November 1924; Kamerlingh Onnes to Einstein, 13 November
 1924 (AEA 14-384, 14-386).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 608 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Schrödinger's wave mechanics, in opposition to the matrix mechanics of Heisenberg,
 Born and Jordan, is as much known as understandable.

 The last "positive contribution" of Einstein to statistical physics includes a paper in

 which he offered arguments independent of the "incriminated statistics," because what

 nowadays is called Bose-Einstein's statistics was not more, according to its creator,

 than a calculatory artifice absolutely devoid of any physical meaning. It was simply a
 consequence of using the wrong mechanics or of not considering some kind of inter-

 action. As Einstein explained to Halpern, it "cannot be considered as giving a true
 theoretical basis to Planck's law."

 Acknowledgments We thank Luis Navarro for reading an early version of the manuscript and making
 interesting comments on it. The focus of our attention on the third paper by Einstein on the quantum ideal

 gas, is due to his suggestion. Conversations with Pere Seglar have also helped very much in elucidating
 some statistical (and non-statistical) points discussed in this paper. T.S. thanks the Max Planck Institut for

 the History of Science and its history of quantum physics group for their hospitality in the summer 2009.

 References

 Bacciagaluppi, G., and A. Valentini. 2009. Quantum theory at the crossroads. Reconsidering the 1927

 Solvay conference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Balibar, F., О. Darrigol, and В. Jech, eds. 1992. Oeuvres choisies d'Einstein /. Quanta. Paris: Seuil-CNRS.

 Bergia, S. 1987. Who discovered the Bose-Einstein statistics? In Symmetries in physics (1600-1980), ed.
 M.G. Doncel, A. H. A. Hermann, L. Michel, and A. Pais, 223-250. Sant Feliu de Guixols, Spain: Seminari
 ď História de les Ciències, Univ. Autonoma de Barcelona.

 Blanpied, W. 1972. Satyendranath Bose: Co-Founder of Quantum Statistics. American Journal of Physics

 40: 1212-1220.

 Bohr, N. 1925. Über die Wirkung von Atomen bei Stößen. Zeitschrift für Physik 34: 142-157.

 Born, M. 1949. Einstein's statistical theories. In Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist , ed. P.A. Schilpp,

 pp. 162-177. Evanston, IL: The Library of Living Philosophers.

 Born, M. ed. 2005. The Born- Einstein Letters 1916-1925. Friendship, Politics, and physics in uncertain
 times. New York: MacMillan. Introduction by Wener Heisenberg, Foreword by Bertrand Russell, New
 Preface by Diana Buchwald and Kip Thome.

 Born, M., W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan. 1926. Zur Quantenmechanik. II. Zeitschrift fur Physik 35: 557-615.

 Bose, S.N. 1924. Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese. Zeitschrift für Physik 26:178-181.
 Bridgman, P. 1922. Dimensional analysis. New Haven: Yale University Press.

 Buckingham, E. 1914. On physically similar systems; illustrations of the use of dimensional equations.

 Physical Review 4: 345-376.

 Carneiro, F.L. 2000. On the use, by Einstein, of the principle of dimensional homogeneity, in the problems

 of the physics of solids. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências 72:591-596.

 Darrigol, О. 1991. Statistics and combinatorics in early quantum theory, II: Early symptoma of indistin-
 guishability and holism. Historical Studies in the Physical and Biokmcal Sciences 2 1 (2): 237-298.

 Delbrück, M. 1980. Was Bose-Einstein Statistics arrived at by serendipity? Journal of Chemical Education

 7: 467-470.

 Desalvo, A. 1992. From the chemical constant to quantum statistics: A thermodynamic route to quantum

 mechanics. Physis 29 (2): 465-537.

 Duncan, A., and M. Janssen. 2008. Pascual Jordan's resolution of the conundrum of the wave-particle

 duality of light. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 39: 634-666.

 Earman, J., and M. Janssen. 1993. Einstein's explanation of the motion of mercury's perihelion. In The

 attraction of gravitation : New studies in the history of general relativity , ed. J. Earman, M. Janssen, and
 J.D. Norton, 129-172. Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkhäuser.

 Ehrenfest, P. 1906a. Bemerkung zu einer neuen Abhandlung des Wienschen Verschiebungsgesetzes. Phys-

 ikalische Zeitschrift 1: 1 19-120. (Reprinted in Klein 1959c. Doc. 8. d. 1 19.Ì

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 609

 Ehrenfest, P. 1906b. Bemerkung zu einer neuen Abhandlung des Wienschen Verschiebungsgesetzes. (Ant-
 wort auf Herrn Jeans' Entgegnung). Physikalische Zeitschrift 7:850-852. (Reprinted in Klein 1959c,
 Doc. 10, pp. 125-127.)

 Ehrenfest, P. 19 1 1 . Welche Züge der Lichtquantenhypothese spielen in der Theorie der Wärmestrahlung eine
 wesentliche Rolle? Armalen der Physik 36:91-1 18. (Reprinted in Klein 1959c, Doc. 24, pp. 185-212.)

 Ehrenfest, P. 1924. Teoriia kvantov. ZhRFKhO 56: 449-450.

 Ehrenfest, P. 1925. Energieschwankungen im Strahlungsfeld oder Kristallgitter bei Superposition quanti-

 sierter Eigenschwingungen. Zeitschrift fiir Physik 34: 362-373. (Reprinted in Klein 1959c, Doc. 56, pp.
 513-524).

 Ehrenfest, T. 1926. Dimensional Analysis viewed from the Standpoint of the Theory of Similitudes. Philo-

 sophical Magazine 5 1 : 257-272.

 Ehrenfest, P., and V. Trkal. 1920. Deduction of the dissociation equilibrium from the theory of quanta
 and a calculation of the chemical constant based on this. Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te
 Amsterdam. Section of Sciences. Proceedings 23: 162-183. (Reprinted in Klein 1959c, Doc. 40, pp.
 414-435.)

 Einstein, A. 1905. Über einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen

 Gesichtspunkt. Armalen der Physik 17: 132-148. (Reprinted in Stachel 1991, Doc. 14, pp. 150-169.

 Einstein, A. 1909a. Uber die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution
 der Strahlung. Physikalische Zeitschrift 10 (22): 817-825. (Reprinted in Stachel 1991, Doc. 60, pp.
 563-583).

 Einstein, A. 1909b. Zum gegenwärtigen Stand des Strahl ungsproblems. Physikalische Zeitschrift 10 (6):

 185-193. (Reprinted in Stachel 1991, Doc. 56, 541-553).

 Einstein, A. 1911a. Eine Beziehung zwischen dem elastischen Verhalten und der spezifischen Wärme bei

 festen Körpern mit einatomigen Molekül. Annalen der Physik 34: 170-174. (Reprinted in Klein et al.
 1993, Doc. 13, 40-414).

 Einstein, A. 191 lb. Elementare Betrachtungen über die thermische Molekularbewegung in festen Körpern.

 Annalen der Physik 35 (9):679-694. (Reprinted in Klein et al. 1993, Doc. 21, 45-480).

 Einstein, A. 1916a. Strahlungs-Emission und - Absorption nach der Quantentheorie. Deutsche Physikalische

 Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen 1 8(1 3/1 4):3 18-323. (Reprinted in Kox et al. 1996, Doc. 34, 36-370.)

 Einstein, A. 1916b. Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen

 16 (18): 47-62. (Reprinted in Kox et al. 1996, Doc. 38, pp. 381-398.)

 Einstein, A. 1923. Bietet die Feldtheorie Möglichkeiten für die Lösung des Quantenproblems? Königliche

 Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Sitzungsberichte, 359-364.

 Einstein, A. 1924. Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases. Königliche Preußische Akademie der

 Wissenschaften. Sitzungsberichte, 261-267.

 Einstein, A. 1925a. Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases. Zweite Abhandlung , 3-14. Sit-
 zungsberichte der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Physikalisch-mathematische
 Klasse.

 Einstein, A. 1925b. Zur Quantentheorie des idealen Gases , 18-25. Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen

 Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse.

 Einstein, A., and P. Ehrenfest. 1922. Quantentheoretische Bemerkungen zum Experiment von Stern und

 Ezawa, H. 1979. Einstein's contribution to statistical mechanics, classical and quantum. Japanese Studies

 Gerlach. Zeitschrift für Physik 1 1 : 31-34.

 in the History of Science 18: 27-72.

 Frenkel, V.l. 1971. Paul Ehrenfest. Moscow: Atomizdat.
 Frenkel, V.l., and P. Josephson. 1990. Soviet Physicists awarded stipends by the Rockefeller Foundation.

 Uspekhi Fizicheskii Nauk 160: 103-134.

 Hall, K. 2008. The schooling of Lev Landau. Osiris 23: 230-259.
 Hanle, P.A. 1977. The coming of age of Erwin Schrödinger: His quantum statistics of ideal gases. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 17: 165-192.

 Howard, D. 1990. 'Nicht sein kann was nicht sein darf'. Or the prehistory of EPR, 1909-1935: Einstein s

 early worries about the quantum mechanics of composive systems. In Sixty-two years of uncertainty:
 Historical, philosophical, physics inquiries into the foundations of quantum physics , ed. A. Miller, pp.
 1-51. New York: Plenum.

 Huijnen, P., and A. Kox. 2007. Paul Ehrenfest's rough road to Leiden: A physicist s search for a Position.

 Physics in Perspective 9: 186-21 1.

 Hund, F. 1975. Geschichte der Quantentheorie. Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 610 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Jammer, M. 1966. The conceptual development of quantum mechanics. New York: McGraw Hill.
 Jeans, J.H. 1905. On the laws of radiation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 76: 545-552.

 Jeans, J.H. 1906. Bemerkung zu einer neuen Ableitung des WIENschen Verschiebungsgesetzes. Erwiderung

 auf P. Ehrenfest's Abhandlung. Physikalische Zeitschrift 7: 667.

 Jeans, J.H. 1914. Report on radiation and the quantum theory. London: The Electrician.
 Jeans, J.H. 1924. Report on radiation and the quantum theory. London: Fleetway Press.

 Jordan, P. 1925. Über das thermische Gleichgewicht zwischen Quantenatomen und Hohlraumstrahlung.

 Zeitschrift für Physik 33: 649-655.

 Klein, M.J. 1959a. Ehrenfest's contributions to the development of quantum statistics. I. Koninklijke

 Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam. Section of Sciences. Proceedings B62: 41-50.

 Wein, M.J. 1959b. Ehrenfest's contributions to the development of quantum statistics. II. Koninklijke

 Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam. Section of Sciences. Proceedings B62: 51-62.

 Wein, M. J., ed. 1959c. Paul Ehrenfest. Collected scientific papers (with an introduction by H.B.G. Casimir).

 Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 Wein, M.J. 1964. Einstein and the wave-particle duality. The Natural Philosopher 3: 3-49.
 Wein, M.J. 1985. Paul Ehrenfest, vol. 1. The making of a theoretical physicist. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 Wein, M. J., A. J. Kox, J. Renn, and R. Schulmann, eds. 1993. The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol.

 3. The Swiss Years : Writings, 1909-1911. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 Wein, M. J., A.J. Kox, and R. Schulmann, eds. 1993. The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 5. The

 Swiss Years : Correspondence, 1902-1914. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 Kormos Buchwald, D., T. Sauer, Z. Rosenkranz, J. Illy, and V.l. Holmes, eds. 2006. The collected papers of
 Albert Einstein. Vol.10. The Berlin Years : Correspondence, May-December 1920 ; and supplementary
 correspondence, 1909-1920. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Kox, A. J., M.J. Klein, and R. Schulmann, eds. 1996. The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 6. The

 Berlin Years : 1914-1917. Princeton: Pinceton University Press.

 Krutkow, I. 1914a. Aus der Annahme unabhängiger Licht-quanten folgt die Wiensche Strahlungsformel.

 Physikalische Zeitschrift 15: 133-136.

 Krutkow, I. 1914b. Bemerkung zu Herrn Wolfkes Note: Welche Strahlungsformel folgt aus der Annahme

 der Lichtatome. Physikalische Zeitschrift 15: 363-364.

 Kuhn, T.S. 1978. Black-body theory and the quantum discontinuity, 1894-1912. New York: Oxford Uni-

 versity Press.

 Kuhn, T.S., J.L. Heilbron, P.L. Forman, and L. Allen. 1967. Sources for the history of quantum physics. An

 inventory and report. Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society.

 Langevin, P., and M.d. Broglie, eds. 1912. La theorie du rayonnement et les quanta. Brüssel: Gauthier-

 Lorentz, H.A. 1901. Boltzmann's and Wien's laws of radiation. Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen

 te Amsterdam. Section of Sciences. Proceedings 3: 607-620.

 Lorentz, H.A. 1903. On the emission and absorption by metals of rays of heat of great wavelengths. Kon-

 inklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam Section of Sciences. Proceedings 5: 666-685.

 Magagno, E. 1971 . Historico-critical review of dimensional analysis. Journal of the Franklin Institute 292 :

 Mehra, J., and H. Rechenberg. 1982. The historical development of quantum theory, vol. 1 in 2 parts.
 The quantum theory of Planck, Einstein and Sommerfeld: Its foundation and the rise of its difficulties
 1900-1925. New York: Springer.

 Mehra, J., and H. Rechenberg. 1984. The historical development of quantum theory, vol. 4, part 1: The

 fundamental equations of quantum mechanics 1925-1926. New York: Springer.

 Miranda, E. 2002. Adiabatic reversible compression: A molecular view. European Journal of Physics 23:

 Monaldi, D. 2009. A note on the prehistory of indistinguishable particles. Studies in the history and philos-

 ophy of modern physics. doi:10.1016/i.shpsb.2009.09.005.

 Moskovchenko, N.I., and V. Frenkel, eds. 1990. Ehrenfest-Ioffe. Nauchnaya Perepiska 1907-1933 gg..

 Leningrad: Nauka.

 Navarro, L. 2009. Einstein, profeta y hereje. Barcelona: Tusquets.

 Navarro, L., and E. Pérez. 2004. Paul Ehrenfest on the necessity of quanta (191 1): Discontinuity, quantiza-

 tion, corpuscularity, and adiabatic invariance. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 58: 97-141.

 Navarro, L., and E. Pérez. 2006. Paul Ehrenfest: The genesis of the adiabatic hypothesis, 1911-1914.

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 60: 209-267.

 Villars.

 391-402.

 389-393.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Einstein's quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas 61 1

 NN, ed. 1928. Electrons et photons. Rapports et discussions du cinquième conseil de physique tenu a

 Bruxelles du 24 au 29 octobre 1927. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Pais, A. 1982. ' Subtle is the Lord... ' The science and the life of Albert Einstein. Oxford: Oxford University

 Press.

 Pais, A. 1994. Einstein lived here. Oxford, New York: Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press.
 Pathria, R. 2007. Statistical mechanics. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.

 Pérez, E. 2009. Ehrenfesťs adiabatic hypothesis and the old quantum theory, 1916-191 S.Archive for History

 of Exact Sciences 63: 81-127.

 Planck, M. 1900. Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum. Deutsche Physika-

 lische Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen 2(17): 237-245.

 Planck, M. 1925a. Über die statistische Entropiedefinition, 442-451. Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen

 Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse.

 Planck, M. 1925b. Zur Frage der Quantelung einatomiger Gase, 49-57. Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen

 Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse.

 Planck, M. 1926. Eine neue statistische Definition der Entropie. Zeitschrift für Physik 35: 155-169.

 Planck, M. 1958. Physikalische Abhandlungen und Vorträge, 3 vols., Braunschweig: Vieweg.
 Planck, M. 1988. The theory of heat radiation. Los Angeles: Tomash Publishers and American Institue of

 Physics. Introduction by Allan Needell. This book contains the original German edition of 'Vorlesungen
 über die Theorie der Wärmestrahlung,' 1906; it also contains the English translation, 1914, of the second
 German edition.

 Przibram, K., ed. 1967. Schrödinger, Planck, Einstein, Lorentz : Letters on wave mechanics. New York:

 Sackur, O. 1911. Die Anwendung der kinetischen Theorie der Gase auf chemische Probleme. Annalen der

 Sauer, T. 2007. Einstein and the early history of superconductivity, 1919-1 922. Archive for History of Exact

 Sauer, T., and U. Majer, eds. 2009. David Hilberts lectures on the foundations of physics, 1915-1927.

 Philosophical Library.

 Physik 36: 958-980.

 Sciences 61:1 59-2 1 1 .

 Dordrecht: Springer.

 Schilpp, P.A., ed. 1949. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-scientist. La Salle: Open Court.
 Schrödinger, E. 1921 . Isotopie und Gibbssches Paradoxon. Zeitschrift für Physik 5: 163-166.
 Schrödinger, E. 1925. Bemerkungen über die statistische Entropiedennition beim idealen Oas, 434-441.
 Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Physikalisch-mathematische
 Klasse.

 Schrödinger, E. 1926a. Der stetige Übergang von der Mikro- zur Makromechanik. Die Naturwissenschaften

 14: 664-666.

 Schrödinger, E. 1926b. Zur Einsteinschen Gastheorie. Physikalische Zeitschrift 27: 95-101.
 Schulmann, R., A. Kox, M. Janssen, and J. Illy, eds. 1998. The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 8.

 The Berlin years : Correspondence, 1914-1918. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Smekal, A. 1925. Zwei Beiträge zur Bose-Einsteinschen Statistik. Zeitschrift für Physik 33: 613-622.
 Smekal, A. 1926. Allgemeine Grundlagen der Quantenstatistik und Quantentheorie. In Encyclopädie der
 mathematischen Wissenschaften. Vol. 5 (1909-1926), 3. Teil, No. 28, ed. A. Sommerfeld, 861-1214.
 Leipzig: Teubner.

 Speziali, P., ed. 1972. Albert Einstein - Michele Besso. Correspondance 1903-1955. Paris: Hermann.
 Stachel, J., ed. 1991. The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 2. The Swiss Years : Writings, 1900-1909.

 Stolzenburg, K„ ed. 1984. Niels Bohr. Collected works, vol. 5. The emergence of quantum mechanics (mainly

 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 1924-1926). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 Tetrode, H. 1912a. Die chemische Konstante der Gase und das elementare Wirkungsquantum. Annalen der

 Tetrode, H. 1912b. Die chemische Konstante der Gase und das elementare Wirkungsquantum II. Annalen

 Tetrode, H. 1 922. Über den Wirkungszusammenhang der Welt. Eine Erweiterung der klassischen Dynamik.

 Theimer, O., and B. Ram. 1976. The beginning of quantum statistics. American Journal of Physics 44:

 Physik 38: 434-442.

 der Physik 39: 255-256.

 Zeitschrift för Physik 10: 317-328.

 1056-1057.

 van Delft, D. 2006. Albert Einstein in Leiden. Physics Today 59 (4): 57-72.
 van der Waerden, B. 1967. Sources of quantum mechanics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Wali, K.C. 2006. The man behind Bose statistics. Physics Today 59 (10): 46-52.
 Wheaton, B.R. 1977. Catalogue of the Paul Ehrenfest archive at the Museum Boerhaave, Leiden. Lei-

 den: Communication 151 of the National Museum for the History of Science and Medicine 'Museum
 Boerhave'.

 612 E. Pérez, T. Sauer

 Wien, W. 1894. Temperatur und Entropie der Strahlung. Annalen der Physik 52: 132-165.
 Wien, W. 1909. Theorie der Strahlung. In Encyclopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Vol. 5 ( 1909 -

 1926), 3. Teil, No. 23 , ed. A. Sommerfeld, 282-357. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:38:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

