 

 

 

 

Embedding semigroups in groups: not as simple as it might seem
Author(s): Christopher Hollings
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 5 (September 2014), pp. 641-692
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569572
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:55 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569572?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2014) 68:641-692
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0138-4

 Embedding semigroups in groups: not as simple
 as it might seem

 Christopher Hollings

 Received: 31 December 2013 / Published online: 3 May 2014
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract We consider the investigation of the embedding of semigroups in groups,

 a problem which spans the early-twentieth-century development of abstract algebra.

 Although this is a simple problem to state, it has proved rather harder to solve, and its

 apparent simplicity caused some of its would-be solvers to go awry. We begin with the

 analogous problem for rings, as dealt with by Ernst Steinitz, B. L. van der Waerden

 and 0ystein Ore. After disposing of A. K. Sushkevich's erroneous contribution in this

 area, we present A. I. Maltsev's example of a cancellative semigroup which may not

 be embedded in a group, which showed for the first time that such an embedding is
 not possible in general. We then look at the various conditions that were derived for

 such an embedding to take place: the sufficient conditions of Paul Dubreil and others,

 and the necessary and sufficient conditions obtained by A. I. Maltsev, Vlastimil Ptâk

 and Joachim Lambek. We conclude with some comments on the place of this problem
 within the theory of semigroups, and also within abstract algebra more generally.

 Mathematics Subject Classification (2010) 01A 60 · 20-03 · 20 M 99

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 This article is an expanded version of Chapter 5 of my book Hollings (2014b) and, as such, contains

 research carried out at the Mathematical Institute of the University of Oxford with the support of research
 project grant F/08 772/F from the Leverhulme Trust. I would like to thank Jackie Stedall and Peter

 M. Neumann for their critical comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and also Joachim Lambek for his

 permission to quote from private correspondence.

 C. Hollings (El)
 Apartment 28 New Mill, Salts Mill Road, Shipley, West Yorkshire BD17 7EJ, UK
 e-mail: cdhollings@gmail.com

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 642 C. Hollings

 Contents

 1 Introduction 642

 2 Embeddings for rings 647
 3 Early results for semigroups 652
 4 Further sufficient conditions 659

 5 Maltsev's embeddability conditions 663
 6 Ptak's embeddability condition 671
 7 Lambek's polyhedral condition 676
 8 Maltsev's and Lambek's conditions compared 681
 9 Concluding remarks 688
 References 689

 1 Introduction

 In a previous paper (Hollings 2009a), I considered the early development of the (alge

 braic) theory of semigroups—that is, the abstract theory of sets with a single associative

 binary operation. In that paper, I identified what I deemed to be the first 'independent'

 semigroup-theoretic result, published by the American mathematician A. H. Clifford

 in 1941: a theorem with no direct analogue in either group or ring theory. As noted in

 Hollings (2009a, Sect. 2), the latter two theories had a heavy influence on the emerg

 ing study of semigroups during the 1930s: semigroups were viewed either as groups

 for which certain axioms had been negated, or as rings in which an entire operation

 (namely, addition) had been dropped. In the present paper, I turn my attention to one

 particular semigroup-theoretic problem which emerged in the 1930s by direct anal

 ogy with a problem from ring theory, but which was touched upon only briefly in

 Hollings (2009a, Appendix B): the question of when it is possible to embed a semi

 group in a group. Over the course of this paper, a particular result connected with

 this problem will emerge as an alternative contender for 'first independent semigroup

 theorem'. Moreover, we will also see that efforts to solve this problem spanned the

 final, twentieth-century, phase of the development of abstract algebra.

 The problem of embedding a semigroup in a group is one of the first topics to have

 been considered in the early days of semigroup theory. It concerns the derivation of

 conditions under which an isomorphic copy of a given semigroup may be located inside

 some group. It is thus, in some sense, a 'converse' to the study of semigroups via their

 subgroups (as carried out, for example, by the Russian mathematician A. K. Sushke
 vich1 in the 1920s and 1930s—see Hollings 2009b or Hollings 2009a, Sect. 5). A

 typical approach to the problem has been to take a semigroup and attempt to augment

 it by the introduction of an identity, as well as an inverse for each element, and then

 to extend the original binary operation to these new elements in such a way that it
 remains associative. As we will see, a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for

 1 Α. Κ. CymKeBirc. Besides Russian and Ukrainian, Sushkevich also published papers in English, German
 and French, in which he used a German transliteration of his name: 'Suschkewitsch'. Certain of his relevant

 publications may therefore be found in the bibliography under this version of his name.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 643

 such an embedding to take place was obtained as early as 1939, and yet the problem

 has seen a great deal of study ever since—perhaps because the solution of 1939 is not a

 particularly practical one. This seemingly innocuous problem is by no means as sim

 ple as it might appear: not every semigroup can be embedded in a group, and, indeed,

 not even every cancellative semigroup2 can be embedded in a group, as we might

 naively suspect, given that any subsemigroup of a group is necessarily cancellative.

 The inspiration for the study of the embedding problem for semigroups came chiefly

 from the analogous problem of embedding a ring in a field, or, more generally, in a

 skew field (also known as a 'division ring' or a 'non-commutative field' : a system with

 two binary operations satisfying all the axioms of a field, except perhaps for commuta

 tivity of multiplication). Some of the authors who considered these problems, however,

 realised that since much of the associated theory was phrased entirely in terms of mul

 tiplication, it might therefore be appropriate to seek a solution in the same terms. The

 operation of addition was thus dropped, and the problem of embedding semigroups in

 groups (or in other semigroups) emerged alongside that of embedding rings in (skew)

 fields (or in other rings). Although a great range of semigroup embedding problems

 has been considered over the decades, the focus here will be upon embeddings into

 groups·, these have seen the most study and are, I believe, the most historically signif

 icant, having been the first such embeddings to have been studied in the burgeoning

 semigroup theory of the 1930s.

 The ring embeddings that eventually gave impetus to their semigroup counterparts

 first arose in the early years of the twentieth-century as part of the development of

 abstract algebra. The notion of a field had already appeared in the nineteenth century in

 the work of Leopold Kronecker and Richard Dedekind (Katz 2009, Sect. 21.5). That of

 a ring followed in a 1914 paper by Abraham (Adolf) Fraenkel (see Corry 2000a, b, and

 also Hollings 2014a), with the subsequent theory of rings seeing much development

 in the 1920s at the hands of Emmy Noether and her school. Before this, however,

 comprehensive theories had emerged for the older notions of integral domains and

 fields, by analogy with the properties of the integers and the rational numbers. One of

 the major pieces of work in this direction was Ernst Steinitz' 1910 paper 'Algebraische
 Théorie der Kôrper' (Steinitz 1910).

 In his paper (on which, see Corry 1996, 2nd ed., Sect. 4.2), Steinitz set about the

 construction of a comprehensive abstract theory of fields. In the early sections, for

 example, he derived a range of basic properties for both fields and integral domains.

 Amongst these is a result that is of great significance for our present purposes: the

 so-called 'Quotientenbildung', namely, the construction of the field of fractions of an

 abstract integral domain, by analogy with the construction of the rationale from the

 integers. We will discuss Steinitz' method in Sect. 2.

 I have referred above to embedding 'problems'. However, Steinitz did not phrase his

 treatment of the 'Quotientenbildung' in such terms, simply because, for him, there was

 no problem: any integral domain admits such a construction. The explicit formulation

 of 'embedding problems' in the sense in which we are interested here appears to have

 2 A semigroup S in which either ac = be or ca = cb implies that a - b, for any a, b, c 6 S. This does
 not, of course, guarantee that c has an inverse element in the traditional group-theoretic sense. If S has a

 zero element, then we must make the additional requirement that c be nonzero.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 644 C. Hollings

 been due to B. L. van der Waerden in his seminal text Moderne Algebra of 1930.

 We know that van der Waerden read Steinitz' paper at Noether's behest (see Waerden

 1975, p. 33): Steinitz's 'Quotientenbildung' appears in van der Waerden's book as the

 proof of the theorem that every integral domain may be embedded in a field (presented

 here as Theorem 1 in Sect. 2). Indeed, van der Waerden went further by posing the

 additional question in the non-commutative case: can every non-commutative ring
 without zero divisors be embedded in a skew field? Several of the mathematicians

 who are mentioned in the present article were inspired by this question, which we will

 refer to as van der Waerden's problem.

 An early contribution to the solution of van der Waerden's problem came from

 0ystein Ore in a paper of 1931 (on which, see Corry 1996, 2nd ed., p. 264). Ore
 was interested in the development of a non-commutative theory of determinants and

 the application of such a theory to the solution of systems of linear equations with

 coefficients from a skew field. In the course of his paper, Ore extended the 'Quotienten

 bildung' to the non-commutative case, thereby embedding a non-commutative ring

 without zero divisors in a skew field of fractions (presented here as Theorem 2 in
 Sect. 2). However, Ore was unable to carry out his construction in general; he was

 forced to assume a further condition which had emerged from his study of deter

 minants: that every pair of elements of the ring in question must have a common

 right multiple (for all elements a, b in the ring, we can find elements m, η such that

 am = bn). The 'common right multiples' condition is therefore a sufficient condition

 for the embedding of a non-commutative ring without zero divisors in a skew field.

 It is difficult to know quite when mathematicians first began to consider the question

 of semigroup embeddings. As we will see in Sect. 2, the adaptation of the methods of

 both Steinitz and Ore to the purely multiplicative case is in fact quite straightforward.

 Indeed, the extension of these constructions was evidently so clear that it was some time

 before explicit proofs (or even statements of the relevant semigroup embedding results)

 appeared in print. Nevertheless, they quickly passed into 'mathematical folklore' and,

 as we will see, were often cited by subsequent authors as though they were obvious

 and widely known facts.

 The first explicit semigroup-theoretic treatment of the embedding problem was

 that of the Russian-born, but Ukraine-based, mathematician A. K. Sushkevich; he

 appears to have been influenced by van der Waerden, but not by Ore. In a paper of

 1935, Sushkevich claimed to have proved that any cancellative semigroup may be

 embedded in a group. As noted above, however, this is not the case: there is a flaw in

 Sushkevich's argument. He appears to have fallen into the trap of assuming that the

 embedding problem is straightforward.

 The first published indication that Sushkevich had given an erroneous result came

 from another Russian mathematician, A. I. Maltsev,3 whose name is now inextricably

 linked with the embedding problem. In a paper of 1937, Maltsev presented a coun

 terexample to show that not every cancellative semigroup may be embedded in a group.

 3 A. H. Ma-ikneB. I choose to omit the silent Cyrillic letter t from my transliteration, although its presence

 is sometimes indicated (after transliteration into Latin letters) by Note that Maltsev's name has also been

 transliterated as 'Malcev'. Indeed, the 1937 paper that will be of interest to us in Sect, 3.2 was published

 under this name, and so it appears in this form in the bibliography.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 645

 In fact, Maltsev's semigroup counterexample is merely a means to an end: in the final

 section of his paper, he used his semigroup to construct a particular non-commutative

 ring without zero divisors, which may not be embedded in a skew field. Maltsev there

 fore gave a negative solution to van der Waerden's problem. Nevertheless, he continued

 to study the embedding problem in the semigroup context and, in a celebrated paper

 of 1939 (together with a sequel of 1940), gave necessary and sufficient conditions for

 a cancellative semigroup to be embedded in a group. These conditions consist of a

 countably infinite set of implications.

 In spite of Maltsev's apparently comprehensive solution to the semigroup embed

 ding problem, it did not go away—perhaps because a countably infinite set of condi

 tions is not so easy to use. Thus, throughout the 1940s, a number of further sufficient

 conditions were obtained by various authors, many of them inspired by Ore's work.

 There also appeared further sets of necessary and sufficient conditions. V. Ptâk gave

 a necessary and sufficient condition in terms of normal subgroups of the given semi

 group, thereby giving a rather more manageable criterion for embedding than that of

 Maltsev. We mention also the 'polyhedral conditions' of J. Lambek: these are much

 like Maltsev's conditions, but, as the name suggests, they are a little easier to han

 dle because they have a geometrical interpretation; they are certainly much easier to

 present.

 The problem of embedding semigroups in groups continues to be studied from

 various different viewpoints. However, I do not propose to try to cover all approaches

 here. I will cover simply those mentioned above; for a range of other embedding

 problems, I refer the reader to the various available survey articles, including, but not

 limited to Bokut (1987), Shutov (1966) and Thibault (1953a, b). One point that I will

 not address here is the question of 'universality' of embeddings: speaking informally,

 the question of whether a given embedding is the most 'economical' possible. For some

 comments on this issue, see Clifford and Preston (1967, Sect. 12.2). 'Universality' is

 an important property in making embeddings useful, but, apart from a brief observation
 by Maltsev (1940, Sect. 4), it was not a significant concern of the early authors who
 attacked semigroup embedding problems—in the interests of saving space, we will

 therefore make little mention of such properties.

 A knowledge of the basics of both group theory and ring theory will be assumed of

 the reader, but no semigroup theory will be supposed—surprisingly little introductory

 theory is required for an understanding of the mathematics to be discussed here, which

 perhaps explains why this is a subject which was studied in the early days of semigroup

 theory. Any relevant notions will be introduced as we go along.

 This article consists of the following sections. In Sect. 2,1 begin by giving details

 of Steinitz' construction of the field of fractions of a given integral domain, and of

 Ore's corresponding method in the non-commutative case. In Sect. 3, I pick apart

 Sushkevich's erroneous contributions in this area and give Maltsev's counterexample

 of a cancellative semigroup which may not be embedded in a group. Section 4 deals

 with a number of sufficient conditions that came after Ore's 'common right multiples'

 condition. In particular, I consider the work of the French mathematicians Paul Dubreil

 and Raouf Doss, as well as that of Thoralf Skolem. In the following three Sects. 5, 6
 and 7,1 discuss the necessary and sufficient conditions of Maltsev, Ptâk and Lambek,

 respectively. In Sect. 8,1 compare the conditions of Maltsev and Lambek, and detail

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 646 C. Hollings

 work that was carried out to identify the conditions they had in common. At the end of

 the paper (Sect. 9), I make some concluding remarks on the nature of the embedding

 problem for semigroups and its place within abstract algebra.

 We note here the curious fact that the problem of embedding a semigroup in a group

 seems to have been one on which many young mathematicians 'cut their teeth'; most

 of the major contributions to this area were made by people who were just beginning

 their careers and who, in many cases, never returned to it: Maltsev (Sects. 3,5) did his

 embedding work early in his career, returning to it only briefly some years later (in

 Maltsev 1953); Doss (Sect. 4) and Ptâk (Sect. 6) also considered embedding problems

 at the beginning of their careers, before abandoning this for other areas—Fourier

 analysis for the former and functional analysis for the latter; Lambek and Bush (Sect. 7)

 both wrote PhD theses on embedding questions and, save for publishing parts of their

 theses as papers, did no further work in this area; Jackson (also Sect. 7) wrote a

 master's thesis on embeddings, which contained new results, and yet, despite pursuing

 an academic career, he never returned to them or made any effort to publish them.

 The embedding theorems are certainly easy to state, but their proofs are far from

 elementary, so it is difficult to see why these results should be particularly suitable for

 early-career mathematicians. On the other hand, perhaps there is in fact no real pattern

 here: Steinitz, Ore (Sect. 2), Sushkevich (Sect. 3), Dubreil and Skolem (Sect. 4) were

 all quite well established at the time of carrying out their embedding work.

 A number of brief mathematical comments are in order before we proceed. First of

 all, it is worth noting that the object into which a non-commutative ring or semigroup
 is embedded must also be non-commutative, for, if it were not, this would contra

 dict the non-commutativity of the original ring or semigroup. In the ring context, we
 observe also that, since a skew field has no zero divisors, the lack of zero divisors is

 a necessary condition for this embedding to take place. Equivalently, it is necessary

 that the multiplication of the original ring be cancellative.4 Indeed, cancellation is a
 necessary condition in both the commutative and non-commutative cases. The equiv
 alence of cancellation and 'lack of zero divisors' no longer holds in the semigroup

 case, since a non-cancellative semigroup may lack zero divisors simply by not having

 a zero element. Obviously, if a semigroup with zero is cancellative, then it does not

 have any zero divisors. Thus, adapting the above comments on rings, cancellation is

 clearly a necessary condition for the embedding of a semigroup in a group.

 I conclude this introduction with a note on terminology: rather than 'embed'/

 'embedding'/'embeddability', some authors (for example, both Maltsev and Lambek)

 have used the terms 'immerse'/'immersion'/'immersibility'. However, I have largely

 adopted the former terminology here, in the interests of a uniform presentation. The

 only places where I have not are in translations of the titles of certain papers for which

 the term 'immersibility' etc. seemed more appropriate.

 4 For a ring has no zero divisors if and only if its multiplication is cancellative (in the sense of note 2).

 Suppose first of all that a ring R has no zero divisors, and that ac — be, for a, b, c 6 R, with c φ 0. Then
 ac - be = (a - b)c = 0, from which it follows that a - b = 0, whence a = b. The other part of the
 cancellation law is similar. Conversely, suppose that R is cancellative. For a, b, c e R, with c / 0, we take
 the equality ac = be (from which it follows that a = b) and set b = 0. □

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 647

 2 Embeddings for rings

 2.1 The commutative case: Steinitz' Theorem

 As noted in the introduction, an embedding problem for rings was given its first

 explicit formulation by van der Waerden in his Moderne Algebra (van der Waerden

 1930, Chap. Ill, Sect. 12) in connection with the notion of the field of fractions of a

 ring. Van der Waerden began his treatment of this by making the simple observation

 that if a given commutative ring 93 is already contained within a field Ω, then we may,

 in a very natural manner, construct fractions (or quotients) in Ω of elements of 93:

 £ = ab~l = b~la (b φ 0),
 b

 where b~l is the inverse of b in Ω. It is a straightforward observation that equivalence

 of such fractions is governed by the condition

 - = - 4=Φ· ad — be, (1)
 b d

 a t c _ ad + be a c ac
 b + d~ bd ' b d = bd' ()

 and that they may be added and multiplied according to the rules

 It may be shown that the collection of all fractions forms a field under the operations

 in (2): the field of fractions (or field of quotients) of the original ring.5

 Having thus dealt with commutative rings that are already located inside a field,

 van der Waerden next turned his attention to a more general question:

 Which commutative rings possess a field of quotients? Or, what amounts to the

 same thing, which, in general, can be embedded in a field?6

 As we have noted, a simple necessary condition for such an embedding to take place
 is that the ring in question contain no zero divisors. Building upon this observation,

 van der Waerden (1930, p. 47) presented the following theorem, which we will refer

 to as Steinitz' Theorem, since it first appeared, in essence, in Sect. 3 of Steinitz' paper
 of 1910:

 Theorem 1 (Steinitz' Theorem) Every integral domain can be embedded in afield.

 The proof that van der Waerden gave of this theorem was simply Steinitz' 'Quotien

 tenbildung'. Indeed, this is nothing other than the still-familiar construction of the

 field of fractions of a given integral domain 93: we take the set of all ordered pairs

 5 For a general discussion of fields of fractions, see Cohn (1995, Chap. 1).

 6 'Welche kommutativen Ringe besitzen einen Quotientenkbrper? Oder, was auf dasselbe hinauskommt,

 welche lassen sich Uberhaupt in einen Kôrper einbetten?' (van der Waerden 1930, p. 47).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (α, b) (b Φ 0) of elements of 93 and define an (equivalence) relation ~ on such pairs

 648 C. Hollings

 by the rule that

 (a, b) ~ (c, d) ad = be (3)

 (cf. (1)). Each pair (a, b) is next replaced by the formal symbol f. It is then necessary

 to show that the collection of all such | forms a field under the operations given in
 (2). The original integral domain 93 is finally seen to be included in this field, via the

 mapping a y, for some fixed b e 93\{0). We note that commutativity has an
 important role to play in this construction. For comparison with what appears below,

 I include, for example, the proof that relation (3) is transitive:

 Proof Suppose that (a, b) ~ (c, d) and (c, d) ~ (e, /). Then ad = be and cf = de.
 Taking the first equality and multiplying on the right by /, we see that adf = bef =

 bde, whence afd — bed, by commutativity. It follows by cancellation that af = be,
 in which case, (a, b) ~ {e, /). □

 Van der Waerden did not confine his attention merely to embeddings for integral

 domains. He observed, for example, that the above construction is easily modified for

 commutative rings with zero divisors: the denominator of a formal fraction is required

 to be a non-divisor of zero (van der Waerden 1930, p. 49). He turned his attention also

 to the non-commutative case, although in this instance he had no solution to offer:

 The possibility of embedding non-commutative rings without zero divisors into

 full fields is an unsolved problem, except in very special cases.7

 The problem of whether we can embed a non-commutative ring without zero divisors

 in a (skew) field is what we have termed van der Waerden's problem. We will see

 Maltsev's negative solution of this problem in Sect. 5. Subsequent versions of van der
 Waerden's book acknowledge Maltsev's work in a footnote.

 2.2 The non-commutative case: Ore's Theorem

 We turn now to an approach to the embedding problem for non-commutative rings—

 that of Oystein Ore. As we will see (particularly in Sect. 4), Ore's ring-theoretic inves

 tigations exerted a strong influence on subsequent work on the embedding problem

 for semigroups.

 Ore's is a familiar name within twentieth-century mathematics.8 This Norwegian

 born mathematician spent most of his life in the USA at Yale University. He appears

 to have been greatly influenced by Noether and her school, both in his PhD thesis

 (supervised by Thoralf Skolem, who will appear briefly in Sect. 4) and in his subsequent

 work, having spent time in Gottingen in the mid- 1920s. Indeed, S. C. Coutinho (2004,

 p. 257) says of Ore's work that it displays

 ... very clearly the influence of the abstract algebra movement that was taking

 shape under the leadership of Emmy Noether and Emil Artin.

 7 'Die Môglichkeit der Einbettung nichtkommutativer Ringe ohne Nullteiler in einen sie umfassenden
 Kôiper bildet ein ungelôstes Problem, aufier in ganz speziellen Fallen' (van der Waerden 1930, p. 49).

 8 For biographies of Ore, see Anon (1970) and Aubert (1970).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 649

 This influence is certainly in evidence in the 1931 paper, 'Linear equations in non

 commutative fields', that is of interest to us here. A very good account of this paper

 may also be found in Coutinho (2004, Sect. 2.1).

 In the paper in question, Ore considered the generalisation of the theory of determi

 nants to skew fields, with the goal of solving systems of linear equations with coeffi

 cients from these. This was a problem that had seen much study since the mid-1920s,
 but Ore was critical of some of the earlier efforts of other mathematicians. For exam

 ple, the notion of determinant adopted by both Heyting (1927) and Richardson (1926,

 1928) was not defined for all values of the coefficients of the corresponding system of

 linear equation—to Ore's mind, this limited the usefulness of such determinants (Ore

 1931, p. 463). He was also critical of a lack of symmetry in Richardson's definition.

 The goal of Ore's 1931 paper was to devise a satisfactory definition of determinant

 in the non-commutative case. It was not his purpose to treat any embedding problem,

 but one such problem emerged along the way. For the time being, we note that Ore

 was certainly aware of van der Waerden's problem:

 In the commutative case all domains of integrity (rings without divisors of zero)

 have a uniquely defined quotient-field, which is the least field containing the

 ring. For the non-commutative case v. d. Waerden... has recently indicated this

 problem as unsolved (Ore 1931, p. 464).

 The basic system with which Ore began was simply a non-commutative ring, for

 which he offered 'algebra' as an alternative term. However, it quickly emerged that

 this notion was inadequate for his purposes, since it did not allow for all the operations

 needed when solving systems of linear equations:

 We shall in the following consider systems of linear equations with coefficients

 which are elements of such a ring. In order to perform an elimination to obtain a

 solution of a linear system, it seems necessary that the coefficients should satisfy

 the axioms mentioned.. .The main operation for the usual elimination is however

 to multiply one equation by a factor and another equation by another factor to

 make the coefficients of one of the unknowns equal in the two equations (Ore
 1931, p. 465).

 Ore therefore augmented his non-commutative ring with the following further con

 dition (Ore 1931, p.465):9

 My. Existence of common multiplum. When a, b φ 0 are two arbitrary elements of a

 ring S, then it is always possible to determine two other elements m, η Φ 0 such
 that an = bm.

 It is easy to see that this new condition makes possible the operation indicated above.

 Notice that My holds immediately in the commutative case, since ab = ba, for any

 elements a, b. To any (non-commutative) ring which satisfies My and which has no

 zero divisors, Ore gave the name regular ring;10 he did not assume the existence of a

 9 Ore labelled his condition in this manner because it was the fifth multiplicative condition in his list.

 10 Not to be confused with the notion of a (von Neumann) regular ring (see, for example, Goodearl 1979).

 What Ore called a regular ring (with identity) is now termed a right Ore domain (Coutinho 2004, p. 258).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 650 C. Hoilings

 multiplicative identity. Adopting the term 'non-commutative field' for what we have

 called a skew field, Ore proved the following result, which we will refer to as Ore's
 Theorem (Ore 1931, Theorem 1):

 Theorem 2 (Ore's Theorem) Any regular ring can be considered as a subring (more

 exactly: is isomorphic to a subring) of a non-commutative field.

 Thus, any non-commutative ring without zero divisors, and in which any two elements

 have a common right multiple, can be embedded in a skew field. Ore proved this theo

 rem via a reasonably straightforward generalisation of Steinitz' 'Quotientenbildung'.
 In Ore's case, however, the formal fractions form not a field, but a skew field. Com

 plications not present in the commutative case emerge in the course of the proof, but
 condition My serves to resolve these.

 As already noted, Ore began by forming fractions | for b φ 0. The first point that it

 was necessary for him to address was that of equality of fractions, that is, the derivation

 of a non-commutative version of condition (1). Let | and |j- be two fractions, with
 b, b\ φ 0. By My, we can find β, β\ Φ 0 such that

 bfi ι = bxfi. (4)

 We then say that

 a a\ „ „
 r = 7- 4=> αβ\ = α\β. (5)
 Ό 01

 The elements β\, β will not in general be the unique values satisfying (4), but it is an

 easy exercise to show that (5) does not depend on the choice of these elements (see Ore

 1931, p. 466). The proof that the notion of equality defined in (5) is transitive needs

 special care, but is again an easy exercise (see Ore 1931, p. 467). I include it here for

 comparison with the corresponding proof in the commutative case (see Sect. 2.1):

 Proof Suppose that £ = £}■ and £}· = £*, where b, b\,b2 φ 0. Then there exist
 β, β\,β[,β2 φ 0 such that bβ\ = b\fi, αβ\ = α\β, b\fi2 = b2fi\ and α\β2 = α2β[·
 By My, there exist r, s φ 0 such that fir = fiis. It then follows easily from the listed
 equations that b(fi\r) = b2(fi[s) and a(fi\r) = b2(fi[s)\ hence, £ = £*. □

 In the non-commutative case, addition of fractions is defined by

 α ι a\ αβ\ + α\β _ αβ\ + α\β
 b + b[= bfix " M '

 where β, β\ are as in (4), whilst multiplication is given by

 α αϊ = cm (6)
 b bx bifi

 where bct\ =α\β. Ore showed that these operations do not depend on the choices of

 β, β ι, αχ, that they are well-defined, and that they satisfy the other properties required

 for a skew field. The original ring may be embedded in the skew field of fractions via

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 651

 the mapping a for any fixed c φ 0. Condition My is thus shown to be sufficient

 for the embedding of a non-commutative ring in a skew field.

 As observed above, the main purpose of Ore's work was to find a suitable definition

 of determinant in the non-commutative case. In particular, he aimed to find those rings

 in which it is possible to define such a determinant, and in which we may therefore

 solve systems of linear equations by elimination. Regular rings are precisely the rings

 that Ore sought. In the introduction to the paper, he commented:

 ... I discuss the properties of rings in which the elimination can be performed;

 these rings must satisfy a certain axiom My and this is, as I show, equivalent to

 the fact, that the ring can be completed to a non-commutative field ('Quotien

 tenkorper') by the introduction of formal quotients of elements in the ring (Ore

 1931, p. 464).

 Theorem 2, together with some associated results that I do not reproduce here, provides

 a proof of this assertion. Further, we can see that condition My is required for Ore's

 notion of determinant if we consider the following pair of linear equations:

 *1«11 + -*2«12 = b\, X\a2\ + X2C122 = h, (7)

 where the α,·;· and bk belong to some regular ring S. By My, we can find Απ, A22 € S

 such that an A22 = «22A12· We then multiply the first equation by A22, and the second

 by An (both on the right), before subtracting one from the other, to obtain:

 *l(flllA22 - fl2lAi2) = b\A22 - b2A\2,

 which Ore wrote as

 x\

 flit

 Û21

 an 1
 <2221

 b\

 t>2

 «121

 «221

 The quantities between the vertical lines are termed right-hand determinants of second

 order·, the determinant on the left-hand side of the equality will be denoted, following

 (12)

 Ore, by Aj2 .1 omit all further details of Ore's work, except to note the following
 pleasing result (Ore 1931, p. 472):

 Theorem 3 The system ofEq. (7) has a unique solution if and only if the determinant

 Δ j2^ does not vanish.

 Thus, Ore's notion of determinant appears to be the 'correct' one, since it behaves, at

 least to the above extent, as a determinant should. In the final section of the paper, Ore
 extended these ideas to determinants of nth order.

 2.3 Extension to semigroups

 We have seen that an integral domain, and also a certain type of non-commutative

 ring without zero divisors, may easily be embedded in a (skew) field simply by the
 construction of the corresponding (skew) field of fractions. Moreover, the methods

 employed by Steinitz and Ore were almost entirely multiplicative in nature, and may

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 652 C. Hollings

 therefore be adapted immediately to the semigroup case. In this way, we obtain two

 theorems concerning the embedding of a commutative cancellative semigroup, and

 a particular non-commutative cancellative semigroup, in a group, namely, its group

 of fractions: the multiplicative group of the (skew) field of fractions obtained via the

 construction of Steinitz (or Ore). As noted in the introduction, however, this adaptation

 to the semigroup case seems to have been regarded as so obvious that it was a long time

 before any mathematician took the trouble to write down the theorems rigorously. The

 earliest explicit statement and proof of these results came in the work of Dubreil, which

 we will see in Sect. 4. For future reference, however, we record here the semigroup
 versions of both Steinitz' and Ore's Theorems:

 Theorem 4 (Semigroup version of Steinitz' Theorem) Every commutative cancella

 tive semigroup may be embedded in a group, namely, its group of fractions.11

 Theorem 5 (Semigroup version of Ore's Theorem) Any cancellative semigroup in

 which every pair of elements has a common right multiple may be embedded in a

 group, namely, its group of fractions.

 3 Early results for semigroups

 3.1 Sushkevich goes awry

 As observed in the introduction, the first author to give an explicit treatment of the

 embedding problem for semigroups was the Russian mathematician A. K. Sushkevich.

 This was in a 1935 paper in Ukrainian, entitled On the extension of a semigroup to
 a whole group' ('Προ nonmpeHHH niBrpyim ao uîjioï rpynn'). Unlike some of
 the authors we will meet in later sections, Sushkevich gave no explicit indication of

 what led him to consider the embedding problem, although the final part of his paper

 does mention the embedding of integral domains in fields, and contains a passing

 reference to van der Waerden's Moderne Algebra. The goal of the above-mentioned

 paper was the construction of a group 'around' any given (cancellative) semigroup,

 thereby 'proving' that any such semigroup may be embedded in a group.

 The main technique employed in Sushkevich's 1935 embeddings paper had its

 origins in some work of the previous year. In an earlier (German) paper, 'Ûber Semi

 gruppen' (Suschkewitsch 1934), Sushkevich had given a decomposition of an arbitrary

 semigroup as the union of two disjoint parts. To modern eyes, this decomposition is

 somewhat simple-minded, for it is merely the separation of a semigroup into its group
 of units and the two-sided ideal formed of all non-units.12 Sushkevich termed the

 former the group part (Gruppenteil, or zpynoea nacmuna in the Ukrainian of the

 1935 paper) of the semigroup, and the latter the principal part (Hauptteil·, zoAoena

 nacmuHa). Using this terminology, he had been able to make some elementary obser

 vations, such as the fact that the group part of a semigroup is nonempty if and only if

 11 This may in fact be stated as a slightly stronger result: a commutative semigroup can be embedded in a

 group if and only if it is cancellative (see Clifford and Preston 1961, Sect. 1.10).

 12 A two-sided ideal in a semigroup is defined in the same way as for a ring, but without any mention of

 addition; see Hollings (2009a, p. 502).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 653

 the semigroup has an identity element. It should be noted that, in both the 1934 and

 1935 papers, all of Sushkevich's semigroups were cancellative: his decision to adopt

 the German term 'Semigruppe' for his objects of interest in the 1934 paper, which

 he had not previously employed in his earlier studies of not-necessarily-cancellative
 semigroups, may very well have been influenced by L. E. Dickson's use of 'semi
 group' to denote what we would now term a cancellative semigroup (see Hollings

 2009a, Sect. 3).13 Sushkevich assumed implicitly that none of his (cancellative) semi

 groups were groups. Since any finite cancellative semigroup is necessarily a group,14

 all of Sushkevich's 'Semigruppen' were thus assumed to be infinite. In particular, the

 principal part of a given cancellative semigroup, as a cancellative semigroup itself,

 was necessarily infinite; there was no such restriction on the group part.

 In the paper of 1935, Sushkevich began with a cancellative semigroup 6; the group

 part of Θ was denoted by 0, and its principal part by Sj. Sushkevich's goal was the

 construction of a group into which 6 may be embedded. To this end, he considered

 separately the case where 6 has an identity element, and that where it does not. I give
 here a sketch of his method in each instance:

 (1) 6 has no identity element. By the above comments, 0 = 0, and so 6 = Sj. For

 each X € Sj, introduce a new element X, and denote the_collection of all such by
 Sj. Define a multiplication in Sj by setting Q Ρ = R in Sj whenever PQ = R in

 Sj. It is clear that Sj forms a cancellative semigroup, anti-isomorphic to Sj.

 Next, introduce another newelement Ε and define it to be a two-sided identity

 for all_elements of both Sj and Sj. Further, for any X e Sj and the corresponding
 X e Sj, set

 XX = XX = E, (8)

 thereby making each X a formal inverse for the corresponding X.

 Finally, construct all alternating products of elements from ή with elements

 fromfl:

 PQ, PQ, PQR, TQR, PQRS, PQRS, ... (9)

 Products of the forms in (9) may be multiplied together to obtain other such alter

 nating products simply by applying the rules for multiplication in Sj and Sj, with

 further simplification afforded by the application of (8). Two alternating products

 13 Sushkevich is one of only two authors I have found who used the term 'Semigruppe' (at least in German),

 the modern German term for a semigroup being 'Halbgruppe'. The other author was Fritz Klein-Barmen

 (1943). Moreover, in the Ukrainian of his 1935 embeddings paper, Sushkevich used the term 'nierpyna',
 in contrast to the modern Ukrainian 'HaniBrpyna' ('πϊβ-' and 'ηβπιβ-' both being Ukrainian prefixes
 denoting 'half-' or 'semi-'). We will see similarly unusual terminology in the work of Vlastimil Ptâk in
 Sect. 6 (see, in particular, note 44).

 14 For, suppose that S is a finite cancellative semigroup. It follows immediately from cancellation that

 jS = S = 5s, for any s 6 S. From this, we conclude that, for a fixed s, there exists e e S such that se = s.

 But e is in fact a right identity for any element of S, since any t e S may be written in the form t = us. It

 follows further that e2 = e. Consider the product es, for any s e S. We may write s as eu, for some u e S.
 Then es = e2u =eu = s. Thus, e is a two-sided identity for S. As to inverses, it follows from sS = S that
 there exists s'eS such that ss' = e. Furthermore, ss's = es = s = se, and so it follows from cancellation
 that s's =e. □

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 654 C. Hollings

 are deemed equivalent if one may be obtained from the other by the application

 of the rules for multiplication in 9) or Sj, or through the insertion or deletion of

 factors of the form XX or XX-, otherwise, two such products are distincjL

 Sushkevich denoted by Sji the system formed from the union Sj U Sj U {£},

 together with all products from (9). He argued briefly that Sji is in fact a group.

 The semigroup Sj is thus, apparently, embedded in the group Sj\.

 (2) 6 has an identity element. Starting from the semigroup 6 = <8U Sj, apply the

 construction from case ( 1 ) to the principal part Sj, thereby constructing the 'group'

 Sj ι. Identify the identity Ε off)i with that of 0 and, with this done, form the union

 of Sji and 0. The only products that are not already defined within this union are

 those of elements from Sj with elements from 0. Let A € 0 and Pj_Q,R e Sj; the
 inverse of A in 0 is denoted by A-1. Products of elements from Sj with elements

 from 0 are then defined by the following rules:

 AP = ~Q, if PA~X = Q; (10)
 ΤΑ = Λ, if A~lP = R. (11)

 In fact, these rules have an immediate and somewhat surprising consequence: if

 the first equality in (10) is multiplied on the right by P, and the first equality in

 (11) on the left by P, then:

 A = QP = PR. (12)

 The products QP and PR aie clearly of the forms given in (9), and so they both

 belong to Sj\. Moreover, given any A e 0 and any Ρ e Sj, it is always possible

 to find unique elements Q, R e Sj which satisfy the second equalities in (10) and
 (11). This means that any A € 0 can be written in the form (12). It follows that 0

 is contained in Sji. At this point, Sushkevich had thus, apparently, embedded an

 arbitrary cancellative semigroup in a group—indeed, the same group as in case ( 1 ).

 We know from the comments in the introduction (and will see in more detail in

 the next subsection) that Sushkevich must have gone wrong somewhere—indeed, the

 error lies in his definition of Sj \, as we will see below. Following his presentation of the

 above methods, Sushkevich went on to 'prove' this embedding in a slightly different

 manner. However, since this second method also employs the above construction for

 Sj ι, we need not go into it here. The paper concludes with what would have been a nice

 application of Sushkevich's results, had the preceding parts of the paper been error

 free. Specifically, Sushkevich offered up an extension of his methods for semigroups as

 a new proof Steinitz' Theorem, distinct from the 'Quotientenbildung'. In connection
 with the latter, Sushkevich cited van der Waerden's Moderne Algebra (as well as its

 Russian translation).15

 Regarding the question of what went wrong with Sushkevich's proof, we need look

 no further than A. G. Kurosh's review (Zbl 0013.05502) of the paper for Zentralblattfiir

 15 Not long after this paper was published, Sushkevich presented the 'Quotientenbildung' in both his
 short Ukrainian textbook Elements of new algebra (EAeMenmu ηοθοϊ OAzeâpu) (Sushkevich 1937b, Sect.
 14) and in the 3rd Russian edition of his Foundations of higher algebra (Ocnoeu eucmeti auizeôpvi)

 (Sushkevich 1937a, Sect. 236). In neither case, however, did he mention the semigroup case.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 655

 Mathematik und ihre Grenzgebiete. Kurosh did not identity the error precisely, but he

 did note that Sushkevich had failed to prove adequately that the multiplication infji is

 both well-defined and associative, something that Kurosh considered to be 'certainly

 not trivial'.16 Indeed, this is where I believe the error to be: despite Sushkevich's

 readiness to believe that it was so, it is not at all clear why the multiplication of the

 products (9) should be well-defined.

 Sushkevich's On the extension of a semigroup to a whole group' is not a very

 widely cited paper. This is perhaps because, as we will see in the next subsection, the

 error was picked up very quickly. One of the very few references that I have found to

 it is in Chap. IV of Sushkevich's own 1937 monograph Theory of generalised groups

 ( Teopm o6o6w,eHHbix zpynn), in which he set out in a coherent form the majority of

 his semigroup-theoretic investigations. The relevant passages of the monograph are,

 however, somewhat muddled, and appear to contain a (needless to say, unsuccessful)

 attempt to patch up the proof of the embedding theorem. At the same time, we find an

 acknowledgment of the work of Maltsev that demonstrated the error in Sushkevich's
 methods:

 The example presented by Maltsev refutes my previous assertion that any [can

 cellative] semigroup can be extended to a group.17

 We turn our attention to Maltsev's 1937 counterexample in the following subsection.

 3.2 Maltsev's counterexample

 As I will discuss briefly in Sect. 5, it appears to have been A. N. Kolmogorov who

 first drew Maltsev's attention to van der Waerden's problem (see Aleksandrov et al.

 1968, English translation, p. 157). The (negative) solution of the problem was the

 real goal of Maltsev's 1937 paper: the construction of the corresponding semigroup

 counterexample was for him simply a means to an end.

 At the time of submitting his counterexample to Mathematische Annalen (in his

 paper On the immersion of an algebraic ring into a field': Malcev 1937), Maltsev

 was teaching mathematics at a high school near Moscow. He had graduated with a

 first degree from Moscow State University in 1931 but retained a Moscow University

 affiliation in connection with the research work that he was engaged in by the mid
 1930s (see Sect. 5). Indeed, S. I. Nikolskii (1972, English translation, p. 179) later

 recalled that around this period, Maltsev 'haunted the mathematics library' of Moscow

 State University. We might therefore suppose a broad familiarity on Maltsev's part with
 the mathematical literature of the time. I believe, however, that there is some small

 doubt as to whether he had seen Sushkevich's 1935 embeddings paper—I suggest

 that he knew it only through the Zentralblatt review that we saw in the preceding

 subsection. I make this assertion because of the style in which Maltsev subsequently

 cited Sushkevich in his own paper: rather than using Ukrainian (surely an easy option

 16 'gewiBnicht trivial'.

 17 'ΠρκΜβρ, πρΗΒΟΛΗΜΗϋ MajifaijeBUM, onpoeepraeT Moe npeaosee yTBepACAeime ο tom, hto
 β CHKy κ) nonyrpynny mohcho αοποαηητβ ao rpynnu' (Sushkevich 1937c, p.91, footnote 1).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 656 C. Hollings

 for a native Russian speaker?), Maltsev listed Sushkevich's paper under the German

 version of its title ('Ûber die Erweiterung der Semigruppe bis zur ganzen Gruppe'),

 which had appeared in the German summary at the end of the paper, and which was
 also used in the Zentralblatt review. Moreover, Maltsev used the German version of

 Sushkevich's name ('Suschkewitsch'), as employed in the German summary, and by

 Zentralblatt. Maltsev also gave the language of Sushkevich's paper as being Russian—
 Zentralblatt makes the same mistake. I contend that Maltsev would not have made

 this error himself, had he seen the paper. Of course, the mistakes may not have been

 Maltsev's—they could have been the work of an over-zealous editor who, with the

 best of intentions, sought to make Maltsev's references consistent with Zentralblatt.

 Whether or not Maltsev had seen Sushkevich's paper, he made no detailed comments

 on its content, nor did he need to: it was enough for him to state Sushkevich's erroneous

 result, and then present his own counterexample. As already commented, Maltsev's

 1937 paper was published in Mathematische Annalen, although it did not appear

 in German, but, rather, in English. It begins, like Sushkevich's paper, by defining a

 'semigroup' to correspond to the modern notion of a cancellative semigroup. As a
 reference for his notion of 'semigroup', Maltsev cited O. Yu. Schmidt's monograph

 Abstract theory of groups {Abcmpanmuast meopw zpynn) of 1916; an examination
 of the latter text reveals that, like Sushkevich later on, Schmidt derived his sense of

 the word 'semigroup' from Dickson (Schmidt 1916, p. 55). Thus, although Schmidt

 employed the modern Russian term for a general semigroup ('nojiyrpynna'), he used

 it to mean a cancellative semigroup.

 Further down the first page of his paper, Maltsev made the following observations,

 which include his only direct reference to Sushkevich (with the full citation in a

 footnote, which I do not reproduce here):

 It can be easily proved that every commutative semigroup can be „immersed"
 (eingebettet) into a group... However, the analogous question concerning non

 commutative semigroups, as far as I know, remained unsolved.

 Prof. A. Suschkewitsch has published a proof...that every semigroup can be

 immersed into a group. However, we shall construct ...a semigroup which can

 not be immersed into a group; thus, Professor Suschkewitsch's result fails to be

 true (Malcev 1937, p. 686).

 The first sentence in this quotation is of course a statement of the semigroup version

 of Steinitz' Theorem (our Theorem 4). Maltsev attached a footnote to the end of this

 sentence, explaining that the result may be proved in much the same way as for integral

 domains: via the construction of the group of fractions. We thus have, seemingly for the

 first time, an explicit statement of Theorem 4, if not an explicit proof. In connection
 with the original 'Quotientenbildung', Maltsev cited van der Waerden's Moderne

 Algebra. It is therefore not unreasonable to suggest that the inspiration for his 1937

 work came from a reading of van der Waerden. The parenthetic German term in the

 above quotation (as well as in one below) is also quite suggestive.

 In spite of Maltsev's initial discussion of semigroups (which he probably included

 because it became important later on, and was unlikely to have been entirely familiar to

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 657

 his readers), we can see from his title that the ring case was his main object of interest.

 After stating the embedding problem for cancellative semigroups, he commented:

 An analogous problem exists for rings, viz. can every ring without divisors of

 zero (Nullteilern) be immersed in a field... ? (Malcev 1937, p. 686)

 This is of course van der Waerden's problem, Maltsev's main concern: he constructed

 a counterexample to demonstrate that the problem has a negative solution. The cor

 responding counterexample for semigroups appeared as part of Maltsev's ring coun

 terexample: he first constructed a cancellative semigroup Sj that cannot be embedded

 in a group, and then constructed a ring without zero divisors around this. Since the

 multiplicative semigroup of this ring contains fy, it cannot be embedded in a skew

 field. Thus, in Maltsev's words, 'a problem mentioned by van der Waerden finds its
 solution' (Malcev 1937, p. 687).

 The key to Maltsev's counterexample(s) is his 'condition Z', which he introduced

 in the first section of the paper:

 Condition Z. For a cancellative semigroup f), if A, B, C, D, X, Y, U, V e Sj and

 Maltsev proved immediately that condition Ζ is necessary for the embedding of a

 cancellative semigroup in a group (Malcev 1937, p. 687):

 Proof Suppose that Sj may be embedded in a group. We may therefore speak of inverses

 of elements of Sj (within the group). This, in turn, means that we may rearrange the

 AX = BY, CX = DY, AU = BV, (13)

 then

 CU = DV. (14)

 expressions in (13), to obtain

 B~1A = YX~\ D~lC = YX-\ B~lA = VU-\

 which combine to give D~xC = VU~X. Further rearrangement yields (14). □

 In general, however, condition Ζ is not sufficient (see, for example, the later counterex

 ample of Holvoet 1959). Nevertheless, with the necessity of condition Ζ established,

 Maltsev was able to outline his procedure for the construction of the required coun
 terexample:

 Hence [it] follows that if a [cancellative] semigroup Sj does not satisfy the con

 dition Ζ then this semigroup can not be immersed into a group. In the next

 [section] we shall construct a [cancellative] semigroup not satisfying the condi

 tion Ζ (Malcev 1937, p. 687).

 Note that Maltsev's counterexample also demonstrates that whilst cancellation may

 be necessary for embedding, it is not, in general, sufficient.

 Since it is reasonably straightforward, I outline here Maltsev's recipe for construct

 ing his counterexample. First of all, we take all possible strings of the eight letters

 a, b, c, d, x, y, u, ν and identify the following 'corresponding pairs' of letters:

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 658 C. Hollings

 ax <—*■ by, cx <—» dy, au <—► bv.

 We may then use these relations to transform one string into another, by replacing

 any of the above pairs of letters with their corresponding pair; Maltsev referred to this

 procedure as an 'elementary transformation'. Two strings are deemed 'equivalent'

 (denoted a ~ β, for strings α, β) if we may get from one to the other via a finite

 sequence of elementary transformations; it is clear that this notion of 'equivalence' is

 indeed an equivalence relation. Moreover, it is a congruence: if, for strings α, β, y, S,
 we have a ~ β and γ ~ S, then ay = βδ, where the binary operation on strings is

 concatenation. The congruence property then makes it possible for us to write down
 a well-defined multiplication of equivalence classes:18 (α)(β) = (αβ), where (a)
 denotes the equivalence class of a string a. With respect to this operation, the collection

 5) of all equivalence classes thus forms a semigroup, indeed, a cancellative semigroup.

 Focusing, in the first instance, on equivalence classes of singleton strings, Maltsev
 observed that condition Ζ does not hold in Sj: (a)(x) = (b)(y), (c)(x) = (d)(y) and
 (a)(u) = (b)(v), but (c)(u) Φ (d)(v). It follows that fj may not be embedded in a

 group. The counterexample in the ring case then consists of all linear forms ^ %i >

 where X; € fj and k,· e Q, and only a finite number of the k, are non-zero. Maltsev thus

 constructed a non-commutative ring without zero divisors which is not embeddable

 in a skew field, and whose multiplicative semigroup is not embeddable in a group.

 This later gave rise to a more subtle problem: are there rings which do not embed in

 skew fields but whose multiplicative semigroups embed in groups? On this problem,
 see Hollings (2014b, Sect. 5.5).

 Maltsev's paper of 1937 merely marked the beginning of his comprehensive work

 in this area. Indeed, it appears that even as early as 12th April 1936 (the date at the end

 of the paper), Maltsev had already obtained the deeper results that we will consider in

 Sect. 5, for we find the following in his introduction:

 We have also found the necessary and sufficient conditions for the possibility of

 immersion of a semigroup into a group. However these are too complicated to
 be included in this paper (Malcev 1937, p. 687).

 Although Maltsev's necessary and sufficient conditions are, in essence, of much the

 same form as condition Z, the theory required to set them up is indeed rather compli
 cated, as we will see.

 3.3 Sushkevich revisited

 We conclude this section by returning briefly to Sushkevich. Following his material

 on embeddings in Theory of generalised groups, Sushkevich does not appear to have

 attempted to make any further contributions in this area. Quite how Sushkevich reacted

 to Maltsev's disproof of his 'theorem' is something we will never know, although it is

 interesting to note that the two of them almost certainly met on at least one occasion, in

 18 Indeed, this is what is going on in the background of the 'Quotientenbildung'. For more on this idea,
 see Howie (1995, Sect. 1.5) or Hollings (2007).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 659

 1939. On 13th—17th November of that year, an All-Union Conference on Algebra was

 held in Moscow (see Anon 1940). During this conference, both Sushkevich and Malt
 sev delivered lectures in the afternoon session of 16th November, one after the other.

 Sushkevich began the session with a talk entitled, somewhat vaguely, On one type of
 generalised group' ('06 οληομ Tune o6o6meHHhix rpynn'). Maltsev followed
 with On extensions of associative systems' (Ό pacmnpeHHflx accomiaTHBHbix

 cHCTeM'), in which he reported, amongst other things, his necessary and sufficient

 conditions for the embeddability of a semigroup in a group. It would therefore be

 rather surprising if Sushkevich had not been exposed to Maltsev's wider work here,
 even if he had not encountered it earlier.

 As a final comment on this matter, we note that there is in fact a small piece of

 (admittedly, circumstantial) evidence to suggest that, in later years, Sushkevich tried

 to disown his 1935 paper: it is the only significant omission from an otherwise quite

 comprehensive publications list, in Sushkevich's own hand, that once comprised part

 of his Kharkov State University personnel file, and which is now held by the Ukrainian

 State Archives (Kharkiv Region).19

 4 Further sufficient conditions

 We have already seen two conditions for the embeddability of a semigroup in a group:

 Ore's sufficient condition My and Maltsev's necessary condition Z. Before considering

 Maltsev's later work in this area, we temporarily abandon our hitherto chronological

 account, and pause to consider some further sufficient conditions which were obtained

 by various authors in the 1940s, the inspiration for several of which came from Ore's

 original sufficient condition My.

 4.1 Right regularity: Paul Dubreil

 The first author whom we will consider here is the French mathematician Paul

 Dubreil.20 The study of semigroups in France owes it initial impetus to Dubreil's

 work (see Hollings 2014b, Chap. 7); it is one of his early semigroup-theoretic papers

 that concerns us here. In this paper, Dubreil considered not merely the possibility of

 embedding a semigroup in a group, but also the manner in which the embedding may
 be realised. A. H. Clifford and G. B. Preston, in their 1961 textbook The algebraic

 theory of semigroups, commented:

 Although [the semigroup version of] Ore's Theorem is phrased as a sufficient

 condition for embeddability in a group, it was noted by Dubreil... that [Ore's

 condition] is nonetheless a necessary and sufficient condition for the embedding

 to be of [a] simple type (Clifford and Preston 1961, p. 36).

 19 Φ.Ρ-2782, on. 20, cnp. 572, apK. 10-12.

 20 For biographies of Dubreil, see Lesieur (1994) and Lallement (1995), and also the autobiographical
 material contained in Dubreil (1981, 1983).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 660 C. Hollings

 Dubreil's study of embeddings began with a very short communication, 'Sur les

 problèmes d'immersion et la théorie des modules', in Comptes rendus hebdomadaires

 des séances de l'Académie des Sciences de Paris. Early in the paper, Dubreil acknowl

 edged Maltsev's use of the necessary condition Ζ, before commenting in passing about

 his necessary and sufficient conditions:

 Subsequently, this author has given necessary and sufficient conditions for there

 to exist a group containing a given [cancellative] semigroup.21

 We can in fact say with some certainty that Dubreil's knowledge of Maltsev's work

 came from van der Waerden and H. Richter, for Dubreil made the following acknow
 ledgment:

 This memoir [that is, Maltsev's paper of 1939] and its translation were kindly

 communicated to me by Messrs. B. L. van der Waerden and H. Richter, to whom

 I express my sincere thanks.22

 The translation mentioned here was presumably an ad hoc, privately circulated one,

 since it pre-dated the systematic translation of Soviet mathematical work by many

 Maltsev's necessary and sufficient conditions, however, were not Dubreil's imme

 years.

 diate concern:

 But another result of intermediate generality, and of particular interest for its

 ease of handling and possibilities for application, was given in 1931 by O. Ore

 23

 Dubreil next quoted Ore's Theorem (our Theorem 2), though he replaced Ore's 'reg

 ular' by the new term right regular (régulier à droite); left regularity may be defined

 similarly, in terms of common left multiples. Amongst Dubreil's observations con

 cerning this condition is the fact that Maltsev's condition Ζ follows from right (or left)

 regularity.

 The major semigroup-theoretic result of Dubreil's paper, which he stated without

 proof, follows, in part, from Theorem 2 (Dubreil 1943, p. 626):

 Theorem 6 For a cancellative semigroup S to be contained in a group G, and for

 every element ξ of G to admit at least one representation in the form ξ = a ■ b~l,for

 a, b e S, it is necessary and sufficient that S be right regular.

 Note that since the semigroup in this theorem is non-commutative in general, an

 element of the form a ■ b~l ( a left fraction/fraction à gauche—so called for seemingly

 21 'Ultérieurement, cet auteur a donné des conditions nécessaire et suffisantes pour qu'il existe un groupe
 contenant un semi-group donné' (Dubreil 1943, p. 626). Note that in his use of the term 'semi-groupe'
 to mean a cancellative semigroup, Dubreil was almost certainly following de Séguier (1904), who had

 originally coined the term for this notion (see Hollings 2009a, Sect. 3); Dubreil termed a general semigroup
 a 'demi-groupe'.

 22 'Ce Mémoire et sa traduction m'ont été aimablement communiqués par MM. B. L. van der Waerden et

 H. Richter, auxquels j'exprime mes sincères remerciements* (Dubreil 1943, p. 626, footnote 2).

 23 'Mais un autre résultat, d'un degré de généralité intermédiaire, et particulièrement intéressant par sa
 maniabilité et ses possibilités d'application, a été donné dès 1931 parO. Ore ...' (Dubreil 1943, p.626).

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 661

 arbitrary reasons) is an entity distinct from an element of the form a-1 · b (a right

 fraction/fraction à droite).

 With regard to the above quotation from Clifford and Preston, Theorem 6 gives the

 remarked-upon 'simple type' of an embedding: an embedding into the group of left

 fractions. Thus, although right regularity is only sufficient for embedding in general,

 it is both necessary and sufficient for embedding specifically into a group of left
 fractions.

 DubreiTs paper concludes with the statement of four theorems on right regular

 rings, with a view, like in Ore's paper, towards the study of systems of linear equations

 over a right regular ring; this goes some way towards explaining the second part of
 DubreiTs title: 'the theory of modules'.

 Such material on embeddings also appears in Dubreil's 1946 textbook Algèbre
 (Chap. V, Part A, Sect. 1). The discussion here also takes in right regularity and

 condition Z, but the presentation is a little different, if only cosmetically. Perhaps with

 the intention of mirroring Maltsev, Dubreil (1946, p. 138) introduced the following
 condition:

 Condition C. Given a group G with subsemigroup S, every element ξ e G may be

 written as a left fraction of elements of 5: ξ = ab~*, for a,b e S.

 Theorem 6 may thus be rephrased more succinctly in terms of condition C.

 Later in his section on semigroup embeddings, Dubreil considered formal right

 fractions of semigroup elements in a slightly different setting, showing that they exhibit

 the structure, not of a group, but of a Brandt groupoid—see Coutinho (2004, p. 272).

 We note also that DubreiTs Algèbre contains what appears to be the first explicit proof
 of Theorem 5.

 4.2 Left quasi-regularity: RaoufDoss

 The next sufficient condition to be considered here is another that was derived from

 Ore's original, and was due to Raouf Doss. Doss is one of our examples of a math
 ematician who studied the embedding problem early in his career, and then never

 returned to it again (the majority of his subsequent mathematical work was in Fourier

 analysis). Moreover, he gave no indication of what inspired him to carry out this work,
 or what led him to the condition contained therein.

 Doss' contribution to this subject may be found in a paper entitled 'Sur l'immersion

 d'un semi-groupe dans un groupe', published in 1948.24 Like other authors in this area,

 Doss began with a brief summary of the previous embedding conditions obtained by

 other authors, including Ore's sufficient condition, and Maltsev's necessary and suffi

 cient conditions. He then gave a new condition, based upon that of Ore: a semigroup
 S is called left quasi-regular (quasi-régulier à gauche) if, whenever two elements

 a,b € S have a common left multiple, ra = sb, for some r,s e S, it is possible to

 find r',s' € 5 such that r'a = s'b and at least one of r', s' has a common left multiple

 24 A detailed account of this paper, as well as a general discussion of the embedding problem, may be
 found in a series of articles by Faisant (1971a, b,c, 1972).

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 662 C. Hollings

 with every other element of S. The main, indeed only, result of Doss' paper is the

 following (Doss 1948, p. 139):

 Theorem 7 Every cancellative left quasi-regular semigroup can be embedded in a

 group.

 Since left quasi-regularity follows from left regularity, Theorem 6 may be obtained

 as a corollary to Theorem 7. Doss' proof of the above theorem involves the verification

 of a system of Maltsev conditions (see Sect. 5), and so it was necessary for him to give

 a brief account of Maltsev's criteria for embeddability. To the best of my knowledge,
 besides Maltsev's own, this is the earliest detailed account of Maltsev's conditions,

 and it was praised by A. H. Clifford in Mathematical Reviews (MR0029384): 'The

 author's clear statement of these conditions is very welcome'.

 As already noted, Doss made no comment on his motivation for this study. His

 condition is certainly a generalisation of Ore's, so perhaps Doss set out to find a more

 general sufficient condition than that employed by Ore and Dubreil. He certainly had

 new tools at his disposal for such an endeavour: his appears to be the first paper to
 have made extensive use of Maltsev's conditions.

 4.3 Common multiples revisited: Thoralf Skolem

 I conclude this section with the contributions of Thoralf Skolem to the embedding

 problem. However, no new conditions will be given here: Skolem rediscovered Ore's

 condition apparently independently.

 Skolem's first statement of an embedding theorem for semigroups appears at the

 beginning of his paper 'Some remarks on semi-groups' (Skolem 1951). Unfortunately,

 it is a 'theorem' which, as we well know by now, is not true: Skolem asserted that every

 cancellative semigroup can be embedded in a group. He attempted no detailed proof

 of this result, merely stating: Ί will only give a hint of the proof of the... assertion'

 (Skolem 1951, p. 43). His 'hint', sadly, is rather familiar to us from Sect. 3 : he suggested

 the adjunction of formal inverses to the given semigroup, and arrived at alternating

 products of the form:

 a"1 be-1■■■ ,ab~lc

 Thus, we see that Skolem fell into the same trap as Sushkevich: for Skolem, just as for

 Sushkevich, there is no guarantee that the multiplication of such alternating products
 is well-defined.

 By the following year, however, Skolem appears to have spotted his mistake; he gave

 the following result at the beginning of his paper Ά theorem on some semi-groups'

 (Skolem 1952, p. 72):

 Theorem 8 Let Η be a semigroup with left and right cancellation, and suppose that

 every pair of elements has a common left (or right) multiple. Then Η can be embedded

 in a group.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 663

 This is of course a result which we know to be true, thanks to our study of the work

 of both Ore and Dubreil. Perhaps not one to make the same mistake twice, Skolem

 provided a full proof of this theorem. He proved it, as we might expect, via the con

 struction of a group of fractions. Indeed, Skolem's proof is much the same as Ore's.

 Any hint of motivation is, unfortunately, lacking. Skolem may not have had access to

 a particularly wide range of foreign sources,25 but it is hard to believe that he did not

 know about Ore's Theorem—not only because this seems to have been a well-known

 result, and is perhaps the only common thread running through much of the work
 considered so far, but also because Skolem had been Ore's supervisor, and it would

 have been perfectly natural for him to have kept track of his former student's work. I

 suggest therefore that, although he made no reference to Ore (indeed, Skolem does not

 appear to have been one for extensive bibliographies), Skolem's proof of Theorem 8

 was an attempt to fill what he perceived as a gap in the literature: a semigroup version

 of Ore's Theorem. Given his apparent isolation, it is not unreasonable to suppose that,

 apart perhaps from Ore's, Skolem had not seen any of the work we have studied so

 far. That he had not seen Maltsev's is strongly suggested by a comment made after his

 proof of Theorem 8, in reference to his earlier error:

 In a previous paper... I set forth this theorem without the restriction that two

 elements always possess a common left (or right) multiple. I doubt, however,

 whether the theorem is generally true without the said restriction (Skolem 1952,

 p. 77).

 of Dubreil's:

 A further remark tells us that Skolem's work was indeed carried out in ignorance

 After this note was printed I got acquainted with the fact that the above theo

 rem has been proved before. Indeed a treatment of this matter can be found in

 P. Dubreil Algèbre... It is a pity that I did not know this earlier, because I would

 then instead of this note have written something about the more difficult case

 when common left or right multiples do not always exist (Skolem 1952, p. 77).

 Skolem does not appear to have returned to this subject ever again (at least not in

 print)—perhaps he subsequendy 'got acquainted' with Maltsev's work as well?

 5 Maltsev's embeddability conditions

 Anatolii Ivanovich Maltsev (1909-1967) was born near Moscow, and studied mathe

 matics at Moscow State University in the early 1930s.26 Upon graduation, he took a

 teaching post at Ivanovo State Pedagogical Institute (now Ivanovo State University),

 at which institution he remained until 1960, when he moved to the newly founded

 25 His papers were published mostly in Norwegian journals, and have thus not been widely available
 internationally (see Fenstad 1996); we may speculate that the opposite was also true and that Skolem did

 not have wide-ranging access to foreign sources.

 26 A non-exhaustive list of biographical articles on Maltsev is: Aleksandrov et al. (1968), Anon (1989),
 Dimitrié (1992), Gainov et al. (1989), Khalezov (1984), Kurosh (1959), Malcev (2010) and Nikolskii(1972).
 Maltsev also features in Sinai (2003, pp. 559-560).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 664 C. Hollings

 Novosibirsk State University. Ivanovo's proximity to Moscow enabled Maltsev to

 travel regularly into the city to discuss his burgeoning research work, principally on

 mathematical logic, with A. N. Kolmogorov, who was eventually able to arrange a

 Moscow research studentship for Maltsev. Biographies of Maltsev stress the influence

 that Kolmogorov had upon him. In particular, Aleksandrov et al. (1968, English trans

 lation, p. 157) note that Maltsev's 1937 paper, which we discussed in Sect. 3, was 'the

 solution of a problem raised by Kolmogorov'.

 The necessary and sufficient conditions (for the embedding of a cancellative semi

 group in a group) which Maltsev merely hinted at in his 1937 paper appeared instead in

 a Russian paper of 1939, entitled On the immersion of associative systems in groups'
 (Ό BKJiKmeroiH accomraTHBHUx cucTeM β rpynnbi').27 As the title suggests,
 semigroups were now studied for their own sake, rather than as a means to an end, as

 had been the case in the earlier paper.

 An interesting feature of Maltsev's 1939 paper is his choice of terminology. Rather

 than following Sushkevich (and Schmidt), as he might have done, by taking the Russian

 equivalent of the term 'semigroup' (= 'nojiyrpynna'), he instead adopted the name
 that appears in the title of his paper: 'associative system' ('accoirnaTHBHafl chc

 TeMa'). Some years later, this term would be adopted, for a short period, by other

 Russian authors for the modern general notion of a semigroup (see Hollings 2014b,

 Chap. 9), but for Maltsev it denoted a cancellative semigroup. He justified his interest

 in such objects by pointing to their appearance as the purely multiplicative parts of

 certain rings, and also made the following remarks concerning groups:

 Some problems of the theory of groups are connected with the properties of

 associative systems. However, for a solution of these problems, a more thorough
 study is needed of the conditions under which a given associative system may

 be considered as part of some group.28

 However, Maltsev gave no indication of the 'problems of the theory of groups' that
 he had in mind.

 With the context of earlier work in this area established, I will now give a brief sketch

 of the necessary and sufficient conditions set forth by Maltsev for the embeddability of a

 cancellative semigroup in a group. However, since Maltsev's presentation is somewhat

 brief in places, I do not propose to follow his original exposition slavishly. Instead, I

 will follow that of a Canadian mathematician, George C. Bush, which appeared in a

 PhD thesis of 1961 and then in a paper of 1963. Bush's presentation is particularly clear,

 21 Although, as noted in the introduction, I use the terms 'embed/embedding/embeddability' elsewhere, I
 nevertheless choose to translate 'BKJitoneHiie' as 'immersion' here, rather than 'inclusion' or 'insertion',

 in order to mirror Maltsev's own English terminology in Malcev (1937). Another often-used Russian word
 for 'embedding'/'imbedding' is 'BMememie' ('containment'), but this word only seems to have come

 into use in this context with later papers (see Schein 1961, for example). Other terms are 'norpynceHne'
 ('immersion'), as used in Lyapin (1960). and 'BJioHceHne' ('enclosure'), as used in the Russian translation
 of Clifford and Preston (1961).

 28 'HeKOTOtie npoojieMU τβορκΗ rpynn tîuokc cBttsaHbi co cuoMcTBaMH accomiaTHBHiJx
 CHCTeM. Οληεκο. am pemeHne βτηχ προβηβΜ ηθο6χολημο ÔOJiee TmaTeMHoe H3yneHHe
 ycAOBHh, πρη κοτορυχ a&hhm accomtaTHBHan cncTeMa mo/Kct 6μτβ ρ ac c. m at ρ hb aeM a Kan
 nacTb Ηβκοτοροϋ rpynnbi' (Maltsev 1939, p. 331).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 665

 and has the virtue of using much of Maltsev's original notation and terminology.29

 Aside from his amplification of certain parts of Maltsev's proofs, Bush also made some

 original contributions in this area, which we will come to in due course (Sect. 8).

 Let 21 be a cancellative semigroup with identity element e. For each χ e 21, we

 introduce new elements x+ and x~, not in 21. In Maltsev's original paper, x~ was

 an ideal element of the first kind {udeaAbnuu OAeMenm nepeozo poda), whilst x+

 was an ideal element of the second kind (udeaAbHbiU dAeMewm emopozo poda); to

 Bush, x+ was the formal right element associated with x, whilst x~ was the formal

 left element.

 Let S denote the collection of all finite strings made up of elements from 21

 and of ideal elements of both kinds. We permit certain elementary transformations

 (oAeMewnapHbie npeo6pa3oeaHiisf) on strings in S, for any χ e 21:

 (a) we may insert either x~x or xx+ between any two adjacent entries in a string;

 (β) we may delete x~x and jcjc+ from a string;

 (γ) for a, b e 21 with ab = c, if a and b appear as adjacent entries in a string, then

 (5) if a e 21, and a = be, for some b, c € 21, then we may replace any appearance of

 we may replace them by c;

 α in a string by be.

 As in Sect. 3.2, two strings are deemed equivalent if we can get from one to the

 other via a finite sequence of elementary transformations; Maltsev termed such a

 sequence of transformations a chain (penouκα). Once again, this 'equivalence' is in

 fact a congruence, and so we may multiply equivalence classes in a sensible way. It

 may then be shown that the collection 0 of all equivalence classes forms a group

 with respect to this multiplication. This notion of equivalence may also be applied to

 elements of 21: these are simply the strings in 5 that contain no ideal elements of either

 kind. Moreover, by (y) above, any such string may be reduced to a singleton string.

 In this connection, Maltsev (1939, p. 332) noted the following lemma for future use:

 Lemma 1 The cancellative semigroup 21 may be embedded in a group if and only if

 distinct elements of Hi are not equivalent.

 Bush (1963a, Lemma 1) later turned this result around and stated it as: 21 may be
 embedded in a group if and only if equivalent elements of 21 are also equal. We can

 see that if equivalent elements are indeed equal, then 0 contains a copy of 21.

 Maltsev recognised, however, that, when considering chains of elementary trans

 formations, we may in fact restrict our attention to those of a particular type, which

 he termed a normal chain of transformations (HopMaAbHOH ν,εηοηκα npeodpaa

 oeanuii): a chain of elementary transformations, during whose application no trans

 formations occur to the left of any ideal element of the first kind, or to the right of

 any ideal element of the second kind. Introducing a new notion of equivalence (one

 for chains, rather than strings), Maltsev considered two chains to be equivalent if they

 have the same initial and final strings. Combining this with the notion of a normal

 chain, we have the following:

 29 More specifically, the notation used in Bush (1961) is more or less identical to that of Maltsev; the

 notation used in Bush (1963a) is somewhat simpler. Other accounts of Maltsev's conditions may be found
 in Clifford and Preston (1967, Sect. 12.6) and Cohn (1965, Sect. VII.3).

 Ώ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 666 C. Hollings

 Theorem 9 Every chain of transformations whose initial and final strings are ele

 ments o/2l ( that is, strings which contain no ideal elements of either kind) is equivalent

 to some normal chain (Maltsev 1939, p. 332).

 It is clear that if a chain of elementary transformations is applied to an element

 of 21, with the result also being an element of 21, then any ideal elements that are

 inserted during this process must at some later point be deleted. A chain of elementary

 transformations therefore determines a sequence of insertions and deletions of ideal

 elements, a sequence which, as we will see below, assumes a particularly simple form
 in the case of a normal chain.

 At this point in his paper, Maltsev modified his notation. He introduced the symbols

 Ai, at, Bi, bi, Ri, r,·, L,·, /,· (i = 1,2,...), with the assumption that these may be used

 to represent all elements of the given cancellative semigroup 21. Notice that, although

 Maltsev made no explicit statement to this effect, his new notation implies that 21 is

 countable. In addition to the above symbols, Maltsev introduced the symbols I*, L*

 (i = 1,2,...) to stand for ideal elements of the first and second kinds, respectively.

 Maltsev's intention was to use this new notation to represent any sequence of insertions

 or deletions of ideal elements; this sequence would then, in turn, define a (normal) chain

 of elementary transformations. With the restriction to normal chains, it is clear that

 any such sequence of insertions and deletions must contain an even number elements,
 since there must be the same number of insertions of ideal elements as deletions. A

 sequence of η insertions and η deletions in a normal chain may be represented by a

 2n-tuple via the following method:30

 - an insertion of L*L, is denoted by L;;

 - an insertion of If* is denoted by /,·;

 - a deletion of L*L, is denoted by L*\

 - a deletion of If* is denoted by I*.

 Thus, to reproduce an example given by Bush (1961, p. 22) the sequence

 insert L*Li, insert/,·/*, delete L*L;, delete If*,

 is represented by the quadruple (L,, /,·, L*, /*). To any 2n-tuple constructed in this way,

 Maltsev gave the name l-chain (Ι-υ,εηοΗκα). For later use, we observe that /-chains

 are subject to the following restrictions:

 (1) no Lj or /,· can appear more than once;

 (2) L* appears if and only if L,· appears; If appears if and only if /, appears;

 (3) L* cannot appear before L, ; If cannot appear before /,· ;
 (4) if L* appears, and Lk is the nearest L,· to the left of L* for which L* has not yet

 appeared, then j = k\ similarly for I*.

 The above comments outline a procedure for the construction of /-chains from

 normal chains of elementary transformations. The reverse construction is also possi

 ble. Recall that S denotes the collection of all strings which feature elements of the

 30 This part of the discussion is drawn from Bush ( 1 % 1 ). Bush termed these 2 η -tuples I-sequences', Clifford

 and Preston (1967, Sect. 12.6) referred to them as Malcev sequences.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 667

 cancellative semigroup 21 together with ideal elements of both kinds. The 21 -operable

 portion of a string in S is that segment of the string which lies between (but does not

 include) the rightmost ideal element of the first kind and the leftmost ideal element of

 the second kind.31 If the string in question contains no ideal elements of the first kind,

 then the 2l-operable portion extends to the end of the string; if it contains no ideal

 elements of the second kind, then the 2l-operable portion extends to the beginning of

 the string.

 Suppose now that we are given an /-chain of insertions and deletions of ideal

 elements; this is of course subject to restrictions (1)—(4) above. The procedure for

 constructing a chain of elementary transformations is as follows, where we consider

 each of the entries in the /-chain in turn, from left to right:

 - whenever L, appears in the /-chain, we replace the 2l-operable portion of the current

 string by /?,· A, and insert L*L, to obtain /?,L*L,A,;

 - whenever /,· appears in the /-chain, we replace the 2l-operable portion of the current

 string by am and insert /,·/* to obtain a,7,7*r,·;

 - whenever L* appears in the /-chain, we replace the 2l-operable portion of the current

 string by to get and then delete L*L,· to obtain /?, 5, ;

 - whenever If appears in the /-chain, we replace the 2l-operable portion of the current

 string by i>,7, to get />,/,/*r;, and then delete /,/* to obtain bm.

 This mutual constructibility of /-chains and chains of elementary transformations

 is in fact one of the aspects of Maltsev's work that Bush felt the need to amplify:

 these ideas are implicit in Maltsev's paper, but were only made explicit by Bush.

 Nevertheless, Maltsev gave an example of the above procedure by applying it to the

 /-chain (l\, L\, L2, /*, L\, L*)\ he took the empty string as the starting point for the
 corresponding (normal) chain of elementary transformations (Maltsev 1939, p. 335;

 see also Bush 1961, p. 24):

 am -» a\l\l*r\ -► /Mi/fri

 -» R\L*L\A\l*r\ -> RxL\R2A2l\rx
 -*■ RxL\R2L\L2A2l\rx -> RxL\R2L\bxlxl\rx
 ->· RxL*,R2L\bxrx -* R\L*R2L\L2B2
 - r!l'k'b2-*

 R\B\

 Although we have yet to take any account of their nature as elements of 21, we

 nevertheless recall at this point that this is precisely what the symbols A/, a/, B;, /»,·,

 Rj, r,·, Li, li represent. We recall also that any chain of elementary transformations,

 normal or otherwise, may contain applications of the rule for multiplication for 21, or,

 to put this a different way, instances of transformations of the types (y) and (5) in

 our earlier list. In fact, if we look at the above example, we see changes taking place

 that may be interpreted as just such transformations. For example, in moving from the

 second string (axlxl*rx) to the third (Rx Axl*ri), a\l\ has been transformed into R\ Ai.

 Similar transformations occur in the transition from the fourth string to the fifth, the

 31 It should be noted that this terminology was introduced by Bush, and was not used by Maltsev.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 668 C. Hollings

 sixth to the seventh, the eighth to the ninth, and the tenth to the eleventh. Thus, if the

 symbols A,·, a,·, />,·, Rj, r,·, L,·, /; are indeed to represent elements of 21, then we

 need to assume the following relationships amongst them:

 ail\ = R\A\, L\A\ = R2A2, L2A2 = b\l\, b\r\ = L2B2, R2B2 = L\B\. (15)

 Another simple consequence of the above example is the fact that a\r\ and R\B\

 are in fact equivalent, in the sense that they are connected by a chain of elementary
 transformations. It therefore follows from Lemma 1 that if 21 can be embedded in a

 group, then

 R\B\=a\rx. (16)

 For Maltsev, any collection of equations of the form (15) (that is, a system of equations

 corresponding to a normal chain of elementary transformations) was a normal system

 of equations (HopMojibHcur cucmeMa paenecmë); the related equation (16) was the

 completing equation (3aMUKanoe paeencmeo).32 If 21 can be embedded in a group,

 then the completing equation follows from the normal system of equations. Later

 writers have often adopted the term Maltsev (or, indeed, Malcev) condition for the

 implication of a completing equation by a normal system of equations.

 Maltsev's 1939 paper contained no general proof of the methods outlined above;

 as already indicated, it was necessary for Bush later to fill in many of the details.

 Another process that received only an outline in Maltsev's work was a shorter proce

 dure for constructing a normal system of equations from a given /-chain, which avoided

 the need to write out chains of elementary transformations explicitly. However, I do

 not reproduce this method here—I instead refer the interested reader to Bush (1961,
 pp. 26-27).

 To summarise those of Maltsev's ideas that I have outlined here: if a cancellative

 semigroup 21 can be embedded in a group, and if some collection of elements of 21
 satisfies a normal system of equations, then those same elements must also satisfy

 the corresponding completing equation. Conversely, if some elements of 21 satisfy a

 normal system of equations, then they also satisfy the completing equation. But then

 for any normal chain of transformations, the initial and final strings are equal. In other

 words, equivalent elements are equal. By Lemma 1 and Theorem 9, this is a sufficient

 condition for 21 to be embedded in a group. We therefore have the following:33

 Theorem 10 (Maltsev's Embeddability Theorem) For a cancellative semigroup 21 to

 be embedded in a group, it is both necessary and sufficient that, whenever certain

 elements o/2l satisfy some normal system of equations, the corresponding completing

 equation is also satisfied.

 Since there are infinitely many possible /-chains, each giving rise to a Maltsev con

 dition, it follows that a cancellative semigroup must satisfy an infinite set of conditions

 32 Clifford and Preston (1967, Sect. 12.6) subsequently referred to this as the locked equation; to them, a

 normal system of equations was a Malcev system.

 33 Maltsev (1939, p. 335); see also Bush (1963a, Theorem 2) and Clifford and Preston (1967, Theo
 rem 12.17).

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 669

 in order to be embeddable in a group. This is indeed a far cry from the simplicity of

 Sushkevich's supposed solution to the problem.

 Maltsev did little but sketch the above ideas in his 1939 paper. However, in his

 concluding paragraphs, he briefly suggested an interesting way in which Maltsev

 conditions may be used as a means of classifying semigroups. With reference to

 the infinite set of conditions needed to ensure embeddability, he made the following
 remark:

 If it is demanded that only part of these conditions are fulfilled, we obtain an

 associative system, more or less approximating a group.34

 By way of illustration, he considered the conditions arising from the simplest possible

 /-chains. That derived from (/,/*), for example, is simply the cancellation law. Indeed,

 this is the simplest possible Maltsev condition. Moreover, the Maltsev condition that
 arises from the /-chain (/, L, /*, L*) is none other than Maltsev's 1937 condition Ζ

 (see Sect. 3.2). The cosmetic similarity that the reader may have noticed between

 condition Ζ and the general form of a Maltsev condition is therefore no coincidence.

 Maltsev touched only briefly upon this possible classification of semigroups via

 Maltsev conditions, for he recognised that an important component of any such theory

 was missing:

 open.

 For a rigorous execution of the classification outlined here, it is necessary to

 investigate the independence of the given conditions. Such independence is easily

 studied for the simplest chains, for example, those containing only one ideal

 element of the 1st kind. However, in its general form, the question remains

 Indeed, the question of the independence of Maltsev conditions was addressed by

 Maltsev in a paper published the following year: 'On the immersion of associative

 systems in groups Π'. Also considered in this subsequent work was the problem of
 finding a minimal extension (MUHUMaAmoe paciuupenue) of a given cancellative
 semigroup: if a cancellative semigroup 21 can be embedded in a group <S, then the

 embedding is said to be minimal if 21 is not contained in any proper subgroup of <5.

 However, I will not go into this material here, but will focus instead on the question
 of independence.

 Let 21 be a cancellative semigroup that is defined by a presentation36 (R\S). For
 Maltsev, a simple consequence (npocmoe CAedcmeue) of S was any relationship
 between products of positive powers of generators from R that holds in 21. Thus, for

 a semigroup that can be embedded in a group, the completing equation is a simple

 consequence of the corresponding normal system of equations.

 34 'Ecjih noTpeôoBaTb. mtoôij BunojiHBJiacb tojikko MacTi. btkx ycjioBHft, το noaywrcH
 accoRHaTHBHaa CHCieMa, ôojiee hjih ΜβΗββ npH6jiH«atomaHCH κ rpynne' (Maltsev 1939, p. 336).

 35 'IUh ΟΤρΟΓΟΓΟ ΠρΟΒβΛβΗΗΒ HaMCTeHHOS 3AeCI> KJiaCCH({>HKaUHH ΗΘΟβχΟΛΗΜΟ HCCJle
 AOBaTt He3aBHCHMocTB yKa3aHHux ycaoBHft. TaKaa He3aBncnMOCTL jierKo H3yiaeTca am
 npocTeitmHX ΐίβποιβκ, HanpHMep, C0Aepa<amnx tojibko oahh aaeajibHuii θΛβΜβΗΤ 1-ro po,na.
 Οληεκο, β o6meM BHAe Bonpoc ocTaeTCH οτκρωτΗΜ' (Maltsev 1939, p. 336).

 36 Note that the '{■[-)' notation was not used by Maltsev.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 670 C. Hollings

 As in the 1939 paper, /-chains, now renamed schemes (cxeMU), were Maltsev's

 main tools for approaching Maltsev conditions. We shall say that a scheme is fulfilled

 (eunoAHeHHuu) if the corresponding Maltsev condition holds. Moreover, the normal

 semigroup (HopMcuibncur noAyzpynna) of a scheme is the semigroup that is generated

 by the symbols appearing in the normal system of equations corresponding to that

 scheme, and which has those equations as its defining relations. A scheme is irreducible

 {nenpueoduMuii) if none of its proper segments is a scheme. Finally, an irreducible

 normal system (nenpueoduMasr HopMaAbHa.fr cucmeMa) is the normal system of

 equations associated with an irreducible scheme. Using these various notions, Maltsev

 proved the following (Maltsev 1940, Theorem 3(1); see also Bush 1961, Lemma 6.6):

 Lemma 2 The completing equation of an irreducible normal system is not a simple

 consequence of the system: it does not hold in the corresponding normal semigroup.

 But if the normal semigroup in question is to be embedded in a group, then the

 completing equation needs to be a simple consequence of the corresponding normal

 system. Hence, (see Bush 1961, Lemma 6.7):

 Lemma 3 The normal semigroup of an irreducible scheme cannot be embedded in a

 group.

 Recall that schemes (/-chains) were introduced earlier as 2n-tuples, since they

 contain an equal number of insertions and deletions of ideal elements. Maltsev defined

 the length (dnuHa) of such a scheme to be n, and employed this notion in the following

 result, whose proof calls upon Lemma 2 (Maltsev 1940, Lemma 4; see also Bush 1961,
 Theorem 6.1):

 Theorem 11 No irreducible scheme of length η can be a consequence of schemes

 whose lengths are less than n/2.

 The essential purpose towards which Maltsev was building with these various ideas

 was the consideration of finite sets of Maltsev conditions. Suppose that we have such
 a set of conditions. Each condition may be represented by the fulfilment of some

 scheme. We suppose that the longest scheme amongst these has length n. Let 21 be

 the normal semigroup of some scheme of length 2η + 2. By Lemma 3,21 may not be

 embedded in a group. However, all schemes of lengths less than or equal to η must be

 fulfilled in 21 (this may be proved in a similar manner to Theorem 11). We see then

 that although 21 satisfies a finite set of Maltsev conditions, it cannot be embedded in

 a group. In this way, Maltsev arrived at the following:37

 Theorem 12 No finite set of Maltsev conditions is sufficient for the embeddability of

 a cancellative semigroup in a group.

 We have seen then, in what is perhaps the most exhausting section of this paper, that

 Maltsev's conditions for embeddability are far from simple: not because the individual

 Maltsev conditions are complicated (they are certainly not), but because there are

 37 Maltsev (1940, Theorem 4); see also Bush (1961, Theorem 6.2) and Clifford and Preston (1967,
 Sect. 12.8).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 671

 infinitely many of them. Moreover, Theorem 12 tells us that this is a feature of Maltsev's

 embedding results that cannot be bypassed. Indeed, this has had an effect on the

 'usability' of Maltsev's work; it led, for example, to the search for more manageable

 (sufficient) conditions, such as those that we saw in Sect. 4. This is a point to which I

 will return in Sect. 9. However, it is possible to find necessary and sufficient conditions
 in a more 'closed' form, as we will see in the next section.

 6 Ptak's embeddability condition

 In this section, we will consider a slightly lesser-known contribution to the problem of

 embedding semigroups in groups: that of Vlastimil Ptâk. This work is not widely cited

 by other authors—it was published in Czechoslovakia and may therefore not have been

 easily available to other researchers internationally (despite Ptak's obvious efforts to

 spread awareness of his work—see below). The work of Lambek, for example, which

 we will see in the next section, appeared after Ptâk's but contains no reference to it.

 However, Clifford and Preston were well aware of Ptâk's work and included a summary

 of it in their chapter on embeddings (Clifford and Preston 1967, Sect. 12.3). Ptâk's

 work is a little easier to grasp than that of Maltsev, and relies largely upon familiar

 group-theoretic notions, particularly normal subgroups. At least superficially, Ptâk's
 solution is 'algebraic', whereas Maltsev's is 'logical'.

 Vlastimil Ptâk was born in Prague in 1925.38 He studied mathematics and physics

 at Charles University from 1945 to 1948, at the same time working as an assistant

 at the Czech Technical University. Upon completion of his undergraduate studies,

 Ptâk became a research student of the topologist Miroslav Katëtov. In 1952, he joined

 the Mathematical Institute of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences (or the Central

 Mathematical Institute, as it was then called); he obtained his candidate degree39 in

 1955 (which appeared in print as Ptâk 1953b, c), followed by his doctoral degree in
 1963. Ptâk rose through the academic ranks and became a full professor at Charles

 University in 1965. From 1960 until his retirement, he was head of the Department of

 Functional Analysis at the Mathematical Institute. Ptâk died in 1999.

 The vast majority of Ptâk's work was in functional analysis; in 1966 he was awarded

 the Czechoslovak Federal Prize for his work in this area. Indeed, this is the work upon

 which his various biographers focus—his study of embeddings is not mentioned at

 all in any of the biographies I have seen. As with many of the other mathematicians

 mentioned in this article, Ptâk only considered the problem of embedding semigroups

 in groups at the very beginning of his career, and then only briefly. Unlike some of

 the others, however, Ptâk's work in this direction does not appear to have originated

 in a dissertation. In his writing, he gave no indication of what brought him to this

 area, although he began his account of the problem by mentioning van der Waerden's

 38 There is a particularly large number of biographical articles on Ptâk, including: Anon (2000), Fiedler
 (2000), Fiedler and Millier (2000a, b), VavHn (1995, 1996a, b) and Vibovâ (1985).

 39 The candidate of sciences degree is an Eastern European qualification, equivalent to a Western PhD; it

 is often followed, as in Ptâk's case, by a higher research degree, the doctor of sciences, which is sometimes

 compared with a DSc, or a German Habilitation.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 672 C. Hollings

 Moderne Algebra, so this may have been his starting point, as it seems to have been

 for Maltsev. In a 1953 summary of Ptâk's work on embeddings, we find:

 This problem is very important in algebra simply because any ring without

 divisors of zero, after removing the element 0, becomes a semigroup with respect

 to multiplication.40

 In the same paragraph, Ptâk hinted at possible applications in analysis: he mentioned,

 somewhat vaguely, and without specific reference, an embedding theorem due to

 Wintner concerning a semigroup connected with linear differential equations with

 analytic coefficients. He noted that:

 The importance of similar results for analysis is obvious.41

 However, I have been unable to identify the relevant work of Wintner.

 Ptâk's contributions to the problem of embedding semigroups in groups are con

 tained in three papers (Ptâk 1949, 1952, 1953a). However, the content of the three is

 more or less the same. The original material appeared in English in the first of the three

 (1949), whilst the second and third papers are Russian and Czech versions, respec

 tively, of the first.42 Ptâk evidently wanted his work to reach a wide audience. The

 noteworthy thing about Ptâk's work is that, although it was published in 1949, a full

 decade after Maltsev's embeddability conditions, Ptâk was still not aware of the full

 extent of Maltsev's work—he seemingly knew only about the counterexample of 1937.

 Ptâk began his 1949 paper, 'Immersibility of semigroups', with what would appear

 to be a summary of his knowledge of the subject, going back to the problem's origins
 with van der Waerden:

 In elementary textbooks on algebra a well-known theorem is proved, stating that

 every commutative ring without divisors of zero may be imbedded in a field.
 In the first edition of his Moderne Algebra van der Waerden mentioned the

 following problem: Is the same possible even for non-commutative rings without
 divisors of zero?...

 This problem is evidently closely connected with the question concerning the

 existence of a group containing a given non-commutative semigroup. This sec

 ond problem was solved by M. Malcev [mc] ... (Ptâk 1949, p. 3).

 40 'Tento problém je dâulefity ν algebïe samé ji2 proto, 2e ka2dy okruh bez dëlitelâu nuly se stane po

 odstranëni prvku 0 semigrupou vzhledem k nâsobem" (Ptëk 1953a, p. 259). In fact, the removal of 0 is not

 necessary.

 41 "Vyznam podobnych v^sledkâu pro analysu je nasnadë' (Ptâk 1953a, p. 260).

 42 AU three papers carry (essentially) the same title, but in different languages: 'Immersibility of semi

 groups' in English, Ό βκλκήθηημ ceMHrpynn' in Russian, and 'Vnoritelnost semigrup' in Czech (for
 some comments on the terminology used in these titles, see note 44 below). Excluding blank pages, the

 English version is 14 pages long. The Russian version is 22 pages in length—the extra pages are accounted

 for by the fact that this version was expanded very slightly (in particular, some comments were added

 which draw connections with Maltsev's work), and the fact that the typeface is slightly larger with respect

 to the page than in the English version. The Russian version also features a further 3 pages of English

 summary. The Czech version is a slightly modified Czech translation of the English summary from the
 Russian version. We note also the existence of a 1 page French summary of Ptâk's work, based upon the

 Russian version: Thibault (1953b, p. 10).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 673

 The work by Maltsev that is cited here is of course that of his 1937 paper, which

 we saw in Sect. 3.2. The incorrect initial given to Maltsev in the above quotation may

 be an indication that Ptâk was merely aware of Maltsev's work, but had not actually
 seen it.43 However, there is an indication that something very specific in Maltsev's

 work provided inspiration for Ptak's. He noted that

 Malcev found a necessary condition that a semigroup be immersible and con

 structed a semigroup not satisfying that condition (Ptâk 1949, p. 3).

 Ptâk was of course referring to condition Ζ here. He did not quote this condition in

 his original work of 1949, but it does appear in the 1952 Russian version, labelled as

 'condition (M)'. This condition was apparently a source of inspiration for Ptâk; in the

 English summary appended to the 1952 paper, he commented:

 The author's condition is a generalization of the condition (M). By generalizing

 the condition of Malcev it is easy to see, that the following condition is necessary

 for a semigroup to be immersible.

 (M') If [a cancellative semigroup] S contains several elements a\,..., an which

 fulfill some relations, then any relation between the elements a\ an
 which may be deduced from the given relations in a group, must hold in
 5, too.

 If this condition is violated, the semigroup S evidently cannot be imbedded in a

 group. The purpose of the [1949] paper... was to show that this is the only way

 how that can happen, that is to show that the condition mentioned is sufficient

 as well (Ptâk 1952, p. 269).

 This rather vague statement of intent was made precise in due course.

 Returning our attention to the 1949 paper, we see that Ptâk went on:

 On the other hand, there is a sufficient condition found by O. Ore ..., which,
 as we shall see, is not necessary. As far as we know, sufficient and necessary

 conditions have not been published (Ptâk 1949, p. 3).

 The second sentence here is clear evidence of the fact that Ptâk had not seen Maltsev's

 further work. This is something which Ptâk addressed directly in the English summary
 at the end of the 1952 Russian version of his work:

 [My 1949 paper was] written in June 1947, that is at a time when our know

 ledge of Russian literature published during the war was still a very incomplete

 one.... the author did not know of the existence of the papers... of Malcev, which

 contain a solution of the problem... Nevertheless both the method used and the

 result obtained by Malcev are different from those of the author, so that—after

 some hesitation—the author decided to publish [the current] extract from the

 paper... containing his own solution (Ptâk 1952, p. 268).

 43 My first thought upon seeing the 'M.' here was that Ptâk might have meant 'Monsieur Maltsev'. However,

 leaving aside the question of why Ptâk would have addressed Maltsev in this manner, a glance through the

 paper suggests that this is not in fact the case: none of the other authors is referred to as 'Monsieur'—Ore

 appears as Ό. Ore' and Dubreil as 'P. Dubreil' ; van der Waerden is not afforded any initials at all.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 674 C. Hollings

 Thus, it seems that by 1952, Ptâk had finally come across Maltsev's results and had

 decided to try to bring his own to a wider Russian-reading audience.

 The introductory passage of the 1949 paper concludes with the following:

 In the present paper the necessary and sufficient conditions that a semigroup be

 immersible are given; for that purpose a method is developed which can also be

 applied in other investigations (Ptâk 1949, p. 3).

 Ptâk began, as we have seen other authors do, by taking the word 'semigroup' to

 refer to a cancellative semigroup.44 He assumed further that his semigroups always

 contained an identity because he considered there to be 'no essential difference' (Ptâk

 1949, p. 5) between the case where the semigroup has an identity and the case where

 it does not, since if it has none, we may simply adjoin one (in the manner described

 by Howie 1995, p. 2).

 The notion of the free group played an important role in Ptâk's considerations, and

 so he spent some time developing this and other ideas; these are presumably what 'can

 also be applied in other investigations'. Ptâk denoted by 0 the free group on a set of

 generators Γ. The free semigroup on Γ is denoted by 6. Bearing in mind the comments

 above on Ptâk's terminology, 6 is in fact, in modern terminology, the free cancellative

 monoid on Γ. Ptâk observed that if 5 is a semigroup with system of generators Γ, and

 6 is the free semigroup on Γ, then there is a canonical homomorphism H : 6 -»■ S,

 namely, the mapping which takes any string in 6 to the corresponding product in S.

 We note that Ptâk made use of a universal algebraic notion which is very familiar

 in modern semigroup theory: the congruence which is termed the kernel of a given
 homomorphism (see Howie 1995, p. 20). Given any homomorphism θ : S -» Τ
 between semigroups S and Τ, the kernel, p, is the congruence on S defined by the rule
 that

 s pt 4=> 0(i) = 0(f).

 Upon factoring the semigroup S by the congruence ρ (see Sect. 3.2), we have that

 S/p = im Θ. This is semigroup theory's version of the First Isomorphism Theorem,

 and it was noted by Ptâk, although not under this (or any other) name. Ptâk referred to

 the kernel of a homomorphism H as the induced equivalence and typically denoted

 it by E. Perhaps following French authors, such as Dubreil (1946, Chap. IV), Ptâk

 referred to congruences as regular equivalences (in French; équivalences régulières).

 After setting up the basic notions just described, Ptâk began to consider conditions

 for embeddability. In particular, he arrived at the following (Ptâk 1949, Theorems 3.2
 and 3.3):

 Theorem 13 Let S, &, 0 and Ε be as above. Then S may be embedded in a group if

 and only if Ε is induced on β by a regular equivalence on 0.

 44 Curiously, the Russian version of Pték's work employs the term 'ceMHrpynna' ('semigruppa') for
 semigroup, rather than the usual Russian term 'nojiyrpynna' ('polugruppa'). Perhaps he adopted this

 term to mirror Dickson's notion of 'semigroup', that is, to refer specifically to a cancellative object—much

 as Sushkevich appears to have done with his German term 'Semigruppe' (see note 13). I have found no other
 author who uses the term 'ceMHrpynna'. Noteworthy terminology also appears in the Czech version of

 Ptâk's work, where he used the term 'semigrupa'; the modem Czech word for 'semigroup' is 'pologrupa'.

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 675

 In other words, a necessary and sufficient condition for the embeddability of 5 in

 a group is that the £-class of each α 6 6 be the intersection of 6 with the Is'-class
 of a in <5, where £' is some regular equivalence on 0. We note that any regular

 equivalence (congruence) on a group has a special form, in terms of which is it usually

 more convenient to work: the congruence class of the identity is a normal subgroup,

 and all other congruences classes are cosets of that subgroup. Thus, if we factor out

 a group by a congruence, we obtain the factor group in the usual sense, that is, the

 group factored by the corresponding normal subgroup.

 Ptâk's proof of Theorem 13 is fairly straightforward. For the necessity of the above

 condition, he took 91 to be the normal subgroup of 0 which corresponds to the canon
 ical homomorphism H : 0 -» G (that is, its 'kernel' in the usual group-theoretic
 sense), and showed that the £-class of a e 6 is equal to α91Π 6. For sufficiency,

 he took 91 to be the normal subgroup of 0 which corresponds to the regular equiva

 lence on 0, that is, the equivalence class of the identity. It was then a simple matter

 to show that 0/91 contains a subsemigroup which is isomorphic to S. Ptâk gave the

 following as an immediate consequence of Theorem 13, essentially a restatement of

 the comments just made (Ptâk 1949, Theorem 3.4):

 Corollary 1 Let S, Γ, 0 and Ε be as above. Then a necessary and sufficient condition
 for S to be embeddable in a group is that 0 contain a normal subgroup 91 with
 the following property: for any two finite sequences (a\,..., ar) and (b\,..., bs) of

 elements ο/Γ, we have for the corresponding products:

 αϊ · · · ar Ε b\ ■ · · bs «=> α\···αΓ = b\· ■ bs (mod 91). (17)

 Suppose now that a\---ar = a and b\ ■ · · bs = β in 6. Then, using basic facts

 about cosets, (17) may be rewritten in the form:

 This observation appears to have inspired Ptâk to define the following subsets of 0:

 α Ε β <=* αβ'1 6 91.

 97lr = {αβ~ι € 0 : α, / e 6 and α Ε β};

 Μι = {α~ιβ e 0 : α, / € 6 and α Ε β}.

 We put Mo = Mr U 9JÎ/. Let {971x} denote the intersection of all subgroups of 0

 which contain Mx, and let [9JI*] denote the intersection of all normal subgroups of 0

 which contain Mx, where χ — 0, r, /. By manipulating the Mx in certain ways, Ptâk

 arrived ultimately at an embeddability condition in terms of these:45

 Theorem 14 Let S, 6, 0 and Ε be as above. Then S may be embedded in a group if

 and only if, for any α, β € 6,

 αβ~ι e [Mr] =ϊαΕβ. (18)

 45 Ptâk (1949, Theorem 3.6); see also Clifford and Preston (1967, Corollary 12.8). An equivalent version

 of this result, stated in terms of congruences rather than normal subgroups, may be found in Clifford and
 Preston (1967, Theorem 12.7).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 676 C. Hollings

 In 1952, Ptâk described this theorem as being 'an exact formulation of the (rather

 vaguely formulated) condition (M')' (Ptâk 1952, p. 270). We note that, as with Sushke

 vich's work in Sect. 3, Ptâk's work contains the implicit assumption that all semigroups

 under consideration are infinite: all of Ptâk's semigroups were cancellative, and so the

 infinite assumption ensures that, in general, they are not already groups. Thus, as in
 Maltsev's case, we once again have an infinite number of implications as our embed

 dability conditions, this time of the form (18).

 A simple consequence of Theorem 14 provided Ptâk with a sufficient condition for

 embeddability (Ptâk 1949, Theorem 4,3; see also Clifford and Preston 1967, Theo
 rem 12.10):

 Corollary 2 Let S, 6, & and Ε be as above. If{Wlr} is a normal subgroup of <5, then
 S is embeddable.

 Ptâk went on to use Corollary 2 to obtain a new proof of Ore's Theorem for semi

 groups. Given a semigroup S, he wrote down the following condition: for every ordered
 pair (a, b) of elements of 5, there exist elements a/, bi e S such that α/α = bib.
 This is of course (the left-hand version of) Ore's condition My from Sect. 2.2. To

 any (cancellative) semigroup satisfying this condition, Ptâk gave the name Ore semi

 group. He then used Corollary 2 to prove that any Ore semigroup may be embedded

 in a group, thereby giving a new proof of Theorem 5. We note that although Ptâk

 included Dubreil's Algèbre (1946) in his bibliography, he cited it only as a reference

 in connection with the properties of congruences on semigroups, and not in relation

 to embedding problems. He attributed the proof of the semigroup version of Ore's
 Theorem to Ore himself.

 7 Lambek's polyhedral condition

 In this section, I describe the last major approach to the embedding problem to be
 considered here: that of Joachim Lambek. The conditions laid down by Lambek (in

 a 1950 Ph.D. thesis The immersibility of a semigroup into a group, as well as a 1951

 paper of the same name46) are wonderfully simple to present. Lambek's solution is as

 comprehensive as Maltsev's, and yet it is much easier to grasp, thanks to Lambek's

 use of the pictorial aid of polyhedra.

 Joachim Lambek was born in Leipzig in 1922, but escaped Germany for Britain

 in the late 1930s.47 During the Second World War, however, he was transported to

 Canada as an enemy alien, and it was here that he ultimately settled. Lambek entered

 McGill University in Montreal; he obtained a first degree in 1945 and a master's a

 year later. Staying at McGill, Lambek embarked upon mathematical research, under

 the supervision of H. J. Zassenhaus. He completed his PhD in 1950, producing two

 dissertations: Biquaternion vectorfields over Minkowski space and The immersibility
 of a semigroup into a groupé It is of course the second dissertation which will

 46 We note also the existence of what is effectively a French translation of this paper: Thibault (1953b).

 47 These biographical details on Lambek are drawn from Barr (1999) and Barr et al. (2000).

 48 These two are bound together into a single volume in the McGill University Library, with the dissertations

 labelled as parts A and B, respectively.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 677

 concern us here. Lambek's mathematical work went on to encompass a wide range of

 areas, most notably (like Maltsev) mathematical logic and category theory; much of

 his work has concerned mathematical linguistics (see, for example, Lambek 2006). In

 algebra, Lambek has worked on the theories of rings and modules, but the material to

 be considered below represents his only significant foray into semigroup theory.

 Lambek recalls his introduction to the embedding problem, and the fact that he did

 not yet know of Maltsev's 1939/1940 work:

 I became interested in the [problem of embedding semigroups in groups] as a

 graduate student, when my supervisor Hans Zassenhaus mentioned it in the first

 lecture of a graduate course and I realized that here was a problem I could work

 on without any further prerequisites. Having solved it, I was disappointed to

 learn that Maltsev had done so..., but consoled by the fact that the two solutions
 were different.49

 We note that in the acknowledgments at the beginning of his thesis on semigroup

 embeddings, Lambek thanked not only Zassenhaus 'for his encouragement and criti
 cism', but also H. S. M. Coxeter, for 'for his kind and valuable suggestions' (Lambek

 1950, p. 0).

 Lambek's embedding results were written up into a thesis at a time when he was

 still ignorant of Maltsev's 1939/1940 work. In his introduction, he noted Maltsev's

 comment on having found necessary and sufficient conditions but their being too

 complicated for publication in the 1937 paper. Nevertheless, Lambek seems to have

 had some idea of what form the conditions should take, perhaps based upon Maltsev's
 condition Z:

 It is in fact not difficult to find such conditions. They state that certain systems

 of equations are not independent. This means that if all but one of the equations

 are given, the remaining equation can be deduced. However, as soon as we wish

 to give verbal utterance to these conditions, it becomes desirable to label the

 equations and the variables contained in them. This is where things begin to get

 involved (Lambek 1950, p. 1).

 Lambek noted that his method involving polyhedra was a way around this
 complication.

 By the time Lambek came to write up his results into a paper, he had learnt of

 Maltsev's work and therefore presented his own as being an easier alternative to

 Maltsev's; in reference to Maltsev's normal systems of equations, he noted:

 Malcev offers a rather complicated construction for obtaining such chains of

 equations. In the present paper I have tried to give a simpler construction, by the

 device of using parts of polyhedra, rather than natural numbers, for labelling the

 equations and variables contained in these conditions (Lambek 1951, p. 34).

 Indeed, Lambek's work provided an entirely fresh approach to the subject, independent
 of Maltsev's:

 49 Joachim Lambek, private communication, 14th June 2011.

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 678 C. Hollings

 Fig. 1 An edge in a Lambek
 Fig. 1 An edge in a Lambek
 polyhedron
 polyhedron

 Acquaintance with Malcev's work will not be expected from the reader (Lambek

 1951, p. 34).

 I base the following account of Lambek's polyhedral conditions on that of Clifford

 and Preston (1967, Sect. 12.5), which roughly follows Lambek's original. However,

 I do not present Lambek's methods with full rigour, as the following comment from

 Clifford and Preston (1967, p. 303) also applies in our case:

 It will suffice for our purposes to treat polyhedra informally and to illustrate the

 argument by drawing pictures.

 George C. Bush (whose account of Maltsev's methods we followed in Sect. 5) pre
 sented an alternative version of Lambek's method, in purely algebraic terms.50 As

 already observed, Lambek presented his results in both a thesis and a paper. Since the

 content of these is virtually identical, I will refer to the more easily accessed paper.

 Lambek's conditions for the embeddability51 of a semigroup in a group are stated

 in terms of Eulerian polyhedra, that is, polyhedra for which V + F = Ε + 2 (where

 V is the number of vertices, F is the number of faces, and Ε is the number of edges)

 and which are homeomorphic to the 2-sphere in Euclidean 2-space.

 Each edge in a polyhedron is an edge to two faces, and we say that each edge has
 two sides: one on each face. As we might expect, each edge has two vertices. At the

 point where an edge enters a vertex, the edge is considered to have two angles: one

 on each side of the edge. For example, Fig. 1 shows an edge with two sides χ and y; a

 and b are the angles at the left-hand vertex of the edge, whilst c and d are the angles

 at the right-hand vertex.

 Each edge is assumed further to consist of two half-edges: one for each vertex. It is

 clear that each half-edge has two sides and two angles, which it inherits from the edge

 of which it is a part. The left-hand half-edge of the edge illustrated in Fig. 1 clearly has

 sides χ and y, and angles a and b\ the half-edge equation of this half-edge is xa = yb.

 50 Bush (1961, 1963a). Indeed, Bush's approach differed considerably in presentation from Lambek's. As
 Bush noted:

 We use polyhedra as a convenient model and mnemonic device, but not as part of the proof (Bush

 1961, p. 30).

 Thus, in contrast to the situation with Maltsev's conditions, it is inappropriate for us to follow Bush's

 exposition if we are to explore Lambek's original conditions.

 51 Unlike Maltsev, who referred to the 'immersibility' of a semigroup, and spoke of 'immersing' it in a

 group, Lambek used a mixture of terminology: for him, a semigroup that was 'immersible' could be 'embed

 ded' in a group. I have standardised the terminology as 'embed'/'embedding'/'embeddability' throughout
 this section.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 679

 Fig. 2 Triangulation of an edge 4
 Fig. 2 Triangulation of an edge
 in a Lambek polyhedron / '
 in a Lambek polyhedron

 Let 5 be a semigroup. We say that S satisfies the polyhedral condition if, for

 any polyhedron whose sides and angles are labelled by elements of S, any half-edge

 equation is a consequence of all the other half-edge equations. We note that there are

 2Ε half-edge equations in total. Modifying slightly the terminology adopted by Bush,

 the implication of one half-edge equation by the 2E — 1 others will be referred to as

 a Lambek condition;52 notice that a Lambek condition is of a very similar form to a
 Maltsev condition.

 Let Ρ be any polyhedron whose sides and angles are labelled by elements of S. We

 triangulate Ρ by taking a point (the centre) in the interior of each face and drawing a

 line from this point to each vertex of that face; we also draw a line from an interior point

 (the mid-point) of each edge of that face to its centre. The triangulation is oriented by

 directing the lines from centre to vertex, mid-point to centre, and mid-point to vertex.

 The labelling of the polyhedron determines a labelling of its triangulation. Consider

 the edge in Fig. 1—in particular, the left-hand half-edge (with angles a and b). The

 labels of this half-edge are transferred to the newly drawn lines in the triangulation of

 the half-edge, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The half-edge itself (labelled Δ in Fig. 2) may
 be labelled in two different ways: one for each triangle adjoining it. Using the upper

 triangle, the label would be xa; for the lower, it would be yb. Labelling in this way,

 it is easy to see that the half-edge has a unique label if and only if the corresponding

 half-edge equation holds.

 Returning to the general situation of the polyhedron P, we suppose that all half-edge

 equations, except perhaps one, hold in the semigroup 5. Then, in the triangulation of

 Ρ, all half-edges except one can be labelled uniquely. Suppose that this one half-edge

 is that shown in Fig. 2, and that yb = p. We attach the label p, arbitrarily, to the
 half-edge Δ.

 We assume now that the semigroup S may be embedded (by inclusion) in some

 group G ; let 1 denote the identity in G. Each triangle in the triangulation of Ρ corre

 sponds to an equation of the form yb = p. Since S is assumed to be contained in a

 group, this equation may also be written in any of six different forms for which the

 52 Bush (1963a, p. 52). Bush called this a Lambek polyhedral condition but we drop the 'polyhedral' not

 only to avoid confusion with the polyhedral condition, but also for reasons of symmetry with the 'Maltsev
 conditions' of Sect. 5, with which these Lambek conditions will shortly be connected. Lambek himself
 gave no special name to these individual conditions.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 680 C. Hollings

 right-hand side is 1, for example, ybp"1 = 1 ,bp~xy = 1, etc. Each ofthese six forms

 represents a different manner of traversing the edges of the corresponding triangle.

 More generally, we consider any connected path C consisting of edges E\, Ei,

 (in that order) in the triangulation. Suppose that the edge Et is labelled by

 Xi e S. Then the path C determines a product /(C) = Xj'x^2... x«", where ε; = +1
 if the edge £, is traversed in the given direction, and ε, = -1 otherwise.53 We
 saw above that a simple closed path bounding a single triangle determines an equation

 whose right-hand side is 1. In fact, although we omit the details, it follows by induction

 on the number of triangles bounded that /(C) = 1 for any simple closed path C which

 bounds any simply connected set of triangles.

 Now suppose that C is the (simple, closed) path which bounds all of the triangles in

 the triangulation of Ρ, with the exception of that triangle for which the corresponding

 half-edge equation is not assumed to hold. But C is also a path along the edges of the
 excluded triangle. Therefore, /(C) = 1 implies that χα = ρ = yb. We have shown
 that if S can be embedded in a group, then an arbitrary half-edge equation follows

 from all the rest, that is, the polyhedral condition holds. Indeed, we have effectively

 demonstrated the necessity part of the following theorem:54

 Theorem 15 (Lambek's embeddability theorem) A semigroup may be embedded in

 a group if and only if the cancellation law and the polyhedral condition are both

 satisfied.

 The sufficiency proof is considerably more complicated so I do not present it here.55
 We see, however, that even though Lambek's Embeddability Theorem is easier to state

 than Maltsev's, the proof is far from simple. Lambek concluded his paper by testing

 the polyhedral condition: he took a commutative, cancellative semigroup (which we

 already know may be embedded in a group) and, using methods similar to those

 employed in the necessity proof above, demonstrated that the polyhedral condition
 does indeed hold in such a semigroup.

 We see then that Lambek's Embeddability Theorem, like Maltsev's, involves an

 infinite number of conditions. At the end of his thesis on embeddings, before he had
 become aware of Maltsev's conditions, Lambek made the comment:

 ... it remains an open question whether a finite number of conditions may not

 do. I conjecture that this question is to be answered in the negative (Lambek

 Indeed, Lambek is correct: as for Maltsev conditions, no finite set of Lambek conditions

 53 The '/(C)' used here is Lambek's notation; Clifford and Preston used 'Cot'.

 54 Lambek (1951, p. 35); see also Clifford and Preston (1967, Theorem 12.16) and Bush (1963a, Theorem 3).

 55 For the full details of necessity, and for the proof of sufficiency, see Clifford and Preston (1967, Sect.
 12.5).

 1950, p. 18).

 will suffice.

 £} Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 681

 Fig. 3 A polyhedron which
 Fig. 3 A polyhedron which
 yields a Lambek condition
 yields a Lambek condition
 which is not a Maltsev
 which is not a Maltsev

 condition; vertices are labelled
 condition; vertices are labelled

 Si

 s,, angles r,·, and sides p,· and qj,
 Sj, angles r,·, and sides p,· and q,,
 where i = 0,1,2
 where i = 0,1,2

 PO / \ Pi

 90 91

 'to 92 t2y

 SO P2 S2

 8 Maltsev's and Lambek's conditions compared

 Having now seen both Maltsev's and Lambek's conditions for the embeddability of a

 semigroup in a group, both of which comprise infinite sets of conditions, it is natural

 to wonder whether there is any connection between the two. Throughout Sect. 5 and,

 to a lesser extent, Sect. 7,1 cited the work of George C. Bush on the embedding of

 semigroups in groups. So far, apart from commenting that Bush derived an algebraic

 version of the polyhedral condition, I have only mentioned Bush's surveys of the

 existing work of Maltsev and Lambek. However, it is when we turn to the comparison

 of the conditions of Maltsev and Lambek that we see some original work due to Bush.

 Bush's work in this direction originated in his PhD thesis, On embedding a semi

 group in a group, which he completed at Queen's University, Ontario, in 1961, under

 the supervision of I. Halperin. Results from this thesis appeared in two papers: one
 in 1963, entitled 'The embedding theorems of Malcev and Lambek', and one rather

 later, in 1971, entitled 'The embeddability of a semigroup—conditions common to

 Mal'cev and Lambek'. Bush does not appear to have gone on to pursue a career in

 research mathematics, and the papers cited here represent almost the full extent of his
 mathematical work.56

 Bush began his comparison of the conditions of Maltsev and Lambek by first show

 ing that the two sets of conditions are formally distinct, that is, that there exist Lambek

 conditions which are not Maltsev conditions, and vice versa. He achieved this by pre

 senting two examples. The first is based upon the polyhedron in Fig. 3. This polyhedron

 gives rise to the Lambek condition:

 56 Mathematical Reviews contains reviews of five papers by Bush: the two already cited, a further paper

 concerning an embedding theorem given by Adyan (Bush 1963b), an article containing proposals for the

 standardisation of certain terminology relating to functions and binary relations (Bush 1969), and a much

 later paper on a topic related to computer science, published in a Turkish journal (Bush 1989). A casual

 online search reveals also a precursor to the cited 1969 article (Bush 1967), an elementary mathematics

 textbook (Bush and Obreanu 1965), and a problem contributed to The American Mathematical Monthly
 (Bush 1962; Heuer 1963). Furthermore, the search also yields the information that Bush was elected to

 ordinary membership of the American Mathematical Society in April 1965 (Green and Pitcher 1965, p. 590).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 682 C. Hollings

 Fig. 4 An edge of a polyhedron
 Fig. 4 An edge of a polyhedron
 arising from the Maltsev
 arising from the Maltsev
 condition (20) \.-4i Ri
 . M R\
 condition (20)

 *•1 61
 bi

 By considering, case by case, the possible forms that the corresponding scheme and

 completing equation would have to take, and obtaining a contradiction in each instance,

 Bush showed that no Maltsev condition can have the form (19). Therefore, (Bush 1961,
 Lemma 5.1):

 He observed that if this were identical to a Lambek condition, then the completing

 equation would force us to have, for some edge, the situation illustrated in Fig. 4, for

 some values x, y. But then we would have to have an equation of the form R\x = b\y

 in the normal system of (20), which is not the case. Hence, (Bush 1961, Lemma 5.2):

 {/Oil = qoh, poso = <?o'o. P\si = q\h, p\si = q\t2, P2S0 = <?2'ο}

 => P2S2 = q2t2- (19)

 Lemma 4 There exist Lambek conditions which are not Maltsev conditions.

 For the second of his two examples, Bush considered the scheme

 (Luh,h,L\,l*2,l\),

 with associated Maltsev condition:

 {LiAi = fliri, a\L\ = α2Τ2, «2^2 = L\B\, R\B\ = b2h, ^2 = b\l\)

 => b\r\ = R\A\. (20)

 Lemma 5 There exist Maltsev conditions which are not Lambek conditions.

 Bush thus showed in particular that neither of the sets of conditions of Maltsev or

 Lambek is a subset of the other. The problem which he turned to next was the question

 of whether the two sets have any conditions in common. He gave, for example, a com

 plete characterisation (in terms of their schemes) of those Maltsev conditions which
 are also Lambek conditions (Bush 1961, Theorem 5.1). He also proved the following

 general theorem (Bush 1961, Theorem 5.3; see also Bush 1963a, Theorem 6):

 Theorem 16 Let Κ be a system of equations and M be a single equation. If the
 condition Κ =► M is satisfied in every semigroup that is embeddable in a group, then

 Κ =► M is a consequence of some Maltsev condition.

 Since every Lambek condition is of the form Κ => M, we have (Bush 1961,

 Corollary 5.1; see also Bush 1963a, Corollary 1):

 Corollary 3 Each Lambek condition is a consequence of a Maltsev condition.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 683

 In fact, there is nothing special about the appearance of the Maltsev condition in

 Theorem 16, nor about the relative positions of the Maltsev and Lambek conditions

 in Corollary 3, as Bush went on to show (Bush 1961, Theorem 5.4 and Corollary 5.2;
 see also Bush 1963a, Theorem 7 and Corollary 2):57

 Theorem 17 Let Κ be a system of equations and M be a single equation. If the
 condition Κ => M is satisfied in every semigroup that is embeddable in a group, then

 Κ => M is a consequence of some Lambek condition.

 Corollary 4 Each Maltsev condition is a consequence of a Lambek condition.

 We see then that Bush managed to establish some nice interrelations between the

 sets of Maltsev and Lambek conditions. However, we have not yet made any mention
 of the conditions common to Maltsev and Lambek. In order to describe these, we need

 another type of condition that we have not seen so far: the so-called lunar conditions.

 Howard L. Jackson was another student, this time a master's student, of I. Halperin

 at Queen's University. He completed his MA in 1956, with a dissertation entitled

 simply The embedding of a semigroup in a group. We have already seen that Bush did

 not begin his studies at Queen's University until 1958, so it is difficult to say whether he

 and Jackson ever crossed paths.58 Nevertheless, even if Jackson and Bush never met,

 they were certainly connected by their supervisor, and Bush's work was very much

 a continuation of that of Jackson. However, whereas Bush's work was quite wide

 ranging, taking in the embedding conditions of Maltsev and Lambek (and, indeed,

 Jackson, as we will see shortly), the focus of Jackson's work was much narrower;

 he concentrated on a certain special type of Lambek condition: the lunar conditions,

 mentioned above. At the beginning of the thesis, Jackson credited Halperin with the

 discovery of these conditions:

 Prof. Halperin gave me these conditions verbally. As yet he has published no

 paper on them (Jackson 1956, p. 3, footnote 1).

 Indeed, Halperin does not appear to have published anything relating to groups or
 semigroups. As we will appreciate once we have seen their definition, to have delivered

 the lunar conditions verbally, at least in the form presented by Jackson, was quite a
 feat. Bush (1961, p. 55) indicated further that the name 'lunar conditions' is also due

 to Halperin.

 Jackson's dissertation begins with the very careful definition of both semigroups

 and groups, together with the proof that any finite cancellative semigroup is in fact

 57 In fact, Bush proved our Theorem 17 and Corollary 4 in a slightly more specific instance, with 'Lambek

 condition' replaced by 'Lambek associative condition', where a 'Lambek associative condition' is a special

 type of Lambek condition, identified by Bush, which gives a pictorial representation of the associative

 law. This arose from Bush's observation that, whilst Lambek had proved the necessity of all Lambek

 conditions for the embeddability of a semigroup in a group, his proof of sufficiency used only those
 Lambek conditions of a certain form, namely, the Lambek associative conditions. As a result, Bush worked

 almost exclusively in terms of Lambek associative conditions; in particular, he proved the necessity part

 of Lambek's Embeddability Theorem for Lambek associative conditions only. Since Bush's definition of a
 Lambek associative condition is rather involved, I have avoided it here. The interested reader is referred to

 Bush's original exposition: see Bush (1961, Sect. 3.3) or Bush (1963a, Sect. 2.2).

 58 Unlike Bush, Jackson pursued mathematical research beyond his MA dissertation: Mathematical Reviews

 lists 16 publications, ranging from 1965 to 1985, most of them on potential theory.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 684 C. Hollings

 a group.59 Jackson's first chapter also contains the counterexample of Maltsev that
 we saw in Sect. 3.2. Then, without any further preamble, Jackson launched into a

 discussion of the lunar conditions in his second chapter.

 For any An + 4 symbols χ^,χχ,... ,x„,ya,yi,... ,yn,ao,a\,..., an, bo,b\,...,

 bn, let S denote the set containing the following equations:

 *οαο = yoai, Mo = Mt> *ιαι = yi<*2, Ml = yt^2

 Xn—\&n—1 = yn—\^ni Xn—\bn—\ = yn—\bni Xn&0 = yn@n· (21)

 The nth lunar condition is the following: whenever the equations in S hold, the equation

 xnbo = ynbn must also hold. The nth lunar condition is denoted by Cn. Jackson also

 gave an alternative definition of Cn in terms of the notion of an equaliser: if xa = yb,

 then the pair (χ, y) is called an equaliser of the pair (a, b). The nth lunar condition

 may now be restated thus: if (x ,·,>>,·) is a common equaliser of (α,·, a,+i) and (bi, b;+i),
 for all i e {0, 1,2,..., η - 1}, and (x„, yn) is an equaliser of (ao, an), then (xn, yn)

 is also an equaliser of (bo, bn).

 We observe that Jackson's C\ is in fact Maltsev's condition Z, and so we know that

 C\ is a necessary condition for the embeddability of a semigroup in a group. In fact,

 more generally, Cn is a necessary condition, as Jackson showed in very short order

 (Jackson 1956, Chap. II, Sect. 2):

 Proof Suppose that a semigroup S may be embedded in a group G. Then every element
 of S has an inverse in G. From the equations (21), we have:

 yôlxo = αι^ο 1 = Mo\ yflx\ = α2«Γ' = Mf1- · · · >

 yn-\xn-l — anan—\ —bnbn_j, yn xn — αηα^ .

 In particular, we take the equality ana~\ = bnb~\x and relabel and rearrange to
 obtain:

 an~ ι = bn-\bn_2an-i· (22)

 In order to derive the final equation, we show that y~lx„ = bnbfl. We have

 anaf1 = bnbf\xan-\afxb\bQ1 = bnb~\x ^η_ι^2α„_2) aflb\b^ (by (22))

 = bnbn_2an—2a\ b\bo = ■ · ■ = bnbn_^an-ia^ bibq ,

 for 1 < i < η - 1. Now, for i = η - 1:

 αηαΰ1 = bnbf1 (aiaf1) b\bfx = b„ b01 = b"b0*·

 Hence, y~lxn = anafl = bnbfx, or xnbo = ynbn· a

 59 See note 14.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 685

 What Jackson did not comment upon, however, is the fact that since the lunar conditions

 are special cases of Lambek conditions, their necessity follows automatically from

 Lambek's results. Nevertheless, Jackson's proof is a little easier than Lambek's.

 Jackson followed his proof with an example, quite similar to Maltsev's, of a semi

 group which satisfies Cι but not C2, thereby showing that Ci is effectively stronger

 than C\. In fact, this example represented Jackson limbering up to tackle the more

 general problem of whether Cn+1 is effectively stronger than Cn : he went on to attempt

 to prove that this is indeed the case by presenting a suitable example; however, Jack

 son's proof is incomplete (see below). Nevertheless, he concluded that if a semigroup

 satisfies Cn, then it necessarily satisfies Cj, C2,..., Cn-\. The third and final chapter

 of Jackson's dissertation is taken up with a straightforward presentation of Lambek's

 polyhedral condition and a proof (essentially a reproduction of Lambek's own) of the

 corresponding embedding theorem.

 These discussions do little to bring out the reasons for the name 'lunar conditions',

 nor has much been said to justify the assertion that these are a special type of Lambek

 condition. Jackson did attempt to explain the name by noting in his introduction that

 ... [tjhese are called lunar conditions because they result when a sphere is divided

 into simple lunes ... (Jackson 1956, p.3)

 where a lune (at least in the two-dimensional pictures used here) is a region bounded

 by two arcs. Later on, after having defined Lambek's polyhedra, Jackson commented
 further:

 ... if the polyhedron chosen consists of exactly η + 1 lunes then the polyhedral

 condition in this case is the nth lunar condition (Jackson 1956, p. 21).

 What is missing here is a diagram to illustrate the lunar conditions and their inter

 pretation as Lambek conditions. After all, the ability to visualise the conditions is the

 major selling-point of Lambek's work. Fortunately, in his thesis, Bush noted that

 ... [t]he condition C„ is the Lambek polyhedral condition ... for a polyhedron
 with 2 vertices and η + 1 edges (Bush 1961, p. 56)

 and provided the picture given in Fig. 5 to illustrate the condition C2·

 In his chapter on the lunar conditions, Bush pointed out the error (noted above) in

 Jackson's proof that Cn+1 is essentially stronger than Cn ■ 'the set of cases he considers

 is not exhaustive' (Bush 1961, p. 58). However, the result is true nevertheless, and Bush

 patched up Jackson's proof.60

 Notice that we have had a great deal to say about the necessity of the lunar conditions

 for the embeddability of a semigroup in a group, but we have so far made no comment

 on their sufficiency. This is because they are insufficient, as Bush showed (Bush 1961,

 60 Bush (1961, Sect. 4.3). It is also worth noting that, in spite of our earlier observation that their necessity

 follows from that of the Lambek conditions, Bush presented Jackson's proof of the necessity of the lunar
 conditions (in his Sect. 4.2). This is because of the comment made in note 57 above, concerning the

 'Lambek associative conditions': Bush did not prove the necessity of arbitrary Lambek conditions, only of

 the so-called Lambek associative conditions. The lunar conditions are Lambek conditions, but they are not

 Lambek associative conditions, so their necessity does not follow from the earlier necessity proof in Bush's
 presentation. He therefore needed to prove this separately.

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 686 C. Hollings

 Fig. 5 The polyhedron
 Fig. 5 The polyhedron
 corresponding to the lunar
 corresponding to the lunar
 condition C2
 condition C2

 ®3

 V3

 Sect. 4.5). He even tried to rectify this by introducing the dual lunar conditions (Bush

 1961, Sect. 4.4), that is, the conditions given by reversing all the products in (21), as

 well as in the final equation xn bo = yn bn. But even taken together, the lunar conditions
 and dual lunar conditions are still not sufficient.61

 The lunar conditions also appear later in Bush's thesis, in connection with his com

 parison of Maltsev and Lambek conditions. Thus, we come finally to the promised
 characterisation of the conditions common to Maltsev and Lambek. As noted earlier,

 Bush obtained a complete characterisation, in terms of their schemes, of those Maltsev

 conditions which are also Lambek conditions. He went on to prove that the Maltsev

 conditions associated with these particular schemes are in fact lunar conditions (Bush
 1961, Lemma 5.7), that is, those Maltsev conditions which are also Lambek condi

 tions are necessarily lunar conditions. Indeed, the result is even stronger (Bush 1961,
 Theorem 5.2):

 Theorem 18 The only conditions which are both Maltsev conditions and Lambek
 conditions are the lunar conditions.

 In accordance with our comments above on the insufficiency of the lunar conditions,

 we have the following theorem noted by Bush (1961, Theorem 5.3):

 Theorem 19 The set of conditions common to Maltsev and Lambek is insufficient for

 the embeddability of a semigroup in a group.

 We have recorded here several results from Jackson's master's thesis and Bush's

 Ph.D. thesis. However, as is often the case with theses, this material did not reach a

 very wide audience. Jackson does not appear to have published any parts of his thesis,

 whilst Bush published only two short papers, 8 years apart, only one of which would

 have been available to Clifford and Preston when they were preparing the second

 volume of their textbook The algebraic theory of semigroups, which was published in

 61 The necessity of the dual lunar conditions may be shown in much the same way as for the lunar conditions.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 687

 1967. Clifford and Preston did not list Bush's thesis in their bibliography and therefore

 probably had not seen it. The result of this was the unwitting duplication by Clifford

 and Preston of some of Bush's work—in particular, Theorem 18 above.

 In their chapter on the embedding of semigroups in groups, Clifford and Preston, like

 Bush, included a section (Sect. 12.7) that is devoted to the comparison of Maltsev's and

 Lambek's conditions. As we have already noted, Clifford and Preston would (probably)

 only have had access to those elements of Bush's work which had been published in

 his 1963 paper; in connection with the comparison of conditions, this would have
 amounted to the results that we have recorded here as Theorems 16 and 17, and

 Corollaries 3 and 4. Thus, Clifford and Preston did not know the full extent of Bush's

 work when they proved the following (Clifford and Preston 1967, Theorem 12.21):62

 Theorem 20 The Maltsev conditions which are also Lambek conditions are precisely

 those Lambek conditions which arise from polyhedra with two vertices.

 In essence, this is Theorem 18: Lambek conditions arising from two-vertex polyhedra

 are of course lunar conditions; diagrams very much like our Fig. 5 appeared in Clifford

 and Preston's proof of the above theorem.

 Despite his having hitherto made no apparent effort to publish further material

 from his thesis, the appearance of Theorem 20 in the second volume of The algebraic

 theory of semigroups seems to have spurred Bush into action. The result was the

 appearance in June 1971 of the second paper mentioned earlier: 'The embeddability

 of a semigroup—conditions common to Mal'cev and Lambek'.

 The purpose of this paper was, essentially, to present Theorem 19 to the world,

 ... take on new interest in the light of Clifford and Preston's work (Bush 1971,

 which, Bush hoped, would

 p. 437).

 With admirable modesty, Bush made no attempt to claim priority for Theorem 20,
 but simply presented a slightly modified version of his earlier discussion of the lunar

 conditions; the paper concludes with Theorem 19.

 We see then that there is indeed some overlap between the work of Maltsev and that

 of Lambek on the embedding of semigroups in groups. However, as Bush showed, their

 approaches are essentially distinct. The geometrical approach of Lambek is consider

 ably easier to present that the equational approach of Maltsev, but it is not simpler in

 any real sense: the complications which are so patent in Maltsev's approach are merely
 hidden behind the diagrams in Lambek's. Nevertheless, Lambek's methods are intu

 itively rather pleasing, and so they mark a good place to end our main discussion of

 the embedding problem.63

 62 Clifford and Preston stated this theorem in rather more complicated (and precise) terms, but this simplified

 statement will suffice for our purposes, not least because their notation for Maltsev conditions differs from
 that used here.

 63 We note that, besides the work on lunar conditions, there have been other attempts to unify the approaches

 of Maltsev and Lambek. Forexample, the work of Krstié (1985), which gave anew geometrical interpretation
 of Maltsev's conditions, and used this to draw connections with Lambek's. Johnstone (2008) united the

 approaches of Maltsev and Lambek in a single categorical method, and then extended this to the embedding
 of categories in groupoids.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 688 C. Hollings

 9 Concluding remarks

 Like so many problems in mathematics, that of seeking to embed a semigroup in

 a group has a simple statement, but proved rather harder to solve. Indeed, as we

 have seen, the apparent simplicity of the problem led some of its attackers astray.

 The comprehensive solution, when it did come, turned out to be not entirely usable:

 Maltsev's necessary and sufficient conditions may be easy to state, but they are a little

 more complicated to wield, and so other authors continued to seek simpler conditions

 that were merely sufficient (Sect. 4). Indeed, the semigroup theorist Peter Trotter has
 said of Maltsev's conditions that

 ... they are difficult to apply... It is therefore of interest to find simple conditions

 satisfied by large classes of semigroups that are sufficient to ensure embeddability

 in groups (Trotter 1972, p. 1).

 As part of this 'practical' approach, Trotter studied a more simply defined class of

 semigroups, which he labelled 'L-semigroups'. These L-semigroup can be embedded
 in groups and are defined via a generalisation of conditions earlier studied by Doss
 (Sect. 4.2).

 I want now to make some comments on the 'independence' of Maltsev's work.

 Recall from the introduction that I have argued elsewhere (specifically, in Hollings

 2009a) that the first truly 'independent' theorem on semigroups was one proved by

 Clifford in a paper of 1941, concerning certain semigroups that arise as disjoint unions

 of groups. By 'independent', I meant that this theorem has no direct analogue in, nor

 was driven by considerations from, either group or ring theory. In fact, Maltsev's
 Embeddability Theorem might displace Clifford's work from this exalted position,

 depending upon one's point of view. As we have seen, Maltsev's study of embeddings

 for semigroups grew out of that of embeddings for rings, but his derivation of his nec

 essary and sufficient conditions did not parallel anything within the ring theory of the

 time; necessary and sufficient conditions for the embeddability of a ring in a field were

 not derived until about 30years later (see Cohn 1971, Sect. 7.6, Corollary 1). Indeed,

 in this instance, it is the results on semigroups that drove the search for corresponding

 results on rings.

 One final observation that might be made about the embedding problem is that it

 spans the final critical decades in the formation of what we now term 'abstract algebra'.

 We have traced its earliest origins to Steinitz' abstraction of the construction of the

 rationals from the integers (his 'Quotientenbildung') and seen it appear in van der

 Waerden's highly influential Moderne Algebra. The realisation that we might throw

 away the additive part of the rings under consideration and thus treat an embedding

 problem purely for semigroups is almost the quintessence of abstract algebra—the

 adaptation of the problem was motivated not by any 'concrete' factors, but merely by

 abstract concerns.64 In the various solutions to the problem, we have seen traditional

 group-theoretic tools brought to bear (such as the normal subgroups employed by
 Ptak), and also notions that now, at their most general, come under the banner of

 64 Indeed, the same might also be said of Ore's adaptation of the 'Quotientenbildung' to the non
 commutative case.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 689

 universal algebra (such as congruences). Finally, in Maltsev's comprehensive solution

 of the embedding problem, we see him on the verge of one of the most abstract

 (and, indeed, logical) of branches of modern mathematics: model theory, a field in

 which Maltsev made important contributions (see Dimitric 1992). Thus, this seemingly

 simple problem may even have had some small influence on the twentieth-century drive

 towards abstract algebra.

 References

 Aleksandrov, P.S., Yu.L. Ershov, M.I. Kargapolov, E.N. Kuzmin, D.M. Smirnov, A.D. Taimanov, and A.I.

 Shirshov. 1968. Anatolii Ivanovich Maltsev: Obituary. Uspekhi matematicheskikh nauk 23(3): 159-170
 (in Russian); English translation: Russian Mathematical Surveys 23(3): 157-168.

 Anon. 1940. Ail-Union conference on algebra, 13-17 November 1939. lzvestiya Akademii nauk SSSR.

 Seriya Matematicheskaya 4(1): 127-136 (in Russian).

 Anon. 1970. Oystein Ore (1899-1968). Journal of Combinatorial Theory 8:1-3.
 Anon. 1989. Academician Anatolii Ivanovich Maltsev (on the 80th anniversary of his birth). Sibirskii

 matematicheskii zhurnal 30(6): 3-6 (in Russian).

 Anon. 2000. List of publications of Vlastimil Ptâk, 1995-1999. Linear Algebra and its Applications 310:

 Ontario.

 15:49-58.

 259-262.

 23-24.

 (in Norwegian).

 Aubert, K.E. 1970. Oystein Ore and his mathematical work. Nordisk Matematisk Tidskrift 18: 121-126

 Barr, Michael. 1999. An appreciation of Jim Lambek at McGill: A talk given on the occasion of Jim

 Lambek's 75th birthday. Theory and Applications of Categories 6 (The Lambek Festschrift): 2-4.

 Barr, M., P.J. Scott, and R.A.G. Seely. 2000. Introduction to "The Lambek Festschrift: mathematical struc

 tures in computer science (Montreal, QC, 1997)". Mathematical Structures in Computer Science 10:
 97-98.

 Bokut, L.A. 1987. Embedding of rings. Uspekhi matematicheskikh nauk 42(4): 87-111 (in Russian); English

 translation: Russian Mathematical Surveys 42(4): 105-138.

 Bush, George C. 1961. On embedding a semigroup in a group. Ph.D. thesis, Queen's University, Kingston,

 Bush, George C. 1962. E1541. The American Mathematical Monthly 69(9): 919.

 Bush, George C. 1963a. The embedding theorems of Malcev and Lambek. Canadian Journal ofMathematics

 Bush, George C. 1963b. Note on an embedding theorem of Adyan. Proceedings of the American Mathe

 matical Society 14: 597-599.

 Bush, George C. 1967. On the terminology of functions. Ontario Mathematics Gazette 5: 16-22.

 Bush, George C. 1969. The language of functions: A survey and a proposal. Mathematics Magazine 42(5):

 Bush, George C. 1971. The embeddability of a semigroup—conditions common to Mal'cev and Lambek.

 Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 157: 437-448.

 Bush, George C. 1989. An approximately 0(log log n) search inspired by Newton's method. Doga. Turkish

 Bush, George C„ and Phillip E. Obreanu. 1965. Basic concepts of mathematics. New York: Holt, Rinehart

 Journal of Mathematics 13(3): 101-106.

 and Winston.

 Clifford, A.H. 1941. Semigroups admitting relative inverses. Annals ofMathematics 42: 1037-1049.

 Clifford, A.H., and G.B. Preston. 1961. The algebraic theory of semigroups. Mathematical Surveys, no. 7,

 vol. 1, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; 2nd ed„ 1964; Russian translation of 2nd ed.:
 Izdatelstvo Mir, Moscow, 1972.

 Clifford, A.H., and G.B. Preston. 1967. The algebraic theory of semigroups. Mathematical Surveys, no. 7,

 vol. 2, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; 2nd ed., 1968; Russian translation of 1st ed.:
 Izdatelstvo Mir, Moscow, 1972.

 Cohn, P.M. 1965. Universal algebra. New York: Harper and Row.
 Cohn, P.M. 1971. Free rings and their relations. London, New York: Academic Press.

 Cohn, P.M. 1995. Skew fields: Theory of general division rings, volume 57 of Encyclopedia ofMathematics

 and its Applications, ed. G.C. Rota. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Corry, Leo. 1996. Modem algebra and the rise of mathematical structures. Birkhauser; 2nd revised ed.,

 Corry, Leo. 2000a. The origins of the definition of abstract rings. Modem Logic 8: 5-27.

 Corry, Leo. 2000b. The origins of the definition of abstract rings. Gazette des mathématiciens 83: 29-47.

 Coutinho, S.C. 2004. Quotient rings of noncommutative rings in the first half of the 20th century. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 58: 255-281.

 de Séguier, J.-A. 1904. Théorie des groupes finis: Éléments de la théorie des groupes abstraits. Paris:

 Dimitrié, R. 1992. Anatoly Ivanovich Maltsev. The Mathematical Intelligencer 14(2): 26-30.
 Doss, R. 1948. Sur l'immersion d'un semi-groupe dans un groupe. Bulletin des sciences mathématiques

 690 C. Hollings

 2004.

 Gauthier-Villars.

 72: 139-150.

 Dubreil, Paul. 1943. Sur les problèmes d'immersion et la théorie des modules. Comptes rendus hebdo

 madaires des séances de l'Académie des sciences de Paris 216: 625-627.

 Dubreil, Paul. 1946. Algèbre, tome I: Équivalences, opérations. Groupes, anneaux, corps, Cahiers scien

 tifiques, fascicule XX, Gauthier-Villars, Paris; 2nd éd., 1954; 3rd éd., 1963.

 Dubreil, Paul. 1981. Apparition et premiers développements de la théorie des demi-groupes en France.

 Cahiers du séminaire d'histoire des mathématiques 2: 59-65.

 Dubreil, Paul. 1983. Souvenirs d'un boursier rockefeller 1929-1931. Cahiers du séminaire d'histoire des

 mathématiques 4: 61-73.

 Faisant, Alain. 1971a. Immersion d'un demi-groupe dans un groupe I, Séminaire P. Lefebvre (année

 1970/1971), Structures algébriques, volume II, exp. no. 17, pp. 210-217.

 Faisant, Alain. 1971b. Immersion d'un demi-groupe dans un groupe II, Séminaire P. Lefebvre (année

 1970/1971), Structures algébriques, volume II, exp. no. 18, pp. 218-231.

 Faisant, Alain. 1971c. Immersion d'un demi-groupe dans un groupe III, Séminaire P. Lefebvre (année

 1970/1971), Structures algébriques, volume II, exp. no. 19, pp. 232-240.

 Faisant, Alain. 1972. Demi-groupes de fractions et plongement d'un demi-groupe dans un groupe, Séminaire

 P. Dubreil, M.-L. Dubreil-Jacotin, L. Lesieur et C. Pisot (24e année: 1970/71), Algèbre et théorie des
 nombres, fasc. 2, exp. no. 12.

 Fenstad, Jens Erik. 1996. Thoralf Albert Skolem 1887-1963: A biographical sketch. Nordic Journal of

 Fiedler, Miroslav. 2000. Vlastimil Pték (8 November 1925-9 May 1999). Linear Algebra and its Applica

 Fiedler, Miroslav, and Vladimir Miiller. 2000a. Professor Vlastimil Pték died. Czechoslovak Mathematical

 Philosophical Logic 1(2): 99-106.

 tions 310: 21-22.

 Journal 50(125): 445^147.

 125(3): 371-373.

 Fiedler, Miroslav, and Vladimir Miiller. 2000b. Professor Vlastimil Pték died. Mathematica Bohemica

 Gainov, A.T., S.S. Goncharov, Yu.L. Ershov, D.A. Zakharov, E.N. Kuzmin, L.L. Maksimova, Yu.L. Mer

 zlyakov, D.M. Smirnov, A.D. Taimanov, V.K. Kharchenko, and E.I. Khukhro. 1989. On the eightieth

 birthday of outstanding Soviet mathematician Academician A. I. Maltsev. Algebra i Logika 28(6): 615—
 618 (in Russian).

 Goodearl, K.R. 1979. Von Neumann regular rings, Monographs and Studies in Mathematics 4. London:

 Green, John W., and Everett Pitcher. 1965. The April meeting in New York. Bulletin of the American

 Pitman.

 Mathematical Society 71(4): 589-599.

 Heuer, C.V. 1963. Solution to E1541. The American Mathematical Monthly 70(7): 759.

 Heyting, A. 1927. Die Theorie der linearen Gleichungen in einer Zahlenspezies mit nicht-kommutativer

 Multiplikation. Mathematische Annalen 98: 465-490.

 Hollings, Christopher. 2007. Some first tantalizing steps into semigroup theory. Mathematics Magazine

 80(5): 331-344.

 Hollings, Christopher. 2009a. The early development of the algebraic theory of semigroups. Archive for

 History of Exact Sciences 63(5): 497-536.

 Hollings, Christopher. 2009b. Anton Kazimirovich Suschkewitsch (1889-1961). BSHM Bulletin: Journal

 of the British Society for the History of Mathematics 24(3): 172-179.

 Hollings, Christopher. 2014a. Investigating a claim for Russian priority in the abstract definition of a ring,

 to appear in BSHM Bulletin: Journal of the British Society for the History of Mathematics.

 Hollings, Christopher. 2014b. Mathematics across the Iron Curtain: A history of the algebraic theory of

 semigroups, to be published by the American Mathematical Society.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Embedding semigroups in groups 691

 Holvoet, Roger. 1959. Sur l'immersion d'un semi-gruppe dans un groupe. Bulletin de la Société mathéma

 tique de Belgique 11: 134-136.

 Howie, J.M. 1995. Fundamentals of semigroup theory, LMS Monographs, New Series, no. 12. Oxford:

 Clarendon Press.

 Kingston, Ontario.

 Jackson, Howard L. 1956. The embedding of a semigroup in a group. MA thesis. Queen's University,

 Johnstone, P.T. 2008. On embedding categories in groupoids. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge

 Philosophical Society 145(2): 273-294.

 Katz, Victor J. 2009. A history of mathematics: An introduction, 3rd ed. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

 Khalezov, E.A. 1984. On the 75th birthday of Academician A. I. Maltsev. Sibirskii matematicheskii zjhurnal

 25:1-2 (in Russian).

 Klein-Barmen, Fritz. 1943. Ûber gewisse HalbverbSnde und kommutative Semigruppen, Erster Teil, Math

 ematische Zeitschrift 48: 275-288. Zweiter Teil, Mathematische Zeitschrift 48: 715-734.

 Krstié, Sava. 1985. Embedding semigroups in groups: A geometrical approach. Publications. Institut math

 ématique (Beograd). Nouvelle Série 38(52): 69-82.

 Kurosh, A.G. 1959. Anatolii Ivanovich Maltsev (on his fiftieth birthday). Uspekhi matematicheskikh nauk

 14(6): 203-211 (in Russian).

 Lallement, Gérard. 1995. Paul Dubreil (1904-1994) in memoriam. Semigroup Forum 50:1-7.

 Lambek, J. 1950. The immersibility of a semigroup into a group. Ph.D. thesis, McGill University.

 Lambek, J. 1951. The immersibility of a semigroup into a group. Canadian Journal of Mathematics 3:

 34—43.

 Lambek, J. 2006. Pregroups and natural language processing. The Mathematical Intelligencer 28(2): 41-48.
 Lesieur, Léonce. 1994. Paul Dubreil (1904-1994). Gazette des mathématiciens 60: 74-75.
 Lyapin, E.S. 1960. Semigroups. Gosudarstvennoe Izdatelstvo Fiziko-Matematicheskogo Literature,
 Moscow (in Russian); English translation: Translations of Mathematical Monographs, vol. 3, Amer
 ican Mathematical Society, 1963.

 Malcev, A.I. [Maltsev] 1937. On the immersion of an algebraic ring into a field. Mathematische Annalen

 113:686-691.

 Malcev, I.A. [Maltsev] 2010. Anatolii Ivanovich Malcev (on the centenary of his birth). Uspekhi matem
 aticheskikh nauk 65(5): 197-203 (in Russian); English translation: Russian Mathematical Surveys 65(5):
 991-997.

 Maltsev, A.I. 1939. On the immersion of associative systems in groups. Matematicheskii sbornik 6:331-336

 (in Russian).

 251-264 (in Russian).

 Maltsev, A.I. 1940. On the immersion of associative systems in groups II. Matematicheskii sbornik 8:

 Maltsev, A.I. 1953. Nilpotent semigroups. Ivanovskii gosudarstvennii pedagogicheskii institut. Uchenye

 zapiski. Fiziko-matematicheskye nauki 4: 107-111 (in Russian).

 Nikolskii, S.M. 1972. Excerpts from a memoir on A. I. Maltsev. Uspekhi matematicheskikh nauk 27(4):
 223-230 (in Russian); English translation: Some reminiscences of A. I. Mal'tsev. Russian Mathematical
 Surveys 27(4): 179-187.

 Ore, O. 1931. Linear equations in non-commutative fields. Annals of Mathematics 32(3): 463-477.
 Ptâk, V. 1949. Immersibility of semigroups. Acta Facultatis Rerum Naturalium Universitatis Carolinae

 Ptâk, V. 1952. Immersibility of semigroups. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal 2(77): 247-271

 Ptâk, V. 1953a. Immersibility of semigroups. Ceskoslovenskâ Akademie véd. Casopis pro pëstovdni matem

 atiky 78: 259-261 (in Czech).

 Ptâk, V. 1953b. On complete topological vector spaces. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal 78: 285-290

 Ptâk, V. 1953c. On complete topological vector spaces. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal 78: 301-364

 192.

 (in Russian).

 (in Russian).

 (in Russian).

 Richardson, A.R. 1926. Hypercomplex determinants. Messenger of Mathematics 55:145-152.
 Richardson, A.R. 1928. Simultaneous linear equations over a division algebra. Proceedings of the London

 Schein, B.M. 1961. Embedding semigroups in generalised groups. Matematicheskii sbornik 55(97): 379

 Mathematical Society 28: 395-420.

 400 (in Russian).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Schmidt, O.Yu. 1916, Abstract theory of groups, Kiev; 2nd ed„ Gostekhizdat, Moscow, 1933; reprinted by

 Knizhnyy dom "Librokom", Moscow, 2010 (in Russian); annotated English translation of 2nd ed. by
 Fred Holling and J.B. Roberts, Freeman, 1966.

 Shutov, E.G. 1966. Embedding of semigroups, in Interuniversity scientific symposium on general algebra,

 Tartu State University, pp. 217-230 (in Russian); English translation: American Mathematical Society
 Translations (2) 139 (1988): 197-204.

 Sinai, Yakov (ed.). 2003. Russian mathematicians in the 20th century. Singapore: World Scientific.

 Skolem, Th. 1951. Some remarks on semi-groups. Det Kongelige Norske Videnskabers Selskabs Forhan

 Skolem, Th. 1952. A theorem on some semi-groups. Det Kongelige Norske Videnskabers Selskabs Forhan

 Steinitz, E. 1910. Algebraische Theorie der Korper. Journalfiirdie reine und angewandte Mathematik 137:

 167-309; 2nd ed., Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and Leipzig, 1930; reprinted by Chelsea, NY, 1950.

 Suschkewitsch, A.K. [Sushkevich] 1934. Ûber Semi-gruppen. Zapiski Kharkovskogo matematicheskogo

 692 C. Hollings

 dlinger 24(9): 42^17.

 dlinger 25(18): 72-77.

 obshchestva 8: 25-28.

 Sushkevich, A.K. 1935. On the extension of a semigroup to the whole group. Zapiski Kharkovskogo matem

 aticheskogo obshchestva 12: 81-87 (in Ukrainian).

 Sushkevich, A.K. 1937a. Foundations of higher algebra, 3rd ed. Moscow, Leningrad: ONTI (in Russian).
 Sushkevich, A.K. 1937b. Elements of new algebra. Kharkov, Kiev: DNTVU (in Ukrainian).
 Sushkevich, A.K. 1937c. Theory of generalised groups. Kharkov, Kiev: DNTVU (in Russian).
 Thibault, R. 1953a. Groupes homomorphes a un demi-groupe: problème d'immersion d'un demi-groupe

 dans un groupe, Séminaire Châtelet-Dubreil; partie complémentaire: demi-groupes, vol. 7 (1953-1954),
 exp. no. 13.

 Thibault, R. 1953b. Immersion d'un demi-groupe dans un groupe (Méthode de Lambek). Séminaire

 Châtelet-Dubreil; partie complémentaire: demi-groupes, vol. 7 (1953-1954), exp. no. 20.

 Trotter, RG. 1972. A class of semigroups embeddable in groups. Semigroup Forum 5: 1-13.
 van der Waerden, B.L. 1930. Moderne algebra, vol. 1. Berlin: Springer.

 van der Waerden, B.L. 1975. On the sources of my book Moderne Algebra. Historia Mathematica 2:31-40.
 Vavfin, Zdenëk. 1995. Miroslav Fiedler and Vlastimil Ptâk: Life and work. Linear Algebra and its Appli

 cations 223/224: 3-29.

 Vavrin, Zdenëk. 1996a. Seventy years of Professor Vlastimil Ptâk (biography and interview). Czechoslovak

 Mathematical Journal 46(2): 337-349.

 Vavfin, Zdenëk. 1996b. Seventy years of Professor Vlastimil Ptâk (biography and interview). Mathematica

 Vrbovâ, Pavla. 1985. Sixty years of Professor Vlastimil Ptâk. Czechoslovak Mathematical Journal 35(4):

 Bohemica 121(3): 315-327.

 662-670.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:55:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

