 

 

 

 

Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems: the cloud chamber problem in the

analysis of Mott (1929)
Author(s): Rodolfo Figari and  Alessandro Teta
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 2 (March 2013), pp. 215-234
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479266
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:03 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:215-234
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0111-z

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems:
 the cloud chamber problem in the analysis of Mott
 (1929)

 Rodolfo Figari • Alessandro Teta

 Received: 15 September 2012 / Published online: 7 November 2012
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

 Abstract We analyze the paper "The wave mechanics of a-ray tracks" Mott (Proc
 R Soc Lond A 126:79-84, 1929), published in 1929 by N. F. Mott. In particular, we
 discuss the theoretical context in which the paper appeared and give a detailed account

 of the approach used by the author and the main result attained. Moreover, we comment

 on the relevance of the work not only as far as foundations of Quantum Mechanics

 are concerned but also as the earliest pioneering contribution in decoherence theory.

 1 Introduction

 N. F. Mott1 proposed a theoretical explanation of the a-particles tracks observed
 in a Wilson cloud chamber in the paper "The wave mechanics of a-ray tracks"

 1 Sir Nevill Francis Mott (30 September 1905 to 8 August 1996) was an English physicist. He won
 the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1977 for his work on the electronic structure of magnetic and disordered
 systems. The award was shared with P. W. Anderson and J. H. Van Vleck (for further details see e.g.
 B. Pippard, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, 44, 314-328, 1998).

 Communicated by: T. Sauer.

 R. Figari

 Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universita di Napoli,
 Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia, Edificio 6, 80126 Napoli, Italy

 R. Figari (E3)
 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo,
 Via Cintia, Edificio 6, 80126 Naples, Italy
 e-mail: flgari@na.infn.it

 A. Teta

 Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienze dell'Informazione e Matematica,
 Universita di L'Aquila, via Vetoio (Coppito 1), 67010 L'Aquila, Italy
 e-mail: teta@univaq.it

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 216

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 (Mott 1929), published in 1929. The work appeared in the early stage of the
 debate about the interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. It was mainly moti
 vated by the attempt to clarify the meaning of the wave-particle duality and
 the crucial role of the measurement process. In this context the paper can be
 surely regarded as one of the seminal contributions by the quantum theory
 founders.

 In addition to its foundational relevance, we also consider Mott's paper extremely

 important as the first pioneering example of the relatively recent research approach
 known as decoherence theory (Giulini et al. 1996). The aim of that theory is to
 explain the emergence of a quantum particle classical behavior as a result of its
 interaction with the environment. In fact, it is known that for an isolated quan
 tum particle an approximate classical evolution can be derived in the limit h —► 0
 only for very special classes of initial states, like WKB or coherent states (see
 e.g. Robert 1998). However, in many important physical situations, quantum par
 ticles exhibit a quasi classical evolution for initial states drastically different from
 the ones in those classes. Decoherence is precisely the dynamical mechanism,
 entirely predictable on the basis of quantum evolution laws, responsible for the
 appearance of a particle classical behavior as a consequence of the interaction with
 the environment. In concrete situations the approach consists in providing mod
 els of a non trivial quantum environment which interacts with the particle going
 through it.

 Our aim is to show that Mott's approach stands entirely inside this line of thought.
 Indeed, the author analyses the a-particle dynamics assuming a spherical wave as ini

 tial state. He attempts to explain the observed straight tracks left by the a-particle as a

 consequence of its interaction with the atoms of the vapor using a typical decoherence
 theory attitude. As a matter of fact, Mott's paper is less known than it deserves. In
 the following we describe the context in which the work appeared, detail the con
 tents of the article and comment on its relevance both in the foundations of Quan

 tum Theory and in the framework of decoherence theory. The paper is organized as
 follows.

 In Sect. 2 we briefly describe the experimental and theoretical background
 in which Mott's paper appeared. In particular, we briefly recall how a Wilson
 chamber works and we summarize the fundamental ideas leading to the formu
 lation of Quantum Mechanics according to the so-called Copenhagen or standard

 interpretation.

 In Sect. 3 we give an account of the first theoretical arguments proposed by Born
 (1927), Heisenberg (1929-30) and Darwin (1929) to explain the tracks observed in a

 cloud chamber in the framework of quantum theory.

 In Sect. 4 we present the introductory considerations appearing in Mott's paper,

 describe the three-particle model presented by the author and give a precise formula
 tion of the main result.

 In Sect. 5 we describe in some detail Mott's arguments, essentially based on per

 turbation theory and stationary phase methods, leading to the result.

 In Sect. 6 we conclude with some critical remarks on relevance and modernity of
 Mott's paper, some limitations of his approach and, finally, possible re-examinations

 and improvements of the result.

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems 217

 2 The Wilson chamber and quantum theory

 Roughly speaking, a tracking chamber is a device where atoms or sub-atomic parti
 cles are detected and their very short dynamical life is recorded. The prototype of such
 a device has been the cloud chamber, constructed by Wilson in the years 1911-12
 (see e.g. Leone and Robotti 2004 for a description of the original apparatus). The
 importance of the cloud chamber was immediately realized and the device was exten
 sively used to investigate the properties of many different atomic and sub-atomic
 particles. In particular, it was used to observe and characterize the "ionizing radia
 tion" emitted by radioactive sources, which was precisely the case examined in Mott's

 paper. During the last years of the 19-th century Wilson was experimentally analyzing

 the conditions of fog formation in air saturated with water vapor. He examined the
 role of electric charges as condensation nuclei for the excess of vapor. In the first
 years of the 20-th century "...ideas on the corpuscular nature of alpha- and beta-rays

 had become much more definite, and I had in view the possibility that the track of
 an ionizing particle might be made visible and photographed by condensing water
 on the ions which it liberated" (from Wilson's Nobel lecture, Stockholm, December

 1927). In fact, he made available an experimental apparatus operating schematically
 as follows. The air saturated with water vapor, contained in a chamber, is submitted
 to a very fast expansion lowering its temperature and driving the mixture towards a
 supersaturated state. The a-particle, released by a radioactive source placed in the
 chamber, interacts with the atoms of the gas inducing ionization. The ionized atoms

 trigger the formation of small drops of water near their positions. The sequence of
 such drops is the visible track that one can directly observe in the chamber. Wilson
 had to solve the complex experimental problem of instantaneous and synchronized
 illumination and photography of the sequence of drops. The track is regarded as the
 experimental manifestation of the "trajectory" of the a-particle and, as a matter of
 fact, is accurately described as the trajectory of a classical particle (relativistic or
 non relativistic according to the initial particle velocity) in a classical electromagnetic
 field. In particular, one observes straight lines whenever no electromagnetic field is

 present.

 The advent of Quantum Mechanics in the years 1925-27, together with its standard
 interpretation, made the effectiveness of the classical description of the tracks rather
 problematic (see e.g. Falkenburg 1996; Carazza and Kragh 2000). In order to outline
 the context at the time the cloud chamber problem was first approached we briefly
 summarize here some crucial steps which led to the final formulation of the theory

 (for a detailed analysis we refer to Jammer 1989; Cushing 1994; Stepansky 1997).

 As it is well known, the decisive contributions to the elaboration of the theory

 came from Heisenberg (1925), together with Born et al. (1925) in 1925, and from
 Schrodinger (1978) in 1926. The two approaches, known as matrix mechanics and

 wave mechanics respectively, were based on radically different physical descriptions
 of atomic phenomena.

 The former approach is characterized by the explicit rejection of the classical notions

 of position and velocity in the description of atomic phenomena, in favor of a new
 kinematics based on observable quantities, like frequencies and amplitudes of the
 emitted or absorbed radiation in quantum jumps. As a consequence, Matrix Mechanics

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 218

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 appears as an abstract algebraic formalism where any visualized or intuitive description
 of a microscopic object is abandoned.

 On the contrary, according to Schrodinger, such intuitive space-time description is
 still possible if one admits that a microscopic object is described by a wave instead
 of a point particle. On the basis of the analogy between optics and mechanics, he was

 able to derive the evolution equation for the wave x/r(x,t). Moreover, he also proposed

 a first physical interpretation of e\^/{x,t)\2 as the density charge at the point x and

 time t of the microscopic object with total charge e. The mathematical equivalence of

 the two theories was soon proved by Schrodinger himself leaving open the problem

 to provide the correct physical interpretation of the formal structure. The Schrodinger

 proposal encountered severe difficulties due to the fact that, in general, the solutions

 of the evolution equation inevitably spread in space as time grows.

 The finally accepted interpretation was given by Born (1926) in 1926. According to

 his proposal, \^(x, t)|2 is the probability density to find the object in x at time t. After
 Born, Quantum Mechanics was accepted more generally as a theory which can only
 provide probabilistic predictions (of the position or of any other observable relative to

 a microscopic object).

 A further important step in the direction of a deeper understanding of the formalism

 was made in 1927 by Heisenberg. In his paper on the uncertainty principle Heisenberg
 (1927) he was able to prove the uncertainty relations for position and momentum
 as a consequence of the non commutativity of the corresponding operators q and p.
 The physical implications of the uncertainty relations were illustrated through the
 famous thought experiment with a gamma-ray microscope to determine the exact
 position of an electron. The conclusion was that a more accurate determination of
 the electron's position implies a less accurate determination of the momentum and
 vice versa. According to Heisenberg, the operational impossibility to determine both

 position and momentum of a particle was the origin of the statistical nature of Quantum
 theory, making, at the same time, the classical notions of position, momentum and
 trajectory inadequate to describe the microscopic world.

 The work of Heisenberg on uncertainty relations stimulated Bohr to clarify his
 point of view on the interpretation of the theory. The main purpose of Bohr was
 to harmonize wave and matrix mechanics in a unified and coherent description of
 atomic phenomena. The occasion was the lecture delivered at the congress in Como,
 on September 1927 (Bohr 1928), and also the discussions in the subsequent Solvay
 Conference in Brussels, on October 1927 (Bacciagaluppi and Valentini 2009). Bohr's

 approach soon became the core of the so-called Copenhagen or standard interpretation

 of quantum mechanics. The main features of such interpretation scheme can be roughly

 summarized as follows: (i) completeness, (ii) wave-particle duality, (iii) lack of causal

 and space-time description, (iv) crucial role of the observation.

 (i) Completeness means that the wave function ijr describes the actual state of an

 individual system and the probabilistic meaning of 1^12 has an ontological char

 acter, i.e. it does not refer to our ignorance of hidden parameters.

 (ii) Wave-particle duality should be understood in the sense that a microscopic system

 cannot be described in terms of only one of the two classical concepts of wave or

 particle. The system rather behaves either as a wave or as a particle, depending

 <?} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems 219

 on the context or, more precisely, on the experimental apparatus used to observe

 the system. Therefore wave and particle behavior are two mutually exclusive and
 complementary aspects of the microscopic object essence.

 (iii) According to Bohr, Heisenberg uncertainty relations show the impossibility of

 having a causal description (based on the precise determination of the momentum)

 and a space-time description (based on the precise determination of the position)
 simultaneously. In this sense classical concepts like causality and space-time
 descriptions must also be considered as two mutually exclusive and complemen

 tary aspects of the description of a quantum system.

 (iv) The last important point is the role of the observation. A measurement apparatus

 must be considered as a classical object, characterized by a precise determination

 of its classical properties. The measurement process consists in the interaction

 between the microscopic system and the classical apparatus. The result of a mea

 surement is the determination of one of the possible complementary properties

 of the quantum system. The crucial point is that the measured property of the

 system cannot be thought as pre-existing to the measurement process. The prop

 erty is produced only as the result of the interaction with the classical apparatus.

 More precisely, the emerging property is determined by the whole experimental
 context, i.e. the specific preparation of the system and the characteristics of the

 apparatus. This, in particular, means that the state of the system immediately

 before the measurement (when the system does not possess the given property)

 is different from the state immediately after the measurement (when the system

 possesses the property). The abrupt change of the state of the system determined

 by the measurement process is called wave packet reduction.

 It is worth mentioning that the above conception of the measurement process is the

 most delicate aspect of the Copenhagen interpretation and it has raised a long debate

 that still continues. Here we only briefly mention some problematic points.

 First, it is not explained why all or part of the experimental device, despite being

 made of atoms, must behave as a classical object with well-defined classical properties.
 Moreover it is not clear where the borderline between the measurement apparatus
 (characterized by a classical behavior) and the system (characterized by a quantum
 behavior) should be put. The problem is usually solved pragmatically in each specific
 situation but, at a conceptual level, the ambiguity remains.

 Finally, one has to renounce to describe the interaction of the system with the
 apparatus using the Schrodinger equation. This fact was formalized in 1932 by von
 Neumann (1955) who postulated two different kinds of evolution for the system: a

 genuine quantum evolution governed by the Schrodinger equation when the system is
 not measured and a different (stochastic and non linear) evolution producing the wave

 packet reduction when the system is measured.

 We only want to mention that many attempts have been made to clarify these con

 ceptual problems within the framework of the standard interpretation but a reasonable
 and universally accepted solution has not been found.

 From the point of view of our analysis it is interesting to observe that the prob

 lematic aspects of the system-apparatus interaction are immediately evident when one

 approaches the description of a quantum particle in a cloud chamber. In fact, for a

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 220

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 quantum mechanical description of the process one must take into account that the
 initial state of the particle emitted by the source does not have the form of a semi

 classical wave packet but rather a highly correlated continuous superposition of states

 with well localized position and momentum. In particular, according to the first theo
 retical analysis of the radioactive decay given by Gamow (1928), the emitted a-particle

 must be described by a wave function having the form of a spherical wave, with center

 in the radioactive nucleus and isotropically propagating in space. Therefore, the non

 trivial problem arises as to how such a superposition state can produce the observed

 classical trajectories. As we shall see in the next sections, in such explanatory scheme
 a crucial role is played by the act of 'observation", where the system to be measured
 can be the a-particle (in particular its position) as well as the atoms of the vapor

 (in particular their excitation).

 3 Early contributions

 In this section we shall briefly summarize the first theoretical attempts to explain

 the apparent contradiction between the highly correlated superposition state of the
 a-particle and the observed tracks in the chamber. In particular, we shall consider the
 contributions of Bora (1927), Heisenberg (1929-30) and Darwin (1929).

 3.1 Born (1927)

 The theoretical explanation of the observed tracks in a cloud chamber was already
 approached by Born (for the first time to our knowledge) in 1927 during the gen
 eral discussion at the Solvay conference (Bacciagaluppi and Valentini 2009). In his
 words: "Mr. Einstein has considered the following problem: a radioactive sample emits

 a -particles in all directions; these are made visible by the method of the Wilson cloud
 chamber. Now, if one associates a spherical wave with each emission process, how
 can one understand that the track of each a -particle appears as a (very nearly)
 straight line? In other words: how can the corpuscular character of the phenomenon

 be reconciled here with the representation by waves?"

 According to Born, the answer can be given resorting to the notion of "reduction

 of the probability packet" discussed by Heisenberg (1927). According to this notion,

 the observation of the electron position by light of wavelength k would produce the

 reduction of the probability packet for the position of the electron to a region of
 linear size k. In the subsequent evolution the packet spreads in space until a new
 observation reduces it again to a packet of width k. Then, in Heisenberg's words:

 "Every determination of position reduces therefore the wave packet back to its original

 size k". This mechanism of reduction would be responsible for the appearance of a
 (nearly) classical trajectory of the electron.

 The same idea is used by Born in the case of the cloud chamber. Here the obser

 vation by means of light must be replaced by ionization of the atoms of the vapor
 in the chamber: "As soon as such ionization is shown by the appearance of cloud
 droplets, in order to describe what happens afterwards one must reduce the wave
 packet in the immediate vicinity of the drops. One thus obtains a wave packet in the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems 221

 form of a ray, which corresponds to the corpuscular character of the phenomenon". It
 is worth to emphasize that, according to this reasoning, the whole process is described
 in terms of the interaction of a quantum system (the a-particle) with a classical mea
 surement apparatus (the atoms of the vapor). Such interaction, which is not described
 by Schrodinger equation, produces "reduction" of the spherical wave to a wave packet
 with definite position and momentum.

 Following a suggestion by Pauli, Born continues discussing the possibility to
 describe both the a-particle and the atoms of the vapor as constituents of a unique

 quantum system, whose wave function depends on the coordinates of all the particles
 of the system. In particular, Born proposes, as an example, a simplified one dimen
 sional model consisting of the a-particle and only two atoms. The a-particle is initially

 in a superposition state of two wave packets with opposite momentum and position
 close to the origin. The two cases where atoms are placed on the same side or on

 opposite sides with respect to the origin are considered. Born discusses, at a purely

 qualitatively level, the probability that during the time evolution of the whole system
 the two atoms will be hit in the two different cases. We simply give the conclusions

 reached by Born without going into details (for a quantitative analysis of the same
 model, see e.g. Dell'Antonio et al. 2008).

 The first statement he makes, without invoking the reduction of the wave packet, is
 that the a-particle has negligible probability to hit both atoms unless they are on the

 same side with respect to the origin.

 On the other hand, Born concludes his argument having an explicit recourse to the
 reduction postulate, saying: 'To the reduction of the wave packets corresponds the
 choice of one of the two directions of propagations", and the choice is made as soon
 as one observes the excitation of an atom, as a consequence of the collision. Only
 starting from such an observation the evolution of the a-particle can be described as

 a real classical trajectory.

 In conclusion, it seems that according to Born a more detailed description of the
 a-particle in a cloud chamber taking into account the presence of the environment is in

 fact possible "but this does not lead us further as regards the fundamental questions".

 3.2 Heisenberg (1929-30)

 As already mentioned, Born's analysis was explicitly inspired by the considerations
 of Heisenberg (1927) on the applicability of the notion of classical trajectory of an
 electron. It is remarkable that Heisenberg himself explicitly reconsidered the cloud

 chamber problem in his lectures at the University of Chicago in 1929, published in

 Heisenberg (1927), following the same line of thought of Born but with considerably

 more details. His approach, described in chapter 5 of the book, can be considered an
 exhaustive qualitative investigation of the problem according to the standard inter
 pretation of Quantum Mechanics. This analysis had a deep influence on the physics

 community for many years.

 Heisenberg's first (rather extreme) remark is that the whole experimental situation

 could be satisfactorily described using only classical mechanics, but it might also be

 of interest to discuss the problem from the point of view of quantum theory.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 222

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 He stresses that, approaching a quantum theoretical description, one is immediately
 faced with the problem of separating the quantum system from the apparatus. In the
 case of the cloud chamber, one has two different reasonable choices: (a) the quantum

 system consists of the a -particle alone (and then the molecules of the vapor play the role

 of the measurement apparatus); (b) the quantum system consists of the a-particle and

 the molecules of the vapor. It should be emphasized that the physical descriptions of

 the experimental situation obtained following the two different choices are explicitly
 considered equivalent. Heisenberg's line of reasoning in examining the two cases
 proceeds as follows:

 In case (a) the single molecule of the vapor measures the position of the a-particle.
 Assume that the molecule (supposed at rest) occupies a volume Aq around the point
 q\ and t\ is the collision time between a-particle and molecule. As result of the
 measurement process, the state of the a-particle is suddenly reduced and therefore at

 time t\ it has position q\ with spread Aq. On the other hand one knows the position

 qo of the a-particle at time to, when it leaves the radioactive source. Since no external

 force is present, one infers that the momentum of the a-particle at time t\ is p\ —
 M(q\ — qo)/(t\ — to), where M denotes the mass. It is then possible to conclude that
 for t > t\ the a-particle is described by the free evolution of a wave packet starting
 from <71, with initial spread Aq and momentum along the straight line y joining qo
 and q\. Therefore, the center of the wave packet moves along the same line y. During
 the time evolution the wave packet inevitably spreads out. On the other hand the
 a-particle collides with other molecules placed along y and after each collision the
 same measurement process of the position takes place. In this way the spreading is
 repeatedly reduced and the wave packet remains focused around the straight line y,

 corresponding to the observed "trajectory" of the a-particle.

 Let us consider case (b), where the molecules of the vapor are considered part of

 the quantum system. Heisenberg starts with an interesting claim that would have prob
 ably deserved further analysis: in case (b) the procedure to account for the observed
 trajectories is more complicated but, on the other hand, it allows to hide the role of
 the reduction of the wave packet.

 Then he goes on to describe a simplified model made of the a-particle plus only two
 molecules. The molecules are non interacting, their centers of mass are fixed in the

 positions ai, aj / and the internal coordinates are denoted by qi, q//. It is assumed that

 the Hamiltonians of the two molecules have a complete set of eigenfunctions <pn,{qi),

 (pnn (qn), corresponding to a discrete set of eigenvalues labeled by integers «/, «//.

 The initial state of the system is chosen in the form of a product of the ground states

 of the molecules (labeled by n®, n°n) times a plane wave with momentum p for the
 a-particle.

 The interesting object to compute is the probability that both molecules are excited

 and the result of the computation is that such a probability is significantly different

 from zero only if the momentum p is parallel to the line joining ai and a//. Since
 the passage of the a-particle is indirectly observed through the excitations of the
 molecules, the result explains why one can only see straight trajectories in a cloud
 chamber.

 The solution of the Schrodinger equation for the three-particle system is approached

 treating the interaction between the a-particle and the molecules as small perturbation

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems 223

 of the free dynamics and assuming that the momentum p is large with respect to
 the spacing of energy levels of the molecules. The perturbative computation is not
 developed in all details by Heisenberg. Here we only summarize the main steps of his

 procedure in order to clarify the line of reasoning.

 The Schrodinger equation is solved by iteration and at the first order the wave

 function can be written in the form

 ifW=e '*E° ^ w{Vnn(x)(pni(qi)<pnn(qn)

 (3.1)

 ni,nn

 where Eq denotes the total energy of the system, x the position coordinate of the

 a-particle and the coefficients w^nu satisfy an equation which is easily derived from

 the original Schrodinger equation. From Born's rule it follows that |tv$n,, (x)\2 rep
 resents the probability density (at first order) to find the a-particle in x when the
 molecules are in the states labeled by «/,«//.

 From the equation for w^nil it is immediately evident the first result: the probability

 that both molecules are excited is zero at first order.

 The second result claimed by Heisenberg is definitively less evident and neverthe

 less it is stated without detailed proof. It says that w^\ is significantly different from

 n/tiu

 zero only in a strip parallel to p located behind the molecule I, whose thickness (close
 to the molecule) is of the same order of the dimension of the molecule. The same kind

 of result is obviously true for w(1„ .

 n,nn

 Then he continues with the analysis of the wave function at the second order

 is(2) = e~'tE° U)ffnil(x)(pni(qi)<pnil(q//) (3.2)

 ni,nu

 (2)

 n,nii

 the strip of u/1? .

 n,nn

 The procedure can be iterated with an arbitrary number of molecules and therefore

 the linearity of the trajectories is proved.

 At the end of the analysis, Heisenberg makes a second claim on the problem of
 the wave packet reduction. In particular, he explains that in case (b) the reduction
 takes place when one arranges a measurement process "to observe" the excitation of
 the molecules. This simply means that the unavoidable line of separation between

 the system and the apparatus has been moved to include the molecules in the system.

 In this sense one should probably understand the previous claim that the reduction in
 case (b) is hidden.

 In summary, Heisenberg's analysis of the cloud chamber, like Born's analysis,
 insists to consider the treatments in case (a) and (b) as conceptually equivalent. This

 belief is founded on the fact that in any case the recourse to the reduction of the wave

 packet cannot be avoided.

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Writing the equation for wn/nn and exploiting the results obtained at the first order, he
 derives the desired final result. The probability density at second order C*)| ,

 (2) o

 with ni ^ n® and «// ^ n°n, is significantly different from zero only if the following

 two situations occur: the molecule II is in the strip of u/1' n or the molecule I is in

 224

 3.3 Darwin (1929)

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 A further relevant contribution to the explanation of the trajectories in a cloud chamber
 was given by Darwin (1929) in 1929. In this paper one does not find any analysis
 of specific models. Nevertheless there is a detailed discussion of the problem and
 it is clearly stated a possible strategy for an approach entirely based on the use of
 Schrodinger equation.

 Darwin approaches a collision problem in the framework of wave mechanics with
 the aim to "take a problem which would be regarded at first sight as irreconcilable

 with a pure wave theory, but thoroughly typical of the behavior of particles, and show

 how in fact the correct result arises naturally from the consideration of waves alone".

 He emphasizes that in order to obtain the correct predictions on the behavior of a given

 system S one has to take into account its interaction with (part of) the environment

 £. Therefore the wave function x/r is not a wave in ordinary three dimensional space

 but rather it is a function of the coordinates of <S and of £. Only when such V/ has

 been computed, the probabilistic predictions on S are obtained by taking an average
 over all possible final configurations of £. Such procedure, even if "discouragingly

 complicated", can account for the particle-like behavior working only on i/f and without

 invoking any act of observation. It is worth noticing that the program outlined by
 Darwin essentially coincides with the basic strategy of modern decoherence theory.

 After these considerations, Darwin discusses a concrete example where the intuitive

 particle behavior can be derived from the analysis of the wave function. That part of
 the analysis is not directly connected with the cloud chamber and therefore it is not

 relevant for our purposes. However, in the final part of the paper, one finds some other
 interesting considerations.

 He examines the case of the ray tracks of a-particles in a cloud chamber, "one of
 the most striking manifestations of particle characters", in connection with Gamow's
 theory of radioactive decay (Gamow 1928), distinguishing two different points of
 view.

 According to the first one "we must regard Gamow's calculations as determining

 only the probability of disintegration, and that when this has taken place, we start the

 next stage by assigning a definite direction/or the motion of the a -particle; after which

 we reconvert it into a wave, but now on a narrow front, so as to find its subsequent

 history".

 As an alternative to this point of view, he first notices that a-rays can in principle

 exhibit diffraction and therefore it is reasonable to assign a real existence to the spher

 ical wave outside the nucleus. Then he discusses a possible wave description of the

 experiment. The wave function i/f is a function of the coordinates of the a-particle
 and of the coordinates of the atoms in the chamber and, before the first collision, it

 is a product of the spherical wave for the a-particle times a set of stationary (in gen

 eral ground) states for the atoms. "But the first collision changes this product into a

 function in which the two types of coordinates are inextricably mixed, and every sub

 sequent collision makes it worse". Such complicated function contains a phase factor
 and "without in the least seeing the details, it looks quite natural to expect that this
 phase factor will have some special character, such as vanishing, when the various
 co-ordinates satisfy a condition of collinearity".

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems

 225

 It is interesting to notice that Darwin clearly identifies stationary phase arguments

 as the crucial technical tools required to predict the particle-like behavior.

 Then he continues: "so without pretending to have mastered the details, we can
 understand how it is possible that the xjs function, so to speak, not to know in what

 direction the track is to be, but yet to insist that it should be a straight line. The decision

 as to actual track can be postponed until the wave reaches the uncovered part, where the
 observations are made". This approach seems to have a general validity. In Darwin's
 view the wave-particle duality proposed by Bohr can be avoided. The whole quantum
 theory can be based on the wave function i/r, considered as the central object from
 which all the particle or wave properties can be accurately described, at least until
 a real measurement is performed. In his words "it thus seems legitimate to suppose
 that it is always admissible to postpone the stage, at which we are forced to think of

 particles, right up to the point at which they are actually observed'.

 4 Mott's paper

 The program enunciated by Darwin was concretely realized by Mott in his seminal

 paper of 1929. In the introduction Mott recognizes to have been inspired by Darwin's
 paper in his attempt to explain the typical particle-like properties of an a-particle in a

 cloud chamber using only wave mechanics. He admits that such a point of view seems

 at first sight counterintuitive, since "it is a little difficult to picture how it is that an

 outgoing spherical wave can produce a straight track; we think intuitively that it should

 ionise atoms at random throughout space". Like Heisenberg, Mott points out that the

 crucial point is to establish the borderline between the system under consideration and

 the measuring device. He recalls the two possible approaches: in the first the a-particle

 is the quantum system under consideration (and the gas of the chamber is part of the
 measuring device) while in the second approach the quantum system consists of the
 a-particle and of the atoms of the gas.

 Mott proceeds toward a detailed analysis of the problem following closely the lat

 ter approach. He claims that the intuitive difficulty mentioned above can be overcome
 since it arises from our erroneous "tendency to picture the wave as existing in ordi
 nary three dimensional space, whereas we are really dealing with wave functions in

 multispace formed by the co-ordinates both of the a -particle and of every atom in the
 Wilson chamber

 The model considered by Mott consists of the a-particle, initially described by a
 spherical wave centered at the origin, and the electrons in two hydrogen atoms. The

 nuclei of the atoms are supposed at rest in the fixed positions ai, a2, with \a \ | < \ao\- It

 is assumed that the a-particle does not interact with the nuclei and that the interaction

 between the two electrons is negligible. The interaction between the a-particle and
 the electrons is assumed to be weak. The model is essentially the same considered

 by Heisenberg in case (b). Nevertheless, as we shall see, Mott's analysis is definitely

 more detailed and therefore the outcome appears more transparent and convincing.

 The main result of the paper can be summarized in the following statement: under

 suitable assumptions (which will be specified later) the two hydrogen atoms cannot
 both be excited (or ionized) unless ai, and the origin lie on the same straight line.

 4?) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where A* is the Laplacian with respect to the coordinate x, M is the mass of the

 a-particle, m is the mass of the electron, —e is the charge of the electron so that 2e is

 the charge of the a-particle.

 The solution of Eq. (4.1) can be conveniently expanded in series of eigenfunctions

 of the two electrons in the hydrogen atoms. More precisely, let i/fj be the y'-th eigen
 function of an hydrogen atom centered in the origin, with tj/o denoting the ground

 state. Then the corresponding eigenfunctions of the atoms in ai, a2 are

 y'j (n) = ifjin -a\), y'j'(r2) = i/j (r2 - a2)

 (4.2)

 226

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 We shall describe how Mott derives the result trying to follow the original nota
 tion and line of reasoning. Main objects of the investigation are periodic solutions
 F(R, r\, ri)elEt!h of the Schrodinger equation for the three particle system, where
 R, r\, ri denote the coordinates of the a-particle and of the two hydrogen atom elec

 trons respectively. The function F (depending parametrically on E) is solution of the
 stationary Schrodinger equation

 A rF +

 2 M

 - ( + ) F = EF i

 ( 2e2 2e2 \
 V|/?-ri| \R — r2| /

 We notice that here it is tacitly assumed that the index j can be an integer or a

 real positive number (and correspondingly xf/j can be a proper eigenfunction or a
 generalized eigenfunction).

 Exploiting completeness of the system of eigenfunctions, we have the following

 representation for F

 F(R, n, r2) = £ fnh(R)^'h(n)^{r2)

 (4.3)

 h'h

 The Fourier coefficients /), j2 (R) of the expansion have a direct physical interpretation.
 Indeed, exploiting Born's rule, the probability to find the first atom in the state labeled

 by ji and the second atom in the state labeled by 72 is

 (4.4)

 One can pictorially say that the "wave function" of the a-particle is /oo(R) if both

 atoms remain in the ground state, /;io(R), j\ 0, if the first atom is in the y'j-th
 excited (or ionized) state and the second in the ground state, fjlj2(R), ji, h / 0, if
 both atoms are excited (or ionized).

 The analysis will show that /oo(R) is a (slightly deformed) spherical wave and

 /y,o(R), jl 7^ 0, is a wave packet emerging from ai with a momentum along the line

 0&\. This means that the second atom can be excited by such wave packet only if

 lies on the line Oaj. Thus the desired result will follow, i.e. fjtj2(R), j], ji ^ 0, is
 approximately zero unless the condition of co-linearity is satisfied.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems

 227

 5 Derivation of the result

 Exploiting the assumed weakness of the interaction between a-particle and electrons,

 the computation is carried out using second order perturbation theory. If we write

 F = F(0) + F(1) + F(2) + • • • (5.1)

 then by successive approximation one has for n > 1

 —— Ar F{n) + (- — An ) F(n) + (-—An ) P(n) -EF(n)

 2M \ 2m In—ail/ \ 2m |r2-a2|/
 = ( 2e2 2e2 \ (»_0

 \|R — n| |R — t21 / (5'2)

 For n = 0 one has to solve the unperturbed equation:

 -*LArF<P> + (-—An —)

 2M V 2m n |ri-ai|/

 F(0)

 + (~An- 62 ) F(0) - £F(0) = 0 (5.3)

 \ 2m |r2-a2|/

 As solution of (5.3) one chooses a diverging spherical wave times the ground state of
 the two atoms

 F<-°\R, n, ri)= (r2),
 Jk\R\

 /oo ) |R| •

 t=V2«(E-2E„) f5A)

 where Ej denotes the j-th eigenvalue of the hydrogen atom and is the outgo
 ing solution of the Helmotz equation. Notice that the use of stationary Schrodinger

 equation forces Mott to choose a solution not in L2 which, strictly speaking, is not

 legitimate. In particular, the probabilistic interpretation (4.4) fails for fffl . For the first
 order term F(1) we write

 FW(R, n, r2) = X /$<*)*/, (5.5)

 *1,1*2

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 228

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 Substituting (5.5) into (5.2) for n = 1 one has

 Z + En + E'2 - e) /$(*)*/, (n K'ta)

 '1,12

 - (]R^i + jR^y 2) <5.6,

 Multiplying the above equation by ^ (ri^j'fa) and integrating over the coordi

 nates of the electrons one obtains the equation for fjj2(R)

 f!sAs+£''+E"-£)/S(s)

 2e2

 = C(R) (sh0<jdr\^^<(n)K^)
 2e2

 |R-nl

 +^10/-/ro- |R"_! r2| *o"fo)*£(n))

 Equation (5.7) can be rewritten in the more compact form

 (^mAr + e~ Ejl ~ E»)fhh{R) = Khh{R)

 where

 Kjlj2(R) = f^(R)(Soj2Vjl0(R - «i) + Sji0V0j2(R - «2))

 Viy(*) = - [dy 2e ^i(y)^j(y)

 J \x-y I

 The computation of the first order term is now reduced to the solution of the non

 homogeneous Helmotz Eq. (5.8). Mott refers to the treatise by Courant and Hilbert,

 Methoden der Mathematischen Physik, chap. 5, par. 10, to assert that the most general
 solution is

 M r e±ik'\R—R'\

 /<>, = Ohh(K> + —2 jdR'KIU2(R')lw-w,
 weuem (5.ii,

 h

 wher eGj,j2 is an arbitrary solution of the homogeneous equation (A+k )G jlj2 — 0.
 In our case the phase in the exponential must be taken with the sign + since we are inter

 ested in waves diverging from a\ or ai. Moreover Mott argues that Gj]j1 "represents

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems

 229

 streams of particles fired at already excited atom" while, as initial condition, we have

 both atoms in their ground state. Therefore one must require

 Ghh = 0 (5.12)

 Furthermore, from (5.9) one sees that Kjlj2(R) — 0 if both j\ and ji are different

 from zero and therefore, by (5.11), one also has = 0 if both j\ and 72 are different
 from zero.

 From these preliminary considerations a first conclusion can be drawn: at first order

 in perturbation theory the probability that both atoms are excited is always zero.

 The result is not surprising since, as Mott remarks, in perturbation theory the prob

 ability that one atom is excited is a first order quantity while the probability that both

 atoms are excited is a second order quantity. This explains why the second order term

 F<2) is required in order to obtain an estimate of a double excitation occurrence.

 The further crucial step is to give an approximate expression for /j^j and /qP.

 From (5.11), (5.12) and (5.9), for f-^ one has

 en M f eik'\R-a\-y\
 4> = 2W^<, + ',,VAoWiF^i- 'li£0 <513)

 and analogously for /^P. In order to find the required approximate expression Mott
 introduces the following assumptions:

 (a) the "observation point" R is far away from the origin and the atom, i.e. \a\| <£ | R |;

 (b) the collisions for the a-particle are almost elastic, i.e. k — k' <5C
 (c) the a-particle has a high momentum k, i.e. is much less than the effective

 linear dimension of the atom.

 Exploiting assumption (a) one obtains the asymptotic formula:

 /$(*) - iff-J,! 2rrh2 fdyf™(y + a^VjMy)e-ik'"aR) y (5.14)

 where

 ui(R)= * °\ (5.15)

 |jR -oil

 Using the explicit expression of [see (5.4)] and assumption (b) one can write:

 Jk'\R—a\|

 r(l)— C
 n;>(R) ~ — -X(Ki(fl)) (5.16)
 jl0"" I*-ail

 J(hi(J?)) = —fdy Vhoiy) ei«\y+^\-ui(R)-y) (5.i7)

 2nTi J + ai|

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On the other hand, the integrand in (5.17) is very small except in a neighborhood of

 y — 0. Therefore one obtains the condition

 230

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 One sees that /jjg(J?) has the form of a wave diverging from a i, whose amplitude X
 is given by the integral in (5.17) and it is explicitly dependent on the direction u\(R).

 The crucial point is now to evaluate such amplitude.

 By assumptions (c), the integral in (5.17) is a highly oscillatory integral and then

 stationary phase arguments can be used. The leading term of the asymptotic expansion

 for k —> oo is determined by the value of the integrand at the critical points of the
 phase, i.e. for points y such that

 V,(|j + ai|-m(*)-j) - ? + *\-«\(R) = 0 (5.18)

 V ' + «i I

 u\(R) — t~~. (5.19)

 l«il

 Using condition (5.19) in (5.15) one has that the amplitude X is significantly different

 from zero only for those R such that R—a i is (almost) parallel to a \, i.e. the observation

 point R must be (almost) aligned with the first atom and the origin.

 From the above argument one concludes that fj^(R) is approximately given by a
 wave diverging from a\ with an amplitude very small except for R satisfying (5.19),

 i.e. except in a small cone with vertex in a \ and pointing away from the origin. An

 analogous analysis is valid for (R) and therefore the computation of the first order

 term is completed.

 one has:

 The next step is to consider the second order term F(2). Proceeding as above,

 n, r2) = Y, to)*"to) (5.20)

 h,h

 ("Is7^ + ^,+^/z-*)/$,«>
 =fdr«"-i +w^i)
 = % Z f$<«>vlm<* - «i> + f}$(*)

 i\

 *2

 +5y,0 X fSWVjmW - «2) + /o(]2)(^)^1o(R - «i) (5.21)

 In the case ji, j2 •=/=■ 0 one finds

 ^ Springer

 (-|?a*+£>'+£'>-£)4!i!<s>

 - /$(*)V0;2(* - «2) + /«£(*) V,•,<>(« - a!) (5.22)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems 231

 We recall that \a\| < )«2U Vj\o(R ~ a\) is negligible except for R ~ a\ and (/?)
 is negligible except for R in a small cone with vertex in 02, pointing away from the

 origin. This means that the last term in the r.h.s. of (5.22) is very small. The same kind

 of argument shows that the first term in the r.h.s. of (5.22) is negligible except when
 the second atom is (approximately) aligned with the first atom and the origin. Thus

 the main result of the paper follows: the probability that both atoms are excited

 jdR\f™hm2, 71,72^0

 (5.23)

 is (approximately) zero unless a\, a 2 and the origin lie (approximately) on the same

 straight line. If one agrees that the (amplified) effect of the excitations of the atoms is the

 true observed phenomenon in a cloud chamber then the result can be rephrased saying

 that one can only observe straight tracks. In this sense Mott provides an explanation of

 the straight tracks observed in the chamber entirely based on the Schrodinger equation.

 6 Concluding remarks

 We want to conclude with a few comments on the different theoretical approaches to

 the cloud chamber problem discussed in the previous sections.

 As was pointed out before, according to Born and Heisenberg, it is definitely equiv

 alent to consider the atom of the vapor as a (classical) measurement device (case a)

 or as a part of the quantum system to be described by Schrodinger dynamics (case b).

 Such a position is meant to guarantee the consistency of the standard interpretation of

 quantum theory. In particular, the authors are interested in stressing the unavoidable

 role of wave packet reduction as the crucial rule ensuring the right correspondence
 between theory and observed physical world. From a purely foundational point of
 view their reasoning aims to make the axiomatic scheme work in any chosen way to
 address the cloud chamber dynamical problem and, as such, it has been adopted and

 shared by the majority of the physics community for a long time.

 However, from the concrete point of view of the physical description of quantum
 systems, the equivalence of the two approaches (a) and (b) seems difficult to maintain.
 In fact, one may find hard to accept the claim that an atom of the vapor is a classical
 measurement device of the position of the a-particle. After all, the atom is a micro

 scopic system on the same ground of the a-particle and there is no a priori reason to

 regard it as a classical system. Agreeing with this point of view, one should concede

 that approach (b) is surely more natural. In particular, it has the important advantage

 to allow a quantitative analysis taking into account explicitly the physical parameters

 characterizing system and environment. It is only on the basis of such a quantitative

 investigation that it is possible to clarify the conditions under which the interaction

 with the environment produces the appearance of classical trajectories.

 We want to stress this crucial point: the classical behavior of the a-particle is far

 from being universal. A completely dissimilar behavior has to be expected if the values

 of the physical parameters are different. On the other hand, consider Heisenberg's

 argument about "the atom as a measurement apparatus", within the framework we
 called approach (a). The resulting reduction of the wave packet should drive the a

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 232

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 particle in a state where the position is close to the ionized atom and the momentum

 has a direction deduced by the successive positions around the source (at time zero) and

 around the ionized atom (after the flight time to the first ionized atom). The argument

 seems independent of the interaction strength, while quantum analysis clarifies that,
 as expected, only an almost zero-angle scattering process (very low energy exchange)

 can guarantee that particle momentum will approximately lie in a small cone with axis

 on the line connecting source and ionized atom.

 A further point to be emphasized concerns the relevance of the result obtained in the

 approach b). It is shown that, under the right conditions and with high probability, one

 can only observe straight tracks. This is a highly non trivial result obtained exploiting
 Schrodinger dynamics without having any recourse to the wave packet reduction rule.

 The reduction should only be invoked at the stage of the "observation of the actual

 track" described by the a-particle. It is remarkable that, as we have seen in Sect. 3, this

 aspect was understood by Darwin even before the quantitative analysis was performed

 by Mott.

 On the basis of the above considerations, it seems to us that, from the physical
 point of view, the approach followed by Mott is more significant and challenging.
 In some sense, one can say that it establishes the validity conditions of the effective
 dynamical behavior of the system which is only postulated in case (a) without real
 physical motivations. It is interesting to notice that awareness of this fact is clearly
 expressed by Darwin while it remains only implicit in Mott, who prudently avoids
 expressing a preference.

 From an historical point of view, it is interesting to understand the reasons why
 the line of research initiated by Mott was not further developed and remained almost

 neglected for many years. One reason could be the influence and the authority of the
 position expressed by Born and Heisenberg. The consequence has been to discourage
 the new approach to the problem with the motivation that it was ineffectively more

 complicated without giving real advantages from the conceptual point of view.

 The whole problem of classical behavior in quantum systems has been rediscovered,

 starting around the eighties of last century, when remarkable experimental progress has
 made a detailed exploration of the classical/quantum border possible. This progress
 has motivated the development of decoherence theory, based on the construction of

 theoretical models of "system plus environment" where the dynamics of the emergence

 of classical behavior in a quantum system could be analyzed and quantified. Therefore,

 any investigation based on the wave packet reduction is of no help and one is forced

 to consider the problem entirely in the context of Schrodinger dynamics.

 As examples of successful applications of decoherence theory we mention the

 reduction of interference effects for the state of a heavy particle due to scattering by

 light particles (Joos and Zeh 1985; Hornberger and Sipe 2003; Adami et al. 2006)
 or the molecular localization for pyramidal molecules, like NH3, due to the dipole
 dipole interaction among the molecules (Claverie and Jona-Lasinio 1986; Grecchi et
 al. 2002).

 It is worth underlining that the pioneering work of Mott is entirely within the same

 line of thought. Moreover, we emphasize that the relevance of such a research is
 more related to the concrete and applied analysis of quantum systems rather than to
 foundational aspects.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Emergence of classical trajectories in quantum systems

 233

 We want to conclude commenting on some limitations present in Mott's analysis and

 on possible developments of his work. The first point concerns the use of the stationary
 Schrodinger equation which prevents a clear description of the time evolution of the

 three-particle system. In particular, it is missing a physically meaningful definition of
 the initial state and an explicit time-dependent analysis of the successive interactions

 of the a-particle with the two atoms. A second aspect is related to the proof techniques

 used by Mott which exploit perturbation theory and stationary phase arguments. There

 is a clear lack of control of the conditions in which these methods are applicable and

 there is no estimate of error arising from the various approximations used by the author

 (for a recent attempt to revisit Mott's model we refer to Dell'Antonio et al. 2010).

 We finally notice that a further development of Mott's work is lacking in the litera

 ture. In particular, the model should be generalized considering a more generic initial
 state for the particle, the presence of external force fields and an environment made

 by an arbitrary number of model atoms. In this way one could analyze the possible
 emergence of a classical trajectory of the quantum particle in a more realistic model.

 In our opinion, such analysis would surely be of great interest both from the theoretical

 and from the applicative point of view.

 References

 Adami, R., R. Figari, D. Finco, and A. Teta. 2006. On the asymptotic dynamics of a quantum system
 composed by heavy and light particles. Communications in Mathematical Physics 268(3): 819-852.
 Bacciagaluppi, G., and A. Valentini. 2009. Quantum theory at the crossroads: reconsidering the 1927Solvay

 conference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Bohr, N. 1928. The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature 121: 580-590.
 Born, M. 1926. Zur Quantenmechanik der Stossvorgange. Physikalische Zeitschrift 37: 863-867. (English
 translation reprinted in: Wheeler J.A., W. Zurek. Quantum theory and measurement. Princeton University
 Press, 1983).

 Born, M., and P. Jordan. 1925. Zur Quantenmechanik. Physikalische Zeitschrift 34:858. (English translation

 reprinted in: van der Waerden B.L. Source of quantum mechanics. Dover Publications Inc., 1967).
 Carazza, B., and H. Kragh. 2000. Classical behavior of macroscopic bodies from quantum principles: early

 discussions. Archive for History Exact Sciences 55: 43-56.

 Claverie, P., and G. Jona-Lasinio. 1986. Instability of tunnelling and the concept of molecular structure in
 quantum mechanics: the case of pyramidal molecules and the enantiomer problem. Physical Review A
 33: 2245-2253.

 Cushing, J.T. 1994. Quantum mechanics, historical contingency and the Copenhagen hegemony. Chicago:

 Darwin, C.G. 1929. A collision problem in the wave mechanics. Proceedings of the Royal Society London

 The University of Chicago Press.

 A 124: 375-394.

 Dell'Antonio, G., R. Figari, and A. Teta. 2008. Joint excitation probability for two harmonic oscillators in

 dimension one and the Mott problem. Journal of Mathematical Physics 49(4): 042105.

 Dell'Antonio, G., R. Figari, and A. Teta. 2010. A time dependent perturbative analysis for a quantum

 particle in a cloud chamber. Annates Henri Poincare 11(3): 539-564.

 Falkenburg, B. 1996. The analysis of particle tracks: a case for trust in the unity of Physics. Studies in

 History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 27(3): 337-371.

 Gamow, G. 1928. Zur quantentheorie des atomkernes. Physikalische Zeitschrift 51: 204.
 Giulini, D., E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, I.-O. Stamatescu, and H.D. Zeh. 1996. Decoherence and the

 appearance of a classical world in quantum theory. Berlin: Springer.

 Grecchi, V., A. Martinez, and A. Sacchetti. 2002. Destruction of the beating effect for a non-linear

 Schrodinger equation. Communications in Mathematical Physics 221: 191-209.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 234

 R. Figari, A. Teta

 Heisenberg, W. 1925.UberquantentheoretischeUmdeutungkinematischerundmechanischerBeziehungen.
 Physikalische Zeitschrift 33: 879-893. (English translation reprinted in: van der Waerden B.L. Source
 of quantum mechanics. Dover Publications Inc., 1967).

 Heisenberg, W. 1927. Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik.
 Physikalische Zeitschrift 43: 172-198. (English translation reprinted in: Wheeler J.A. and W. Zurek.
 Quantum theory and measurement. Princeton University Press, 1983).

 Heisenberg, W. 1930. The physical principles of the quantum theory. Chicago: The University of Chicago

 Hornberger, K., and J.E. Sipe. 2003. Collisional decoherence reexamined. Physical Review A 68(012105):

 Jammer, M. 1989. The conceptual development of quantum mechanics, 2nd edn. New York: American

 Joos, E., and H.D. Zeh. 1985. The emergence of classical properties through interaction with the environ

 ment. Physikalische Zeitschrift B59: 223-243.

 Leone, M., andN. Robotti. 2004. A note on the Wilson cloud chamber (1912). European Journal of Physics

 Press.

 1-16.

 Institute of Physics.

 25: 781-791.

 Mott, N.F. 1929. The wave mechanics of a-ray tracks. Proceedings of the Royal Soceity of London A 126:
 79-84. (Reprinted in: Wheeler J.A., W. Zurek. Quantum theory and measurement, Princeton University
 Press, 1983).

 Robert, D. 1998. Semi-classical approximation in quantum mechanics. A survey of old and recent mathe

 matical results. Helvetica Physica Acta 71: 44-116.

 Schrodinger, E. 1978. Collected papers on wave mechanics, 2nd edn. Vermont: Chelsea Publishing Co.
 Stepansky, B.K. 1997. Ambiguity: aspects of the wave-particle duality. The British Journal for the History

 of Science 30: 375-385.

 von Neumann, J. 1932. Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Berlin: Springer. (English trans

 lation Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Princeton University Press, 1955).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:03:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

