 

 

 

 

Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum electrodynamics in the 1960s
Author(s): Joan Lisa Bromberg
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 3 (May 2016), pp. 243-266
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913460
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:59 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913460?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:243-266 ΛβΛ rm<.sU,rL
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-015-0166-8 VB^

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum
 electrodynamics in the 1960s

 Joan Lisa Bromberg1

 Received: 4 May 2015 / Published online: 2 October 2015
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract The laser, first operated in 1960, produced light with coherence properties

 that demanded explanation. While some attempted a treatment within the framework

 of classical coherence theory, others insisted that only quantum electrodynamics could

 give adequate insight and generality. The result was a sharp and rather bitter contro

 versy, conducted over the physics and mathematics that were being deployed, but also

 over the criteria for doing good science. Three physicists were at the center of this

 dispute, Emil Wolf, Max Born's collaborator on a canonical text on optics as a branch

 of classical electromagnetism, Roy J. Glauber, a student of Julian Schwinger and a

 high-energy particle theorist, and Leonard Mandel, both experimentalist and theorist

 and versed in the physics of photodetection. The story told here is thus one of three

 distinct research trajectories and of the explosion that occurred when, pushed into the

 well-financed field of laser studies, these trajectories collided.

 1 Introduction

 One feature that marks twentieth-century physics is the complicated and ever-changing

 relation between classical and quantum physics, from the early uses of classical theo

 ries as stepping stones to quantum mechanics,1 through the application of the latter to

 1 See, among other publications, Darrigol (1992) and Joas and Lehner (2009).

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 Η Joan Lisa Bromberg
 joanlisa@jhu.edu

 1 Department of the History of Science and Technology, The Johns Hopkins University,

 Gilman 301, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 <£) Springer

 244

 J. L. Bromberg

 ever wider subject matters,2 to the use by late twentieth-century chaos theorists of a

 hybrid of classical and quantum analyses.3 An episode in this classical-quantum story

 occurred in the mid-century and was due, in part, to the invention of the laser and the

 attempts then made to deal with the peculiar kind of light it generated.

 Laser light provided a number of puzzles. Did it also exhibit the recently discov

 ered Hanbury Brown-Twiss effect? Here two beams of light from a conventional light

 source that were aimed at two different photodetectors showed unexpected correla

 tions. Did it produce waves in the visible part of the spectrum that were as coherent as

 radio frequency waves? And if it did, how was such coherence to be explained? Were

 its statistical properties similar to those of conventional light or different?

 Three somewhat separated traditions handled light ca. 1960. One was based on

 classical electromagnetism and applied mainly to optical and astronomical phenom

 ena, where the intensity of the light could be considerable. Another was quantum

 electrodynamics, which dealt with quanta, but could only deal with the effects of a

 handful of photons at a time. A third was quantum statistics, which traced its treatment

 of light back to Albert Einstein and Satyendranath Bose. Practitioners from these, as

 well as other, research traditions flocked to explain laser light, their numbers swelled

 by the largess of the US military and its interest in laser weapons and by the eagerness

 of commercial firms and university scientists to enter a promising new field.4

 What eventuated was a sharp and rather bitter controversy between the practitioners

 of classical and quantum electrodynamic approaches: a controversy that can give us

 some data on the arguments for each of these two styles of physics in the mid-century.

 But, as well, it can teach us something about knowledge transfer and knowledge

 growth. For the very existence of the dispute forced the combatants to examine the

 relation between their theories and techniques and those of the adversary, and led to

 efforts on both sides that enriched physics.5

 Three physicists were at the center of these events, and they are the focus of this

 paper. They were Emil Wolf, fresh from a collaboration with Max Born on a text, the

 magisterial Principles of Optics, based on classical electromagnetism, Roy J. Glauber,
 a student of Julian Schwinger and a theorist of high-energy physics, and Leonard

 Mandel, a scientist equally adept at instrumentation, experiment and theory. The story

 told here is therefore also one of their research trajectories and of the explosion that

 occurred when these trajectories, pushed by various factors toward the well-financed

 and well-promoted field of laser studies, collided there.

 The consequences were several. One was the emergence of the large new field of

 non-classical light. But another was a continued productive use of classical methods.

 And a third was a searching exploration of the explanatory power of classical vs.

 quantum calculations. A dramatic result of this last line of research was the proof that

 the photoelectric effect, long heralded as decisive evidence for the hypothesis of light

 2 Two studies are Hughes (1998) and Joas (2010).

 3 See Wise and Brock (1998) and Bokulich (2008).

 4 The classic articles on the military's interest in quantum electronics are Forman (1987, 1992, 1996). For

 the laser, see Seidel (1987) and Slayton (2011).

 5 Controversies with these two features are, of course, common in the history of science. See Dascal (1998).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 245

 quanta, could largely be explained classically.6 In this way, the 1960s controversy over

 classical vs. quantum theories of laser (and other forms of) light sustains the conclusion

 authors like Wise and Brock and Bokulich have already put forth: Twentieth-century

 physics is not simply a tale of the invention of quantum mechanics and its progressive

 conquest of the fields of classical physics. Rather it tells us of the continued viability

 of both theories, and their productive interplay.7

 2 Laser puzzles

 Three of the puzzles that scientists pondered, as mentioned above, were the question

 of whether the Hanbury Brown-Twiss (HBT) effect existed for laser light, the nature

 of this light's statistics and the explanation of its coherence. The uncertainty that

 researchers felt is clearly revealed in the published literature.

 The work that yielded the HBT effect originated in an attempt to measure the

 diameter of visible stars. Robert Hanbury Brown and his colleague Richard Quentin

 Twiss had invented a method for measuring the diameter of radio stars and wanted

 to show that it could be extended to visible ones. In 1956, they reported a laboratory

 proof-of-principle experiment. Using a conventional light source—a high-pressure

 Hgl98 arc—they split its beam in two and aimed each of the resulting beams at a

 separate photomultiplier tube. The position of one tube could be varied. When it was

 placed in such a way that the beams hitting the two had traveled the same distance, so

 that the light on the photocathodes was coherent, the fluctuations in the currents from

 the two detectors were correlated. As the movable tube was positioned so as to reduce
 the amount of coherence, the correlation decreased.8 That the current fluctuations from

 the tubes increased or decreased in tandem suggested that photons were arriving (or

 failing to arrive) in tandem.

 The strategy that Brown and Twiss used to explain these results had two parts. The

 first was to calculate the correlations for the radio frequency case. Here a radio field

 strikes two separated aerials and the signals that are excited travel separately through

 a series of circuit elements until they are introduced into a "correlator" that multiplies

 them together. The second step was to calculate the correlations for the apparatus of

 their optical experiment and show that they had the same form as the correlations in

 the radio frequency case. "Let us consider the case where a linearly polarized plane

 wave of light is normally incident on two separate photocathodes [that are followed

 by filters],..we shall show that the average value of the correlation between the a.c.

 fluctuations in the output currents of these filters is identical with that derived above

 for the radio case by a classical deterministic theory" (Brown and Twiss p. 311).

 It appears that Brown and Twiss were not here juxtaposing classical to quantum

 electrodynamics. Instead, they were claiming that the phenomenon they had exhibited

 6 See Milonni (1984).

 7 Hasok Chang makes a plea for this sort of situation in Chang (2011).

 8 The history of this experiment and the controversy it aroused are described in Silva and Freire (2013). Some

 minor mistakes in the description of the Brown-Twiss paper of January 1956 are corrected in Historical
 Studies in the Natural Sciences Volume 45, #3 (2015).

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 246

 J. L. Bromberg

 could be explained by a deterministic wave theory as well as by a stochastic corpuscular

 one. They referred to the 1909 paper in which Einstein had calculated the fluctuations

 in the energy contained in a small portion of a cavity filled with thermal radiation. There

 were two terms to the fluctuations. In the case of the second term, "as Einstein...pointed

 out, this excess noise is essentially a wave interference effect, but it can be interpreted

 in the corpuscular picture as the so-called 'bunching' of photons. ... It is of course

 possible, by means of quantum statistics, to develop the theory ... entirely in terms

 of the particle picture ... however, we have chosen an alternative approach which

 emphasizes that the correlation between photons is essentially an interference effect

 related to the wave picture" (Brown and Twiss 1957, pp. 301, 302).

 Now a mercury arc is a source of thermal light, which was thought of as coming

 from a large number of excited atoms radiating independently. A laser, however, makes

 use of stimulated emission, in which photons from one atom excite emission in others.

 Would this nonthermal source also give light with HBT correlations? Opinions varied.

 In a letter published before the first lasers functioned, John H. Sanders of Oxford

 thought "[successful operation of the optical maser would ...provide a light source

 which would allow an even more convincing demonstration of photon correlation"

 than that with conventional sources (Sanders 1959). In a paper submitted roughly on

 the operational laser's first birthday, Leonard Mandel and Emil Wolf wrote: "Until

 very recently it was difficult to demonstrate [the HBT] effect, because of the very low

 value of the 'degeneracy parameter' ... of light generated by ordinary sources. ...but

 the degeneracy parameter of radiation from an optical maser is of quite a different

 order of magnitude ... thus one may now carry out with relative ease a number of

 experiments which make use of the Hanbury Brown-Twiss effect."9

 In contrast, other authors were critical. Thus, two scientists at the Canadian Defence

 Research Telecommunications Establishment, in a critique of an article on the signal

 to-noise ratios calculated for the detection of laser light, pointed out that the author had

 assumed that calculations good for blackbody light, "i.e., a group of atoms emitting

 independently in a large number of modes," were also good for laser light (Smith and

 Williams 1962, p. 337). This kind of assumption could simply not be carried over for

 this new kind of light. Nor, by extension, could the laser be expected to give the same

 experimental effects, including the HBT effect.10

 Doubts about the statistical character of laser light were closely connected with

 the question of HBT correlations. Because ordinary light was conceived as coming

 from independent radiators, it was generally held that the quantities that characterized

 the (intrinsically fluctuating) classical electromagnetic field, for example the electric

 field strength, obeyed a Gaussian probability distribution. Was that true for lasers? Or,

 viewing the same question from the point of view of photons, the proof that the photons

 in a thermal field obey Bose-Einstein statistics depended on the assumption that the

 atoms that emit them follow a thermal distribution, with more atoms in lower than in

 9 Mandel and Wolf (1961b), quotation on p. 1697. The degeneracy parameter is the average number of

 photons in the same quantum state or, viewed from the perspective of statistical mechanics, in the same cell

 of phase space. Still another, similar, early opinion is Givens (1962).

 10 Mandel and Wolf themselves would reverse their opinion, based on Smith and Williams, in an article
 submitted in February 1963 (Mandel and Wolf 1963, p. 1315).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 247

 upper energy states. Lasers, however, made use of inverted populations, with more of

 its atoms in the more energetic levels. As University of Maryland physicist Carroll

 Alley would ask, "Could it be that some statistics intermediate between classical and

 Bose-Einstein apply to maser light...?" (Quantum Electronics III, p. 108).

 The uncertainties surrounding laser coherence were more complex. The laser is

 intrinsically of interest to both engineers and physicists. But engineers and physicists

 had different meanings for the word "coherent." Still worse, there were multiple and

 discordant meanings for the term within each discipline.

 Lamentations about the multiple definitions of coherence and expressions of con

 fusion about its meaning abound. A few examples can illustrate the point. In an article

 in the American Journal of Physics received in 1955, A. Theodore Forrester began

 "Certain widespread misconceptions concerning the nature of light, from the classical

 point of view, seem to have their origin in a rather loose usage of the term coherence"

 (Forrester 1956, p. 192). Princeton University's Robert H. Dicke, speaking at the first,

 1959, quantum electronics conference, held "It is interesting to note that the extension

 of the concepts of the radio engineer into the optical frequency region where quantum

 effects are important has yet to be carried out. In this connection, there has been consid

 erable misunderstanding of coherence concepts in the past.... the photon experiment

 of Hanbury Brown and Twiss has shown how confusing are coherence concepts when

 quantum effects are important" (Dicke 1960, p. 573). And Israel R. Senitzky would

 write in a paper published in 1962, "[An] unsatisfactory situation exists with respect

 to the concept of coherence ... because of the various different meanings attached to
 the word 'coherent'" (Senitzky 1962, p. 2864).

 Alongside these complaints went attempts on the part of both engineers and physi

 cists to provide coherence with a more satisfactory definition. A letter from Marcel

 J. E. Golay, received in February 1961 by the Proceedings of the Institute of Radio

 Engineers, affirmed that "coherence is not a quantitative concept, but a qualitative one;
 either radiation is coherent, or it is not." To test a source of narrowband radiation for

 coherence, he suggested heterodyning it with two perfectly monochromatic signals.
 "The two components of a phasor are obtained." If the phasor traces out a "molehill"
 centered at the origin, the radiation is incoherent. If it traces out a "'mole-run' cen

 tered at the origin but with vanishingly small probability at that origin" it is coherent11
 (Golay 1961).

 To this, R. N. Bracewell of Stanford's Radioscience Laboratory, replied "before
 we can discuss Golay's view that 'either radiation is coherent, or it is not,' we need

 a definition. The one suggested is not good." To give his own, he went on, "let us

 limit attention to a signal voltage v(t) derived from the radiation field by an antenna."

 Bracewell goes on to associate this real quantity with a complex phasor, F(t), and

 to give a definition of "a (complex) degree of coherence" which, unlike Golay's,
 was susceptible of gradations. He also dismissed Golay's molehill vs mole-run test

 with the argument that "both gasoline generators [of electricity] and ideal sine wave

 generators" can be made to give mole-runs. That distribution, therefore, "does not

 11 Golay was at Perkin-Elmer, an important laser firm.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 248

 J. L. Bromberg

 qualify as a criterion for coherent signals"12 (Bracewell 1962). Meanwhile, Senitzky

 proposed, using the apparatus of the quantum physicist, "[f]or our purposes, it is most

 convenient to define coherence by means of a consideration related to the uncertainty

 principle." And he went on to define it in terms of the degree to which the instantaneous

 value of a dynamical variable, like position or momentum, differed from its average

 (Senitzky 1962, p. 2865).

 All this time, however, a succession of scientists working within the classical theory

 of electromagnetism, and most prominently the Czech-born British scientist Emil

 Wolf, had been creating a highly sophisticated definition of coherence. Wolf, who had

 come to England in 1939 as a boy, had received his Ph.D. in 1948 at Bristol University.

 His mentor there was Ε. H. Linfoot, a mathematician and optical scientist, and Wolf

 had followed Linfoot as his assistant when Linfoot was appointed assistant director at

 the Cambridge University Observatories. Wolf's earliest work was on the development

 of the theories of geometrical optics and diffraction for use in the design of practical

 optical systems.

 In January 1951, Wolf left Cambridge to join Max Born in Edinburgh in order to

 collaborate with him on what would become Principles of Optics, a book that would

 serve as a canonical text on classical electromagnetism and optics for the rest of the

 century. Here, while working on the chapters on interference, Wolf began to see the

 need for more rigorous treatments of coherence.13

 Born retired in 1953, and in 1954 Wolf moved to the University of Manchester,

 where, for several years, he was supported by a series of fellowships and contracts.

 Drawing on recent progress in the mathematics of random processes, he proceeded

 to publish his results on coherence.14 Generalizing the work of earlier authors, Wolf

 defined coherence in terms of the correlations of the fields at two distinct space-time

 points. Let the two points be Pi and P2. Wolf made use of a complex function of space

 and time, V(P,t), whose real part represented, for example, a Cartesian component of
 the electric field. He then introduced a "mutual coherence function" that depended

 upon the time average of the product of V at one space-time point with its complex

 conjugate at another. From this, a derived quantity, the complex degree of coherence,

 emerged that took the value 1 for completely coherent light and 0 for light that was

 completely incoherent. Values between 0 and 1 then identified the far more realistic

 case of light that was partially coherent.15 On these foundations, Wolf and his students
 and collaborators erected an elaborate theoretical structure. It enabled them to deal

 with partially polarized as well as partially coherent light and to generalize Huygen's

 principle and other bedrock relations of classical optics. In short, at this point, Wolf

 had in hand a research program that was giving solid results and that seemed capable

 of yielding many more.

 12 Bracewell's definition of the degree of coherence is so much like that of Wolf, which I discuss below,

 that it is worth knowing why he does not cite Wolf.

 13 Wolf discusses his collaboration with Born in detail in Wolf (1983).

 14 The papers Wolf published are listed in the bibliography of Wolf (2001). The subset specifically related
 to coherence through 1966 are also listed in the bibliographies of Mandel and Wolf (1970).

 15 Wolf gives some of the progress of his thinking in the 1999 lecture "The Development of Optical
 Coherence Theory" (Wolf 1999).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 249

 At Manchester, Wolf was in the thick of the discussion of the HBT results and their

 theoretical explanation. Hanbury Brown worked out of Manchester's Jodrell Bank
 radio astronomy installation. Astrophysicist Franz D. Kahn, then a Lecturer in the

 university's Department of Astronomy, was publishing an explanation that made use

 of photons "when quantum physics applies" (Kahn 1958, p. 95). In this environment,

 Wolf also sought to bring Brown and Twiss' results into connection with the theory

 he was developing. He computed the correlation of the fluctuations in intensity at two

 points in an electromagnetic field under the assumption that the field was due to a large

 number of "randomly emitting atomic radiators." It was, he showed, proportional to the

 square of his mutual coherence function. What Brown and Twiss had accomplished,

 from the perspective of his own work, was "a radically new method for the measuring

 of the correlation between light beams" (Wolf 1957, quotations on pp. 353 and 354).

 An essential feature of his theory, and one to which Wolf repeatedly called attention,

 was that its components were quantities that were observable.16 One reason among

 others that made this desirable was that a theory couched in such terms could be

 applied more successfully to instruments and experimental results. In addition, because

 his theory took into account the random fluctuations that real light fields inevitably

 show, and rewrote Maxwell's theory in terms of them, Wolf saw it as generalizing

 Maxwell's "deterministic" theory into a "statistical" one. "[0]ptical coherence theory

 ... bears a similar relationship to Maxwell's theory as statistical mechanics bears to

 Newtonian mechanics" (Wolf 2001, p. 621). These researches were not widely known

 ca. 1960, not even by optical scientists.17 But the 1959 publication of the first edition of

 Principles of Optics, which incorporated Wolf's work, was beginning to disseminate

 them. Meanwhile, laser scientists were beginning to observe coherence in laser light.

 Their analyses were based, not on Wolf's work, but on the widely used and simpler

 criterion that light at two points were coherent if the beams proceeding from them
 could be made to interfere.18

 3 Disparate approaches

 Two men, Emil Wolf and Leonard Mandel, were particularly well positioned to attack

 the problems laser light posed. Wolf, as we just saw, had been wrestling with problems

 of optical coherence for almost a decade. Mandel had played a major role in discussions

 of the Hanbury Brown-Twiss effect. More unexpected, however, was a foray into laser

 puzzles by the nuclear and high-energy particle theorist, Roy J. Glauber.

 By 1960, when the first lasers were operating, Wolf had a permanent position. It

 was in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Rochester in

 Rochester, New York. Here he found a strong interest in lasers and ample military

 16 See, for example, Wolf (1954).

 57 Even in 1963, Wolf would remark "there seems to be a considerable lack of agreement about the precise

 meaning of the term 'coherence'. Yet, in the domain of classical optics, a considerable clarification of this

 term has been obtained ... and a theory has been formulated which provides a satisfactory description of

 the majority of coherence effects ... from thermal sources" Wolf (1963b), quotation on p. 29.

 18 For example, Nelson and Collins (1961) and Abella and Townes (1961). The following year, 1962,

 however, would see the appeal to the Wolf theory in such experiments.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 250

 J. L. Bromberg

 funding to support it. One of his first tasks at Rochester was to chair the program

 committee for a conference on coherence that the Air Force was promoting (Bromberg

 1991, pp. 106-108). Thereafter, to some degree, he turned his attention from partial

 coherence to the much more complete coherence lasers showed. In one paper, co

 authored with Mandel, the two laid their problem out: "the general properties of

 completely coherent fields have so far not been studied in any detail." They then build

 up the two notions, of "complete coherence" between the electromagnetic disturbances

 at two points in an optical field and of "coherent fields," out of Wolf's mutual coherence

 function and his complex degree of coherence (They also use the concept of the

 normalized spectral density, which is the Fourier transform of the complex degree of

 coherence.) (Mandel and Wolf 1961a, quotation on p. 815).

 Other papers, though mainly concerned with thermal light, throw a lifeline to lasers.

 Thus, we have a paper by Wolf alone, submitted in the Spring of 1962, that seeks to

 determine whether one can deduce a light source's energy spectrum (the dependence

 of the energy density on the frequency) from the complex degree of coherence even

 for cases in which the energy density is asymmetric around its average frequency.

 The paper is an exercise in the mathematics of complex variables, but Wolf points out

 that it may be useful for obtaining information about the spectrum of the output from

 an optical maser (Wolf 1962). In another paper, submitted at the end of 1962, Wolf

 makes use of the laws he had previously discovered for the way in which his mutual

 coherence functions change as they propagate in space and time. He concludes that

 "complete spatial coherence may be generated in light which is initially only partially

 space-coherent or even incoherent," and suggests that "[t]his result throws doubts as

 to the correctness of the belief that the strong spatial coherence of maser beams has

 its real origin in stimulated emission." "For our analysis strongly suggests that the

 propagation of light between the end plates of the two mirrors of the maser cavity,

 together with the accompanying diffractions at each mirror, [is the true origin]" (Wolf

 1963a, quotations on pp. 166 and 168).

 The joint papers Wolf and Mandel wrote in these early years incorporated results

 each was achieving individually, and it is difficult to guess the extent to which each

 internalized the other's reasonings. But if we try to isolate Wolf's approach, we may

 conclude, provisionally, that he approached the laser's problems by generalizing and

 extending the theoretical structures he had already created to deal with thermal light.

 As he wrote in a paper for an April 1963 conference, "optical coherence theory ... has

 primarily been developed for the analysis of effects produced with thermal light. ...

 [its] framework... can readily be broadened to make the theory applicable to coherence

 experiments performed with any kind of light, whether from a thermal source, a laser

 or any other type of source."19

 The Berlin-born Mandel, like Wolf, came from a family that took refuge in Britain to

 escape the Nazi holocaust. His Ph.D. research, from Birkbeck College at the University

 of London, was on cosmic rays, and involved him in work with particle detectors

 (Scully et al. 2006). From his earliest paper, published while he worked at Imperial
 Chemical Industries, Mandel was concerned with instruments, but also with the effect

 19 Wolf (1963b), quotation on p. 30. This same generalizing tactic is also notable in Wolf's earlier papers.

 β Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 251

 on them of intrinsically stochastic processes, like radioactive decay. Thus, this first

 article took up this question: Given that the beta rays then used in the measurement

 of the thickness of samples were emerging in an inherently probabilistic fashion, how

 did this limit the accuracy of these thickness gauges.20

 The instruments Mandel considered extended to apparatus like image intensifiers;

 in these, photons hitting a photocathode liberate photoelectrons that then impinge on

 a luminescent screen to release still additional photons.21 Hence, when controversy

 broke out over the HBT effect and the responses to light of the photodetectors used

 in demonstrating it, it is not surprising that Mandel—by this time a Lecturer in the

 Department of Physics, Instrument Technology at Imperial College, London—joined

 the fray with two theoretical papers (Mandel 1958, 1959).

 The papers are best known to physicists for a formula that gives the probability that

 a detector will register η photoelectrons in an interval of Τ seconds at time t. Mandel

 first assumed that the probability that the cathode of a photodetector will release an

 electron, in the infinitesimal interval between t and t + di, is proportional to P(t),

 the classical intensity—averaged over a few cycles—of the wave that strikes it. But

 because the field varies from moment to moment in a random way, one cannot rest

 there. Instead, it is necessary to take an average over an ensemble of realizations, in

 each of which P(t) might differ. Doing so gives a probability distribution that differs

 from that for classical particles. It enabled Mandel to derive formulas that support

 Brown and Twiss' analysis.

 These papers are equally interesting, however, for the way in which Mandel, like

 Brown and Twiss, struggles throughout with light's wave-particle duality. To start

 with, he assigns the waveness of light to the classical field and the particleness to the

 discreteness of the photoelectrons that are emitted. "Consider a beam of light falling

 on some photoelectric detector ...Only the photoelectrons and not the photons are,
 of course, observable and our discussion must therefore be confined to the statistical

 behavior of the photoelectrons.... The observable P(t) provides the only link between

 the wave and the particle descriptions of the beam".22 But his considerations are
 not always consistent. Elsewhere he invokes the statistical idea of degeneracy with

 its basis in a phase space of 6 dimensions, three spatial and three representing the

 three components of momentum, a space divided into cells of a size dictated by the

 quantum mechanical uncertainty principle.23 High degeneracy corresponds to many

 photons crowded into a single cell. He tells us that when it occurs, the light beam has a

 wave character, while low degeneracy corresponds to a beam with particle properties.

 20 Mandel (1954). This, of course, is similar to the pre-World War II papers on how Brownian motion

 limits the accuracy of galvanometers.

 21 For example, Mandel (1955).

 22 Mandel (1958), quotation on p. 1038. Historical treatments of the wave-particle duality generally treat

 the pre-World War II period and include Folse (1985), Duncan and Janssen (2008) and Camilleri (2006). For

 aspects of Mandel's encounter with Louis de Broglie's brand of wave-particle dualism, see my manuscript,

 "Leonard Mandel and Experimental Tests of Quantum Mechanics," available from the Center for History

 of Physics at the American Institute of Physics.

 23 Because the uncertainty principle requires that the uncertainty in any one of the three spatial dimensions

 multiplied by the uncertainty in the conjugate component of the momentum must be equal to or larger than
 h, the cell must be at least of size h?.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 252

 J. L. Bromberg

 "The degeneracy is also indicative of whether the wave or the particle properties of

 the beam predominate" (Mandel 1958, quotation on p. 1041). Again, when examining

 the result he has gotten for the fluctuations in the numbers of electrons released by

 a photocathode, with its two terms, he associates the second term with wave effects.

 "The excess fluctuations given by [the second term of the equation] correspond to

 the wave interaction noise of Hanbury Brown and Twiss" (Mandel 1958, quotation

 on p. 1042). "The correlation [between the fluctuations registered by two detectors]

 is therefore appreciable only when the wave properties, as distinct from the particle

 properties, of the beam become evident" (Mandel 1958, quotation on p. 1046).24

 In the years immediately following the first operating lasers, Mandel published both

 experimental and theoretical papers about them. It was work done while he bounced
 between his home base in London, where his equipment was, and the University of
 Rochester, where his friend and collaborator Wolf now worked. One of the earliest

 theoretical papers, sent in from Rochester, applied the concept of degeneracy to the new

 light source. "Until very recently all light sources gave rise to nondegenerate beams

 in the visible ... The purpose of this note is to compare [the degeneracy parameter] for

 a number of sources and to draw attention to the very large values of [it] which can

 now be obtained for visible light from the recently developed optical maser."25

 The high degeneracy of laser light and its consequent wave-like properties was one

 motivation Mandel gave for an experiment in London with one of his graduate students.

 Pointing out that it had been shown that light from two independent microwave sources

 could interfere, the paper postulated, and went on to demonstrate, that light from two

 independent ruby lasers could also interfere. The authors give a calculation of the

 effect using a classical analysis. They mention, but do not here engage with, Paul

 Dirac's quantum mechanics-based dictum that "Interference between two different

 photons never occurs."26 Other papers Mandel sent in during 1962 show a continuing

 attempt to understand the relation between ordinary interference and the HBT effect,

 between ordinary light and laser light and between the various concepts then abroad
 of coherence.27

 In all this work, Mandel's papers reflect the groping for proper notions of laser

 light that so marked the physics literature in these first post-laser years. What you
 scarcely find in them, however, are appeals to the conceptual apparatus of quantum

 electrodynamics (QED). Yet there were physicists who were trying to find solutions

 within this theoretical framework, and among them was Roy J. Glauber. Unlike Mandel

 and Wolf, he had not worked on these problems before, but for the phenomena he had

 studied, he had developed treatments that would prove adaptable to them.

 24 Mandel's use of statistical mechanics may reflect an influence of Reinhold Fuerth, an authority on

 classical and quantum statistics, who was at Birkbeck College when Mandel studied there and whom
 Mandel thanks "for some valuable discussions" (Mandel 1958, p. 1046).

 25 Mandel (1961), quotation on p. 797. This high degeneracy was the reason Mandel and Wolf initially

 thought that the laser would show the HBT effect.

 26 Magyar and Mandel (1963). The paper may be one of many indications of Mandel's experimental

 prowess, for the ruby lasers were markedly ill-behaved. Subsequent papers would engage fully with Dirac.

 27 See, for example, Mandel (1962a,b).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 253

 Roy Glauber was born in New York City in 1925. He worked at the Manhattan

 Project during World War II, and received his Ph.D. in 1949 at Harvard, under Julian

 Schwinger, with a thesis on the interaction of nucleons with meson fields. The next year

 he spent on a fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University.
 Here, he extended his thesis work to treat two cases. The one that is relevant here is the

 case in which a classical electric current produces a quantized photon field (Glauber

 1951 ).28 Glauber wished to get around the perturbation methods then in use, that could

 only deal with a handful of photons, or other bosons, at a time. "Deficiencies in the

 mathematical techniques for handling quantized field theories obscure many questions

 of critical importance, such as the extent to which difficulties of the theory arise from

 a questionable expansion in powers of a coupling constant, and the importance of

 higher order corrections" (Glauber 1951, p. 395). Instead of such a perturbation theory

 expansion, he represented the state of the system by a function with similarities to one

 Erwin Schroedinger had used decades earlier as a way to portray a wave function that

 would cohere together, instead of spreading out with time.

 After Princeton, and a year spend at the California Institute of Technology filling in

 for Richard Feynman, Glauber returned to Harvard. Here, one focus of his research was

 the phenomenon of scattering, especially the scattering of neutrons by nuclei, crystals

 and gases. In this work, Glauber emphasized the importance of going beyond the simple

 case of elastic scattering, where no energy is exchanged between the impinging particle

 and its target. And here too, we find certain parallels to the situations he would treat in

 lasers. For example, in the paper entitled "Time-Dependent Displacement Correlations

 and Inelastic Scattering by Crystals," (Glauber 1955), he represents the crystal as a

 continuous field, u(r, t), where u is the displacement of each point in the crystal from

 its equilibrium position. The neutron, as it passes through exchanging energy with the

 field, creates and absorbs the field's quanta (phonons). Correlation functions between

 the displacements at two separated points were already being used in this type of
 analysis. Glauber generalized them to include the correlation between the fields at two

 separated points and two distinct times.

 Glauber knew of the HBT effect from Harvard colleagues who were wrestling with

 it, but he only himself became involved after the first lasers were operated. He was

 approached then by Saul Bergmann, a theorist from the American Optical Company
 in Southbridge, Massachusetts. Bergmann had secured a copy of the 1961 Mandel

 and Wolf paper and wanted to recruit Glauber to help him understand what the HBT

 effect would be for the light from a laser (Bromberg 1991, pp. 108-110). Mandel and

 Wolf, as we have seen, used classical electromagnetism in their paper, and Glauber

 thought it essential to put the analysis in terms of quantum electrodynamics. "There is

 ultimately no substitute for the quantum theory in describing quanta" (Glauber 1963a,
 p. 85).

 After pondering the problem for about a year, Glauber realized that there might be

 an analogy between the relation of the lasing medium to laser light and the relation

 between a classical current and the quantized electromagnetic field it produces that he

 had studied in his 1951 paper. The lasing medium could be seen as a classical current in

 28 David Kaiser describes life for young theorists at the Institute in these years in Kaiser (2005, pp. 87-93).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ·£) Springer

 254

 J. L. Bromberg

 this sense: Macroscopically speaking, it was an electrically polarized medium whose

 polarization changed with time (Glauber 2006, p. 87). The field the laser produced

 could then be represented by the same kind of cohering states Glauber had previously

 used. Glauber now gave them the name of "coherent states." One indication that he

 was on the right track was that when he wrote down the expansion for an incoherent

 light beam in terms of coherent states, he got the right statistics: His incoherent beam
 had a Gaussian distribution.

 In a short paper received by Physical Review Letters in December 1962, Glauber

 laid out these results. He also introduced a quantum mechanical correlation function,

 C, not between two points in free space but between the photoionization events at

 two photodetectors separated in space and time. Correlation between the events only

 occurred when C departed from unity. For coherent states of the field, the correlation

 function C reduces to unity. Hence, coherent states "lead to no photoionization cor

 relations at all" (Glauber 1963a, quotation on pp. 85-86). It was more likely than not

 that laser light would turn out to be close in behavior to coherent states. If so, laser

 light would not show HBT correlations.

 The Physical Review Letters paper was a compilation of results without proofs. The

 next paper Glauber submitted was very different. It was sent to the Physical Review

 in February 1963 on the eve of his departure for Paris where the Third International

 Congress on Quantum Electronics was to be held. And it contained not only proofs

 but tutorials for those of his fellow physicists who did not know QED. "We shall try

 to construct this paper so that it can be followed with little more than a knowledge of

 elementary quantum mechanics. Since its subject matter is, in the deepest sense, quan

 tum electrodynamics, we begin with a section that describes the few simple aspects

 of that subject which are referred to later" (Glauber 1963b, pp. 2529-2530).

 The amount of new physics in the paper suggests that Glauber had done a prodigious

 amount of work in the late fall and early winter. Among the noteworthy results were

 a much extended definition of correlation and a new concept of coherence. Wolf had

 written his correlation function in terms of a complex quantity, V. Glauber wrote his in

 terms of E, the electric field vector. But in quantum electrodynamics, the field vectors

 become operators. And Glauber pointed out that it made sense to write Ε as the sum

 of two operators, E+ and E~, the first of which could be linked with the annihilation

 of photons, and the second with their creation. He developed his correlation functions

 in terms of these operators. There were η of them, where the integer η could take on

 any value; this corresponded to an experiment with η separated photodetectors.

 Wolf had defined coherence of the light between two field points by deriving a

 complex degree of coherence from his correlation functions and assigning complete

 coherence to the case in which its absolute value was unity. Glauber defined com

 plete coherence by requiring that all η correlation functions could be factored into

 independent functions. It was a condition mathematically similar to Wolf's but much

 extended. If only the first j functions could be so factored, where j was less than or

 equal to n, the field only had nth order coherence. "In photon coincidence experiments

 of multiplicity up to and including n, the photon counts registered by the individual

 counters may then be regarded as statistically independent results. No tendency of pho

 ton counts to be statistically correlated will be evident." The fact that the experiments

 of Hanbury Brown and Twiss did show correlations meant that "light beams from

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 255

 ordinary sources ...when made optimally coherent in the first-order sense, still lack
 second-order coherence" (Glauber 1963b, p. 2535).

 Glauber emphasized the much greater variety of light fields revealed by his quantum

 mechanical analysis than had been considered previously. "The optical definition does

 not at all distinguish among the many ways in which fields may vary while remaining

 equally correlated at all pairs of points" (Glauber 1963b, p. 2534). He linked this with

 the wider domain of experimental data that was just then being enabled by light sources

 like the laser and by improved photodetectors. These were points Glauber would come

 back to repeatedly. His work showed that whole classes of radiation fields might exist,

 and might become observable, that were not dreamt of in classical physics.

 4 Conflict and co-option

 Wolf and Mandel were also on their way to the Paris meeting in February 1963, Wolf

 to give an invited paper on recent achievements in his program, Mandel to air new

 ideas for dealing with laser light. The talks, and those parts of the discussions that

 were included in the published proceedings, give some insight into a clash that was

 both intellectual and emotional. Indeed, the personal stakes must have been high.

 Glauber was arriving after a period of intense work and substantial accomplishment.
 Wolf, whose decades-long research had been in fields, like optics, often considered

 marginal, had seen it suddenly moved to center stage with the advent of the laser. The

 strife became still more intense after Paris, when Indian-born mathematical physicist

 E.C. George Sudarshan joined the Wolf-Mandel camp and published a so-called equiv

 alence theorem which asserted that every quantum mechanical field could also be given

 a classical description. It was a fight conducted over the physics and mathematics that

 were being deployed, but also over the criteria for doing good science, over the validity

 of the underlying theories, and over versions of history. Yet the combatants were also

 learning from each other and were even being pushed by the struggle in new directions.

 Wolf and Mandel had seen Glauber's "Photon Correlations" paper before the Paris

 meeting (Wolf 1984). Wolf's invited talk, "Recent Researches on Coherence Properties
 of Light," (Wolf 1964) did not include it among its 47 references, but an influence

 of Glauber seems palpable. Thus, instead of starting out with the time averages that

 Glauber was criticizing, Wolf starts with the kind of ensemble average Glauber favored

 and then specializes to a time average for stationary fields. Instead of looking at

 correlations between the fields at two space-time points, he starts with fields at η

 different points. And he explicitly corrects the suggestion he and Mandel had made,

 and that Glauber had excoriated in his Physical Review Letters article, that the laser

 would show enhanced HBT correlations. "[i]t would appear at first sight that it would

 be a relatively simple matter to demonstrate [the HBT] effect by using laser light. This

 however, is not so." For the derivation of the effect relies on "the assumption that the

 probability distribution which characterizes the (real) field U is Gaussian... [but this]

 is not at all appropriate for laser light" (Wolf 1964, p. 31). Otherwise, as might be

 expected, the talk reviewed, or at least mentioned, many of the results of Wolf and his
 group, and some of Mandel's.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 <0 Springer

 256

 J. L. Bromberg

 While Wolf's talk described ongoing results in a program that had already been well

 formulated, Mandel's was a break with his previous work. The talk showed the same

 intense interest in wave vs. particle aspects of light that we saw earlier, but this time,

 in discussing the particle side, Mandel ventured into quantum electrodynamics.29 He

 cites a formalism used by two Soviet physicists.30 In analogy to the relation that exists

 in quantum mechanics between the electron and the Schroedinger wave function, the

 Soviet authors posited that photons could be related to a wave function in a similar

 way. They derived this function, f(k), from Maxwell's equations by suitable substi

 tutions and mathematical manipulations. It was defined in momentum space, but a

 configuration space function, /(r) could, in turn, be deduced from it.

 Mandel used the configuration space function. In the simple case in which each

 of Ν photons was represented by the same wave function, the square of the function

 represented the probability of finding a photon at, approximately, a given position at

 a given time (approximately, because it is not possible to locate a photon at distances

 smaller than its wave length). A more complicated situation arises when the various

 photons are in different states. The wave function then involves products of these state

 functions and any ensemble that is constructed in order to define the statistics of the

 photons must be built in terms of these more involved functions.

 As did Wolf in his invited talk, Mandel introduces higher-order correlations, defin

 ing them in terms of the complex functions V(P) that formed the basis for Wolf's

 classical coherence theory. They are "the classical analogues of a description involv

 ing ensembles of multiple photon states" (Mandel 1964a, p. 106). As had Wolf, Mandel

 used these higher-order correlations to describe the HBT effect.

 Glauber's response to Wolf's talk had been "I think you should treat the problem

 quantum-mechanically." (Quantum Electronics III, p. 34). His own talk, "Quantum

 Theory of Coherence," did just that (Glauber 1964). It was, in the main, a summary

 of the two papers he had just submitted. His comments on Mandel's paper, however,

 were more severe. "I do not... understand the derivations you have given on the basis

 of configuration space wave functions for photons,... since the possibility of having

 phase information means that the number of photons present is intrinsically indefinite.

 ...Your derivations take no account of some of the most essential properties of photons.

 To apply them as you have, is to violate complementarity of the photon number and

 the phase of the field" (Quantum Electronics III, pp. 108-109).

 Wolf, for his part, gave a utilitarian defense. "Of course, one should try to formulate

 a full quantum-mechanical treatment of coherence, but this may not be very easy to
 do. For many purposes the classical and semi classical treatments are quite good

 approximations and in fact have been extremely successful" (Quantum Electronics

 III, p. 34). "If I understand Dr. Glauber correctly he defined complete coherence in

 terms of an infinite sequence of correlations. This may be very elegant but perhaps

 29 In examining Mandel's ideas, the Paris paper should be supplemented by two other works Mandel

 published at about this time. They are Mandel (1963a, b).

 30 Akhiezer and Berestetsky (1953). In his Progress in Optics paper (Mandel 1963b), Mandel also cites two

 1930s papers on this formalism by Landau and Peierls and by J. Robert Oppenheimer. These are described

 by Ole Keller in (2007). For more recent work along this line, see Bialynicki-Birula 1996.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 257

 not so practical.... I think one must wait to see how useful some of these definitions
 will [be] for the analysis of experiments" (Quantum Electronics ΠΙ, p. 119).

 From the very start, the dispute called forth searching considerations of the appli

 cation of classical vs. quantum electromagnetic theory to photoelectric emission and

 of the proper placement of the quantum-classical boundary. Obviously, these issues,

 interesting in themselves, were also at the heart of the jurisdictional wrangle. Glauber

 denied that modern photodetectors could be described by classical theory. "The detec

 tors used [in traditional optical experiments]... measured only intensities which had

 been averaged over relatively long periods of time. The new light detectors enable

 us to ask more subtle questions." "The photon counter is an intrinsically quantum

 mechanical instrument" (Glauber 1965, quotations on pp. 65 and 67). In contrast, the

 Rochester group held that "[t]he simplicity of the semi-classical theory and its wide

 range of validity makes in well suited for the analysis of many problems relating to

 photoelectric detection of light fluctuations.... a full quantum field theoretical treat
 ment is not at all necessary for the analysis of such problems" (Mandel et al. 1964,

 p. 436). Glauber placed the quantum-classical boundary at the point at which large

 numbers of photons were present. "Classical theory, strictly speaking, deals correctly

 only with ... modes having large occupation numbers" (Glauber 1966a,b, p. 793).
 Mandel and Wolf countered that "It is a common (but mistaken) belief that semiclas

 sical methods always fail when the light intensity is sufficiently low" (Mandel and

 Wolf 1966, p. 1033).

 These were quarrels about problems in physics, but they were also quarrels about

 method. The Wolf camp would repeatedly stress the simplicity of the classical methods

 and the many phenomena they treated. "A theory based on classical and semi-classical

 concepts cannot... be expected to be capable of answering all questions relating to
 coherence." But it has been successful in predicting experiments and leading to an

 understanding of effects "for which full quantum mechanical treatment is not yet
 available or is exceedingly complex." What Wolf was advocating was the use of

 theories whose complication matched the complexity of the problem. It is, of course,

 a statement about the proper way to do science.31

 More problematic, and perhaps more interesting, was Rochester's suggestion that

 classical electrodynamics gives insight into what is actually going on. Hence, we find
 in a 1964 article by Mandel, "we see that the semiclassical theory may sometimes

 be just as accurate as the quantized field theory, while providing some valuable intu

 itive insight into the physics of the problem" (Mandel 1964c, p. B1224). Or in the
 Mandel-Sudarshan-Wolf paper, "[t]he method employed by Purcell is semi-classical,

 but it brings out the essence of the phenomenon much more clearly than most other

 approaches" (Mandel et al. 1964, p. 435).

 But what does it mean to get physical insight when the ontology of classical physics

 has been rejected? When there is a consensus, as we just saw in Wolfs remark, that

 quantum mechanics is at ground the proper basis for explanation?32 Indeed, we are

 31 The quotation is from Wolf (1964, p. 14). See also Wolf (1984, p. 49), "You have to match your problem
 with how it's treated."

 32 Bokulich (2008) discusses precisely this issue.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 258

 J. L. Bromberg

 not surprised to see the insight argument also appropriated by the Glauber camp, as

 in an article by one of his students: "It has become important in these new areas of

 optics [the laser and new techniques for counting photons] to make use of the greater

 insight and detail afforded by the quantum theory"33 (Cahill 1965, p. B1566).

 Glauber, as we have seen, argued on the basis of the generality of his results. It

 was not only that there were many more kinds of optical coherence than the classical

 theory embraced. The experience of radio frequency engineering was also covered

 in his theory. "There is no need ... to make any material distinction between radio

 frequency and optical fields" (Glauber 1965, p. 66). Indeed, one of the factors that had

 led Glauber to his scheme in the first place had been Golay's discussion of coherence

 and its use of illustrative examples from radio technology.34

 Glauber was also arguing on ontological grounds. Quantum electrodynamics was

 the theory that correctly described the behavior of electromagnetic fields, and it was

 therefore the theory that should be used. "There is ultimately no substitute for the

 quantum theory in describing quanta." And this too was a statement about the right

 way to do science. Yet even in the years that he was elaborating his ideas, a fair amount

 of disaffection with quantum electrodynamics existed. As Mandel would put it some

 years later: "The critique stems partly from some dissatisfaction with the mathematical

 framework of Q.E.D.,... and partly from a sense of dissatisfaction with the conceptual

 framework underlying the theory. [Moreover] some people feel that Q.E.D. is less

 amenable than most theories to intuitive arguments" (Mandel 1976, p. 29).35

 Yet there were also commonalities in the two camps' approaches. Both, for example,

 stressed the importance of building theory in close connection with observation. We

 have already seen Wolf's insistence on working with theoretical objects that were in

 principle observable. We have seen Mandel's dictum that any meaningful discussion of

 photons must refer to the observable photoelectrons. For his part, Glauber laid weight

 on the circumstance that what photodetectors actually do is destroy impinging photons

 and that therefore any adequate theory must base itself on the quantum mechanical

 annihilation operator. "All the familiar methods of detecting light quanta absorb them

 and thus, in effect, constitute measurements of the annihilation operator" (Glauber

 1964, p. 111). It is one of the dramatic turns in this bit of history that a common
 criterion led to such different constructions.36

 The battle over coherence took on a new dimension after Wolf returned from Paris.

 Back in Rochester, he discussed the problem with George Sudarshan and, within

 weeks, Sudarshan had his equivalence theorem in hand. In a note published in Phys

 33 See the discussion of insight (i.e., understanding), and some references to the literature, in de Regt
 (2014).

 34 See also note 8 on p. 2534 of his "Quantum Theory of Optical Coherence" (Glauber 1963b).

 35 But Mandel's conclusion (p. 65) would be "Although semiclassical theories have had considerable
 success in accounting for many observed effects, ... they fail completely in other cases, and no evidence
 exists that should cause us to think of giving up Q.E.D. in favor of a semiclassical theory." See also my

 discussion of Edwin Jaynes' crusade against QED in Bromberg (2006).

 36 We may assume that these criteria (simplicity, convenience, generality and so on) reveal not only the

 authors' opinions but also their beliefs about what arguments would be persuasive. Hence, they also throw

 some light on the methodological assumptions abroad in 1960s physics.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 259

 ical Review Letters, and a talk at the April 1963 Symposium on Optical Masers,

 Sudarshan presented his reasoning (Sudarshan 1963a, b). The gist of the argument

 was this: Using a set of states that were equivalent to Glauber's coherent states as his

 basis, and employing the quantum mechanical density matrix, Sudarshan claimed that

 the expectation values (that is, the averages) of all the quantum mechanical expressions

 that appeared in Glauber's correlations functions are equivalent to the expectation val

 ues derived from a classical treatment, "there is a one-to-one linear correspondence

 between the classical distribution function ... for a classical complex valued signal

 and the quantum-mechanical density matrix in the sense that they both yield the same

 expectation values for corresponding dynamical variables. Hence, any linear rela

 tionships between expectation values (like equations of motion, symmetry properties,

 etc.) can be equally well handled in terms of either formalism without any loss of

 generality" (Sudarshan 1963b, p. 47, emphasis in original).

 The fight over classical-semiclassical vs. QED methods now expanded to include

 a debate over the validity of Sudarshan's theorem. It had two inter-related aspects.

 On the one hand, it was about Sudarshan's mathematics and in particular, about his
 classical distribution function, which he had named φ (ζ). If it were to represent a

 probability distribution, it should be positive everywhere and well behaved. But the

 Glauber camp challenged the assumption that it had these properties. One example is

 a 1964 paper by Dennis Holliday at the Rand Corporation and Martin L. Sage of the

 University of Oregon, which argued that φ (ζ) "cannot be interpreted as a probability

 density function... without a detailed investigation of [its] properties... for each density

 matrix. ... one must follow ad hoc rules in using [it] in contrast to well defined and

 general mathematical rules for using probability densities. Consequently, Sudarshan's

 equivalence theorem is mathematically meaningless and without physical content"
 (Holliday and Sage 1965, p. B487).

 On the other hand, and while not ignoring the expression's mathematical prob

 lems, Glauber turned φ (ζ) into an instrument for probing physics—more specifically,

 for probing the degree of classicality any particular electromagnetic field possesses.
 Glauber called the function Ρ (α).37 He derived it from a more general function,

 labeled R, which held for any field. In the special circumstances that R simplified into

 a well-behaved P, the field that was being described had a classical analog. Such a field,

 Glauber identified as having a "P-representation." For the many fields, however, for

 which Ρ (a) was negative or even undefinable, there was no classical analog. "When

 the Ρ representation ... is available ... it permits us to find the correlation functions

 ...by evaluating integrals which are quite similar in form to the classical averages"
 (Glauber 1966a, p. 793). "Indeed for a broad class of radiation fields which includes

 ... virtually all of those studied in optics [the P-representation is possible].... Its use

 offers deep insights into the reasons why some of the fundamental laws of optics ...are

 the same as in classical theory, even when very few quanta are involved" (Glauber

 1963c, p. 2776). "Although the Ρ representation possesses many unique virtues, it also

 possesses one great liability; for many states of the field no such representation of the

 37 The word "function" is used loosely here and does not describe its mathematical status. Glauber addresses

 the relation between his work and Sudarshan's in the final paragraphs of Glauber (1963c) and represents
 the two works as simultaneous and independent.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 260

 J. L. Bromberg

 field can be found in any simple or useful sense." "The variety of pure states available

 to a quantum-mechanical mode operator is simply much greater than the variety of

 states available to a classical operator" (Glauber 1966a, p. 793).

 It is interesting to see how the two camps described each other's work in these early

 years. There are instances in which each places the other's efforts as simply one of a

 number of similar productions found in the literature. There are also times in which

 the other camp's results are portrayed as edifices erected upon their own efforts or on

 well-known prior results. Thus, on page 2533 of "Quantum Theory of Coherence,"

 (Glauber 1963b) Glauber writes "classical correlation functions have received a great

 deal of discussion in recent years, mainly in connection with the theory of noise in

 radio waves. A detailed application of the classical correlation theory to optics has

 been made by Wolf." For his part, Wolf, in his talk at the Symposium on Optical

 Masers, has "the correlation functions which play a central role in [Glauber's] theory

 may be regarded as the quantum-mechanical transcriptions of the correlation functions

 of classical theory" (Wolf 1963b, p. 40). And in their 1965 review article, Mandel and

 Wolf introduce coherent states with a reference to the 1955 text by Leonard Schiff, and

 a more recent, 1964, text by William Louisell, and then say "The states have recently

 been studied in detail by Glauber..." (Mandel and Wolf 1965, in note 16 on p. 242).

 Such putdowns have the effect of diminishing the other's originality. Their lack of

 validity derives, of course, from the fact that they ignore the actual route a researcher

 took: what papers he actually read and what course his thinking actually took. They

 ignore, in short, the factors to which the historian of ideas pays attention. But they also

 may bear witness to the degree of specialization in 1960s physics. Mandel, who was

 extremely catholic in his reading, is an exception. But it is unlikely that Glauber read

 Wolf's earlier papers or the work of authors, like Frits Zernicke, that Wolf generalized.

 Nor would I guess that Wolf read the 1950s Glauber. In the main, the citations in their

 papers form two non-overlapping sets, and it is natural that each would misunderstand

 the genesis of the other's ideas.

 Of course, as well as down-playing each other's contributions, the two sides also

 stimulated each other. We have already seen some evidences. One was Wolf's increased

 concern for higher-order correlation functions in light of Glauber's work. Another may

 well have been Glauber's many discussions of the difference between classical and

 quantum theories. And Glauber's QED definitions of correlation functions and the

 criteria for coherence certainly bear a striking resemblance to Wolf's classical theory.

 Another, particularly noteworthy, example of cross-stimulation may be Mandel's move

 from a formalism of photon wave functions to one in terms of annihilation operators

 and coherent states. As early as the fall of 1963, he built his quantum mechanical

 explanation of the effect he and George Magyar had discovered on the foundation of

 Glauber's theory (Mandel 1964b).

 In the end, both sides could claim victories. The facets of lasers' behavior and of the

 light they produced came to be handled by a multiplicity of models: semiclassical,

 quantum electrodynamic, engineering. A great deal could be derived from semiclassi

 5 Conclusion

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 261

 cal theory. "As a practical tool [semiclassical radiation theory] is indeed very successful

 in describing the principal operating features of lasers" (Milonni 2007, p. 113). A great

 deal, but not everything. For example, generally an ad hoc term had to be added to the
 semiclassical theory to represent spontaneous emissions by the molecules constitut

 ing the laser medium.38 The quantized theory avoided ad hoc assumptions and gave

 additional information, like the statistics of the photons comprising the field.

 As for our three protagonists, their paths were affected to varying degrees by the

 work they did during the controversy. Wolf, who had formulated a productive research

 program in the context of classical electromagnetism well before the laser, continued

 to develop it. Of principal significance was the research he and his colleagues did on

 the relation between the coherence of light and its polarization, and on a new way of

 representing coherence that used, as a variable, frequency instead of time. Applications

 included the propagation of light through media as diverse as turbulent atmospheres,

 optical fibers and human tissues (Wolf 2007a, b).

 Leonard Mandel, on the other hand, became a leading explorer, as both theorist and

 experimentalist, of the non-classical light that the controversy introduced. In this role,

 he examined some of physics' most fundamental questions. An example is a 1991

 experiment he did with his graduate students that showed that it was not the making

 of an observation that determined which of two complementary properties would be

 manifest, but rather the setting up of an experimental situation that would permit such

 an observation to be made, whether or not it is, in fact, carried out (Zou et al. 1991).

 Glauber, for his part, added to his pre-laser interests research that extended his work

 on coherent fields, on the P-representation and on the distinction between classical and

 quantum electromagnetism. He also participated in the application of the machinery

 of his optical theories to material particles, both bosons and fermions.39And in 2005,

 he received a Nobel Prize in physics for his contributions to the quantum mechanical

 theory of optical coherence.

 Acknowledgments I am grateful to Jed Z. Buchwald and Olival Freire Jr. for critical comments on earlier

 drafts and to Stephen E. Stich and Susan Vasakas for computer help.

 Appendix

 Wolf's mutual coherence function may be written as

 r(P1,P2,T) = (V(P1,t + T)V*(P2,t))

 where the angle brackets denote an average over time. His complex degree of coherence

 is then obtained by normalizing this function (Wolf 1955).

 Γ(/>ι,/>2>τ)

 Y ντ(Λ, Λ, 0) · Γ(?2, Pi, 0)

 38 Mandel and Wolf (1995), Chapter 18, "The single-mode laser." Two other texts that help illustrate the
 variety of approaches are Sargent et al. (1974) and Siegman (1986).

 39 Some examples are Glauber (1966b) and Cahill and Glauber (1969, 1999).

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 262

 J. L. Bromberg

 If the absolute value of γ is unity, it is clear that Γ factors into two independent

 functions, in conformity with Glauber's prescription for first-order coherence. Wolf's

 terminology differs. Since Γ (Pi, P2, r) connects two different space-time points, he
 calls it a second-order correlation.

 In his 1957 paper on the HBT effect, Wolf calculates the correlation of the fluctu

 ations in intensity at two space-time points. He writes the fluctuation at one of these

 points as

 where

 Δ/ = 7(f) - (/(/))

 l(t) = V2(/).

 <Δ/ι(ί)·Δ/2(ί + τ))

 {AX2 ■ AY2) = 2{XY)2

 The correlation of the fluctuations at two points is then

 For any two random functions X (t) and Υ (?) that satisfy a two-dimensional Gaussian

 probability distribution, Wolf proves that

 Setting X — V\ and Υ — V2, Wolf is then able to equate the correlation of intensity

 fluctuations to 2{V\ (t) V2 (t + τ))2 = 2Γ2 (In this publication, Wolf uses the symbol

 J for Γ).

 Glauber writes the electric field operator, E, as e (ω, r) β~'ω,άω.

 Then, Ε = e (ω, r) ε~ιω'άω + /0+σο e (ω, r) ε~~ιω,άω = E~ + E+.
 He cites Dirac's Principles of Quantum Mechanics as the authority for interpreting

 E+ as a photon annihilation operator. When it acts on a state with η photons, it produces

 a state with (η — 1) photons, while E~ yields an (η + 1) state:

 "the probability per unit time that a photon be absorbed by an ideal detector at point

 r at time t is proportional to

 Σ l</ Κ ')l '')l2 = Σ<1' Κ f)l /><»' Κ f)l *>
 / /

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 = (i\E-(r,t)E+(r,t)\i)."

 Here | i > is the state of the initial field and \f > is the state of the final field and the

 sum is over all possible final states (μ is an index that Glauber used to indicate the

 photon's state of polarization) (Glauber 1963b, quotation on p. 2531).

 The probability that η photons are absorbed at η photodetectors then becomes

 {i\E~ ...E~ (r0, t0) E+ (ro, to)··· E+ (,rx,h) | i)

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum.

 263

 For the case where the initial state of the field is imperfectly known, Glauber invokes

 the quantum mechanical density matrix and writes tr {pE~ (r, t) E+ (r, i)} =

 (rt, rt) for the average counting rate of an ideal photodetector. For an η photon
 coincidence, this becomes G("' = tr{pE~ (π, ii)... E~ (r„, tn) E+ (r„+1, i„+i)
 ... E+ (j2ni tin) }■ Like Wolf, he arrives at a definition of coherence by normalizing

 these correlation functions. He sets g(n> = GM(xι... X2n)/ Π;
 where χ stands for r and t, and the product is evaluated for j ranging from 1 to 2n.

 "If the field in question possesses nth-order coherence, it must, therefore, have

 g(j\x\...xj,xj...x\) = 1 for j < n. It follows from the definition of the g(^ that
 the corresponding values of the correlation functions ... factorize" (Glauber 1963b,
 2534-2535).

 References

 192: 957-959.

 Abella, I.D., and C.H. Townes. 1961. Mode characteristics and coherence in optical ruby masers. Nature

 Akhiezer, A.I., and V.B. Berestetsky. 1953. Quantum electrodynamics. Moscow: State Technico-Theoretical

 Literature Press; English translation, Washington DC: Office of Technical Services.

 Bialynicki-Birula, Iwo. 1996. Photon wave function. Progress in Optics 36: 245-294.
 Bokulich, Alisa. 2008. Re-examining the quantum-classical relation: Beyond reductionism and pluralism.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Bracewell, R.N. 1962. Measuring the coherence of a signal. Proceedings of the IRE 50: 214.
 Bromberg, Joan Lisa. 1991. The laser in America, 1950-1970. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
 Bromberg, Joan Lisa. 2006. Device physics vis-ä-vis fundamental physics in cold war America: The case

 Brown, Robert Hanbury, and Richard Q. Twiss. 1956. Correlation between photons in two coherent beams

 of quantum optics. Isis 97: 237-259.

 of light. Nature 177: 27-29.

 Brown, R. Hanbury, and R.Q. Twiss. 1957. Interferometry of the intensity fluctuations in light. I. Basic

 theory: The correlation between photons in coherent beams of radiation. Proceedings of the Royal
 Society A242: 300-324.

 Cahill, Kevin E. 1965. Coherent-state representations for the photon density operator. Physical Review B:

 Cahill, Kevin E., and Roy J. Glauber. 1969. Ordered expansions in boson amplitude operators. Physical

 B1566-B1576.

 Review 177: 1857-1860.

 Cahill, Kevin E., and Roy J. Glauber. 1999. Density operators for fermions. Physical Review A 59: 1538—

 Camilleri, Kristian. 2006. Heisenberg and the wave-particle duality. Studies in History and Philosophy of

 Modern Physics 37: 298-315.

 Chang, Hasok. 2011. The persistence of epistemic objects through scientific change. Erkenntnis 75: 413

 Darrigol, Olivier. 1992. From c-numbers to q-numbers: The classical analogy in the history of quantum

 theory. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Dascal, Marcelo. 1998. The study of controversies and the theory and history of science. Science in Context

 de Regt, Henk. 2014. Visualization as a tool for understanding. Perspectives on Science 22: 377-396.

 Dicke, Robert H. 1960. New possibilities for fundamental experiments and techniques. In Quantum elec

 tronics: A symposium, ed. Charles H. Townes, 572-581. New York: Columbia University Press.

 Duncan, Anthony, and Michel Janssen. 2008. Pascual Jordan's resolution of the conundrum of the wave

 particle duality of light. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 39:634-666.

 Folse, Henry J. 1985. The philosophy of Niels Bohr: The framework of complementarity. Dordrecht: North

 Forman, Paul. 1987. Behind quantum electronics: National security as basis for physical research in the
 United States, 1940-1960. Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 18, Part 1:
 149-229.

 1555.

 429.

 11: 147-154.

 Holland.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 Forman, Paul. 1992. Inventing the maser in postwar America. Osiris, 2nd Series, 7: 105-134.

 Forman, Paul. 1996. Into quantum electronics: The maser as "gadget" of cold-war America. In National

 military establishments and the advancement of science and technology, eds. Paul Forman and Jos6 M.

 Sanchez-Ron. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 180. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 261-326.

 Forrester, A. Theodore. 1956. On coherence properties of light waves. American Journal of Physics 24:

 264 J. L. Bromberg

 192-196.

 52: 225-226.

 Givens, M. Parker. 1962. Noise in wave interaction experiments. Journal of the Optical Society of America

 Glauber, Roy J. 1951. Some notes on multiple-boson processes. Physical Review 84: 395^100.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1955. Time-dependent displacement correlations and inelastic scattering by crystals. Phys

 ical Review 9%: 1692-1698.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1963a. Photon correlations. Physical Review Letters 10: 84-86.
 Glauber, Roy J. 1963b. The quantum theory of optical coherence. Physical Review 130: 2529-2539.

 Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 482-492.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1963c. Coherent and incoherent states of the radiation field. Physical Review 131: 2766

 2788. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970:493-515.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1964. Quantum theory of coherence. In Quantum electronics... third international congress:

 111-120.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1965. Optical coherence and photon statistics. In Quantum optics and electronics (Lectures at

 the 1964 Les Houches Summer School), eds. Cecile De Witt, A. Blandin and Claude Cohen-Tannoudji,
 65-185. New York: Gordon and Breach.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1966a. Photon counting and field correlations. In Physics of quantum electronics: Conference
 proceedings, eds. PL. Kelley, B. Lax, and P.E. Tannenwald, 788-811. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Glauber, Roy J. 1966b. Classical behavior of systems of quantum oscillators. Physics Letters 21:650-652.
 Glauber, Roy J. 2006. One hundred years of light quanta: Nobel lecture, December 8, 2005. In Les Prix

 Nobel: The Nobel Prizes, 2005, ed. Karl Brandin, 75-98. Stockholm: The Nobel Foundation.

 Golay, Marcel J.E. 1961. Note on coherence vs. narrow-bandedness in regenerative oscillators, masers,

 lasers, etc. Proceedings of the IRE 49: 958-959.

 Holliday, Dennis, and Martin L. Sage. 1965. Statistical descriptions of free boson fields. Physical Review

 138B: B485-B487.

 Hughes, Jeff. 1998. "Modernists with a vengeance": Changing cultures of theory in nuclear science, 1920

 1930. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 29: 339-367.

 Joas, Christian, and Christoph Lehner. 2009. The classical roots of wave mechanics: Schroedinger's trans

 formations of the optical-mechanical analogy. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modem Physics
 40:338-351.

 Joas, Christian. 2010. Campos que Interagem: Fisica Quäntica e a transferencia de conceitos entre fisica de
 particulas, nuclear e do estado solido. In Teoria quäntica: Estudos historicos e implicagöes culturais,
 107-149. Campina Grande-SP: Editora da Universidade Estadual da Paraiba.

 Kahn, Franz D. 1958. On photon coincidences and Hanbury Brown's interferometer. Optica Acta 5:93-100.

 Kaiser, David. 2005. Drawing theories apart: The dispersion of Feynman diagrams in postwar physics.

 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Keller, Ole. 2007. Historical papers on the particle concept of light. Progress in Optics 50: 51-95.

 Magyar, George, and Leonard Mandel. 1963. Interference fringes produced by superposition of two inde

 pendent maser light beams. Nature 198: 255-256. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 550-551.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1954. Accuracy limitations of β-ray thickness measurement. British Journal of Applied

 Mandel, Leonard. 1955. Realizable light gain in photoelectronic image intensifiers. Journal of Scientific

 Physics 5: 58-64.

 Instruments 32: 405-406.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1958. Fluctuations of photon beams and their correlations. Proceedings of the Physical

 Society 72: 1037-1048. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 334-345.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1959. Fluctuations of photon beams: The distribution of photoelectrons. Proceedings of

 the Physical Society 74: 233-243. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 346-356.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1961. Photon degeneracy in light from optical masers and other sources. Journal of the

 Optical Society of America 51: 797-798. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 446-447.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1962a. Interference and the Alford and Gold effect. Journal of the Optical Society of

 America 52: 1335-1340.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Explaining the laser's light: classical versus quantum... 265

 Mandel, Leonard. 1962b. Transient coherence in optics. Journal of the Optical Society of America 52:

 1407-1408.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1963a. Intensity fluctuations of partially polarized light. Proceedings of the Physical

 Society 81: 1104-1114. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 553-563.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1963b. Fluctuations of light beams. Progress in Optics 2: 181-248.
 Mandel, Leonard. 1964a. Some coherence properties of non-Gaussian light. Quantum Electronics:... Third

 Mandel, Leonard. 1964b. Quantum theory of interference effects produced by independent light beams.

 international congress: 101-109.

 Physical Review 134A: A10-A15.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1964c. Physical significance of operators in quantum optics. Physical Review 136B:

 B1221-B1224. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 647-650.

 Mandel, Leonard. 1976. The case for and against semiclassical radiation theory. Progress in Optics 13:

 27-68.

 Mandel, Leonard, E.C.G. Sudarshan and Emil Wolf. 1964. Theory of photodetection of light fluctuations.

 Proceedings of the Physical Society 84:435-444. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 651-660.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1961a. Some properties of coherent light. Journal of the Optical Society

 of America 51: 815-818. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970:448-452.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1961b. Correlation in the fluctuating outputs from two square-law detec

 tors. Physical Review 124: 1696-1702.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1963. Detection of laser radiation. Journal of the Optical Society of

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1965. Coherence properties of optical fields. Reviews of Modern Physics

 AmericaS3: 1315.

 37: 231-287.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1966. Photon statistics and classical fields. Physical Review 149: 1033—

 1037. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 847-851.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1970. Selected papers on coherence and fluctuations of light, vol. I,

 1850-1960. vol. II, 1961-1966. New York: Dover Publications.

 Mandel, Leonard, and Emil Wolf. 1995. Optical coherence and quantum optics. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Milonni, Peter W. 1984. Wave-particle duality of light: A current perspective. In The wave-particle dualism:

 A tribute to Louis de Broglie on his 90th birthday, eds. S. Diner, D. Farque, G. Lochak, and F. Selleri,
 27-67. Dordrecht: Reidel.

 Milonni, Peter W. 2007. Field quantization in optics. Progress in Optics 50: 97-135.

 Nelson, D.F., and R.J. Collins. 1961. Spatial coherence in the output of an optical maser. Journal of Applied

 Physics 32: 739-740.

 Quantum electronics: Proceedings of the third international congress, iilectronique Quantique: comptes

 rendus de la 3e conference internationale, Paris 1963, eds. Pierre Grivet and Nicolaas Bloembergen.
 Paris: Dunod and New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.

 Sanders, John H. 1959. A proposed method for the measurement of the velocity of light. Nature 183: 312.
 Sargent III, Murray, Marian O. Scully, and Willis E. Lamb Jr. 1974. Laser physics. Reading: Addison

 Wesley.

 Scully, Robert J., Marian O. Scully, and H. Jeff Kimble. 2006. Leonard Mandel: May 9,1927-February 9,

 2001. Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences 87: 274-289.

 Seidel, Robert W. 1987. From glow to flow: A history of military laser research and development. Historical

 Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 18: 111-147.

 Senitzky, Israel R. 1962. Incoherence, quantum fluctuations, and noise. Physical Review 128: 2864-2870.

 Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970:473-479.

 Siegman, Anthony E. 1986. Lasers. Mill Valley: University Science Books.

 Silva, Indianara, and Olival Freire, Jr. 2013. The concept of the photon in question: The controversy
 surrounding the HBT effect circa 1956-1958. Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences 43: 453
 491.

 Slayton, Rebecca. 2011. From death rays to light sabers: Making laser weapons surgically precise. Tech

 nology and Culture 52:45-74.

 Smith, Archibald W., and Gerald W. Williams. 1962. On the detection of maser signals by photoelectric

 mixing. Journal of the Optical Society of America 52: 337-338.

 Sudarshan, E.C.G. 1963a. Equivalence of semiclassical and quantum mechanical descriptions of statistical

 light beams. Physical Review Letters 10: 277-279. Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 577-579.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 266 J. L. Bromberg

 Sudarshan, E.C.G. 1963b. Equivalence of semiclassical and quantum-mechanical descriptions of statistical

 light beams. In Proceedings of the symposium on optical masers, 1963,45-50. New York: Polytechnic

 Press of the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn.

 Wise, M. Norton, and David C. Brock. 1998. The culture of quantum chaos. Studies in History and Philos

 Wolf, Emil. 1954. Optics in terms of observable quantities. II Nuovo Cimento 12: 884-888. Reprinted in

 ophy of Modern Physics 29: 369-389.

 Mandel and Wolf 1970:194-198.

 Wolf, Emil. 1955. A macroscopic theory of interference and diffraction of light from finite sources II.

 Fields with a spectral range of arbitrary width. Proceedings of the Royal Society, Ser. A, 230:246-265.

 Reprinted in Mandel and Wolf 1970: 230-249.

 Wolf, Emil. 1957. Intensity fluctuations in stationary optical fields. Philosophical Magazine 2: 351-354.

 Wolf, Emil. 1962. Is a complete determination of the energy spectrum of light possible from measurements

 of the degree of coherence? Proceedings of the Physical Society 80: 1269-1272.

 Wolf, Emil. 1963a. Spatial coherence of resonant modes in a maser interferometer. Physics Letters 3:

 166-168.

 Wolf, Emil. 1963b. Basic concepts of optical coherence theory. In Proceedings of the symposium on optical

 masers, 1963: 29^43. New York: Polytechnic Press of the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn.

 Wolf, Emil. 1964. Recent researches on coherence properties of light. In Quantum electronics: ... third

 Wolf, Emil. 1983. Recollections of Max Born. Optics News 9, November/December: 10-16. Reprinted in

 international congress, pp. 13-34.

 Wolf 2001: 552-558.

 Wolf, Emil. 1984. Interview by Joan Lisa Bremberg on 23 September, 1984. https://www.aip.org/

 history-programs/niels-bohr-library/oral-histories/31406. Accessed 7/17/2015.

 Wolf, Emil. 1999. The development of optical coherence theory. Lecture, first given January 1999. Reprinted

 in Wolf 2001: 620-633.

 Wolf, Emil. 2001. Selected works of Emil Wolf with commentary. Singapore: World Scientific.

 Wolf, Emil. 2007a. The influence of Young's interference experiment on the development of statistical

 Wolf, Emil. 2007b. Introduction to the theory of coherence and polarization of light. Cambridge: Cambridge

 optics. Progress in Optics 50: 251-273.

 University Press.

 Zou, X.Y., L.J. Wang, and Leonard Mandel. 1991. Induced coherence and indistinguishability in optical

 interference. Physical Review Letters 67: 318-321.

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:59:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

