 

 

 

 

External and Internal Factors in the Development of Science
Author(s): Dudley Shapere
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring, 1986), pp. 1-9
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690394
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:51 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/690394?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 SYMPOSIUM PAPER:

 External and Internal Factors in the Development of Science

 Dudley Shapere

 Wake Forest University

 I

 According to a familiar traditional view, science

 is a distinctive enterprise, demarcated sharply from
 all other human pursuits. The exact nature of that
 line of demaracation was conceived differently by
 different thinkers or schools. Depending on whom
 one read, the demarcation might be held to lie in
 its experimental method, or in its building upon
 irrefutable observational facts, or in the distinctive
 rules (deductive or inductive) by which it adopts a
 theoretical superstructure on the basis of those facts,
 or in its goals of attaining knowledge of nature, or
 in a combination of several or all of these factors.

 But despite all such important differences of detail,
 according to all versions of this traditional sort of
 view, it was the unalterability, the inviolability, the
 eternity, attributed to the distinguishing marks of
 science, that most strikes us today. For according to
 those approaches, the distinguishing characteristics
 of science must characterize it forever, unaffected by
 any results of scientific inquiry. If it was its method
 that demarcated science from other sorts of human

 activities, that method was conceived as having since
 its introducton been applied to gain further and fur-
 ther truth, without itself ever having been altered or
 alterable by any of the discoveries to which it led; and
 it would always continue to be unalterable in its fu-
 ture applications. The situation was supposed to be
 similar in the case of rules of scientific inference: they
 were "logical" (either deductive or inductive), which
 implied both that they were unalterable and that their
 status was independent of the world of facts to which
 they were applied. As to facts themselves, much of
 that tradition held them to be irrefutable also.
 That tradition, as is well known, is now a

 shambles, rejected almost universally. Already by
 the 1950s it had become clear to many that all at-
 tempts to characterize such eternal and inviolable

 Author Address: Department of Philosophy, Wake Forest
 University, Drawer 7229 Reynolda Station, Winston-Salem, North
 Carolina 27109 USA

 This paper was first presented at the Annual Meeting of the
 Society for Social Studies of Science, Troy, New York, October
 26, 1985.

 demarcators had failed. The notion of "observational
 facts" as brute undeniable givens, wholly inde-
 pendent of our fragile and insecure interpretations
 of them, was all but surrendered, and the idea
 that there was anything "given" in experience was
 thrown in jeopardy. All attempts to give a precise
 characterization of scientific method, whether ex-
 perimental or logical, whether in terms of deductive
 or inductive logic, were, if not wholly abandoned by
 then, at least viewed with extreme pessimism by a
 growing number of those concerned with the study
 of science. New philosophical analyses emphasized
 that theories are radically underdetermined by obser-
 vation; that what are called observations, far from be-

 ing interpretation-free, are heavily theory-laden; that
 if indeed, as appeared to be the case, it was impos-
 sible to specify any unladen "given" in experience,
 then perhaps theory-ladenness even predetermined
 the outcome of experimental tests; that for any given
 body of what are taken to be data, alternative ex-
 planations, perhaps even an infinity of them, are al-
 ways possible, and that perhaps any alternative can,
 with sufficient ingenuity, be defended "come what
 may," in the face of any body of what are alleged to
 be observational data.

 The rebellion against tradition was not confined
 to philosophers: an even more serious threat came
 from the newly-professionalized discipline of the his-
 tory of science. A torrent of historical studies indi-
 cated more and more convincingly that changes over
 the development of science have gone far deeper
 than mere change of theory. The changes seemed
 to extend also to what was counted as evidence,
 as observational, as factual; to criteria of adequacy
 of explanations of that evidence, or those observa-
 tions or facts, and even to what counted as an ex-
 planation; and to method, which seemed not to be
 a single thing after all, but a multiplicity varying
 from period to period and subject to subject. The
 studies exposed the presence of broader and deeper
 "interpretative frameworks" which guided the con-
 struction of evidence, observation, fact, explana-
 tion, and theory, and which even determined the
 methodological rules, the criteria of scientific ade-
 quacy and the meanings of scientific terms, and even

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1 * 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the goals of science itself. And it appeared that such
 interpretative frameworks differed in fundamental,
 perhaps incommensurable, ways from tradition to
 tradition or from group to group.

 The implications seemed profound. If facts un-
 derdetermine theories-if indeed the sum total of

 scientific constraints, whether factual (observational),
 methodological, logical, criteriological, or whatever,
 underdetermine scientific belief-then some other,
 non-scientific, considerations must enter in to fill

 the gap between scientific constraints and scientific
 belief. Since science is a group endeavor, the
 most promising candidate would be social con-
 siderations. An even more extreme implication
 threatened: for if fact or observation, method, logic,
 and criteria all depend on presuppositions which
 vary from one tradition or group to another, then
 there are no independent scientific constraints stand-
 ing above ultimate interpretative frameworks, and
 there would remain no intrinsically scientific con-
 straints on belief; everything about science would be
 a matter of "external" considerations, perhaps so-
 cially conditioned. If for example observational facts
 are interpretation-laden through and through, then
 how could they be expected to enable us to decide
 for or against the interpretation to which they owe
 their very status, indeed their very meaning? Thus
 one degree or another of social relativism loomed:
 either social (or other non-scientific) considerations
 made up the difference between scientific constraints
 and scientific belief, or else there were no scientific

 constraints which were not themselves socially con-
 ditioned or determined. There was nothing intrin-
 sically "internal" to the scientific enterprise which
 distinguished its procedures and conclusions from
 "external" ones.

 There can by now be no reasonable doubt of
 the pervasive role of presupposition, of interpreta-
 tion, in science and scientific change. There are
 no brute facts which confront us and force our

 theory choices in certain obligatory directions; there
 is no "given" which does not involve intepretation.
 Nor is there a single scientific method which is ap-
 plied unambiguously across the board in all science,
 past, present or future. The extraction or testing
 of theories and hypotheses is far more complicated
 than can be captured by rules of any formal logic.
 What counts as an observation; conceptions of the
 objects or processes under study (and even whether
 what we study are appropriately characterized as
 "objects" and "processes"); the problems arising with
 respect to those objects and processes; the charac-
 teristics expected of answers to those problems, and
 the criteria of adequacy by which one answer is
 selected from the body of possible ones; the methods
 by which those answers are to be attained; the goals

 of inquiry-all these are shaped in the light of back-
 ground beliefs, background beliefs which are dif-
 ferent at different periods of history and in different
 domains of inquiry. Science is built upon a back-
 ground of presupposed beliefs, beliefs which form
 the basis of our interpretations of nature and our
 methods of studying it, and which are in principle al-
 ways subject to alteration, abandonment, or replace-
 ment.

 Nevertheless, it remains another question whether

 some of the conclusions which have been drawn

 really do follow from this pervasiveness of presup-
 position and interpretation. More specifically, we
 need to examine more closely whether either of the
 following theses follows from that pervisave role:

 (1) that there are no "internal" factors guid-
 ing scientific development independently of
 non-scientific factors (for reasons obvious to

 sociologists, I will call this "the strong thesis");
 or

 (2) that, while there are such internal factors, they
 are insufficient by themselves to guide science,
 and must be supplemented by "external" fac-
 tors. I will call this "the weak thesis."2

 In what follows, I will argue that neither of these
 theses follows from the pervasive employment in
 science of background beliefs and the deep changes
 that have affected the beliefs so employed. In other
 words, I shall try to show, firstly, that there is an
 important distinction between internal and external
 factors in science-though that distinction has to
 be radically recast in the light of the way science
 relies on antecedent beliefs and undergoes pervasive
 changes in those beliefs; and secondly, that the in-
 ternal factors are generally sufficient to guide science
 in its inquiries-even though the claims it builds on
 those background beliefs are always in principle sub-
 ject to possible doubt-and that that sufficiency has,
 as a matter of contingent fact rather than a neces-
 sity of logic, tended to increase over the history of
 science.

 II

 According to the view of science which I shall
 present, the distinction between external and internal
 considerations guiding the development of science,
 far from being an a priori and essential characteris-
 tic present in science from its inception, has itself
 been a product of that development. In early periods
 of the history of efforts to understand nature, there
 was precious little guidance as to what, precisely,
 required investigation, what was relevant to the in-
 vestigation, how to go about the investigation, and
 what a conclusion of the investigation would be

 2 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 like. The Milesian philosophers of the sixth century
 B.C., who perhaps more than anyone deserve the
 reputation of founders of the knowledge-seeking en-
 terprise, do not seem to have focussed on particular
 problems concerning particular sorts of substances
 or processes, but took all existence, all change, as
 their domain of inquiry, and everything-or rather
 nothing in particular-was relevant to their efforts.
 What methods they had were of the most simplis-
 tic and intuitive logical and analogical sort; and as
 to what they demanded in an explanation, that was
 little more than that an explanation should show na-
 ture not to be capricious.

 Clarification with regard to these four aspects
 of inquiry-what to study, what was relevant to
 the study, the appropriate methods for that study,
 and the character of an explanatory conclusion to
 the study-required learning how to learn about na-
 ture. Later I will mention some other aspects of the
 scientific enterprise with respect to which we had to
 learn how to learn, but for the present let us focus on
 these and ask this question: How did we, in seeking
 knowledge about nature, come to learn how to go
 about determining what needs to be studied, what is
 relevant to that study, the methods of going about
 that study, and the character of explanations which
 would be the goals of those studies? How did we get
 from Miletus to today's science, not just in respect
 of the profound changes of beliefs that have come
 about, but in respect of how we go about study-
 ing nature to obtain those beliefs, and how did that
 profound transition produce a distinction between
 considerations "internal" and "external" to science?

 Of course in this short paper I can only give a sketch,
 an overview, of the process; but perhaps that will
 be enough to provide a basis for some conclusions
 about the debate concerning the nature and relative
 status of internal and external considerations in the
 development of science.2

 We can begin by considering one important de-
 velopment which gradually assumed centrality in
 the scientific enterprise during the sixteenth through
 eighteenth centuries: the approach of examining
 specific subject-matters, such as moving bodies,
 salts, gases, in isolation from others-what we may
 call the piecemeal approach to inquiry about nature.3
 Although it had been present far earlier, it was then
 only one of many, not coming to prominence in the
 search for knowledge until the early modern period.
 In particular, it replaced an older holistic approach,
 stemming from Milesian philosophy, of trying to
 explain everything at once-for example, of trying
 to explain the nature of change or of substance in
 general. The specific subject-matters for study in this
 new approach may be referred to as domains of inves-
 tigation.

 Early domains of investigation were necessarily

 those of common, everyday classifications, based on
 considerations such as sensory similarities, use, place
 of discovery of a substance, and the like. Thus
 certain metals were given the same name and con-
 sidered one sort of substance on the basis of their ap-
 pearance, and similarly for certain transparent crys-
 talline substances. Views of what the problems con-
 cerning those classifications were, of the methods by
 which those problems were to be approached, and of
 what sorts of answers to try to provide, what it was
 to give an explanation of the items of a domain, were
 likewise based on prevailing views, of which there
 were many contradicting one another, with few hav-
 ing any clear advantage over their competitors; and
 all were ill-formulated and vague. What was and was
 not relevant to, the classifications and the attempt to
 deal with them was obscure.

 But with the beginnings of intensive study of
 those presumed types of substances, distinctions
 were found between members of the types which
 led to distinct classifications. Domains were
 thus reconstituted and restructured, old bases of
 classification coming to be seen as superficial, other
 bases formerly seen as superficial, or new ones
 not known before, coming to be seen as of fun-

 damental importance. What had previously been
 classified indiscriminately as "salts" became separate
 domains for investigation; on the other hand, early
 differences found between electricity and magnetism,
 the former, for example, acting on light bodies of
 all sorts, the latter only on heavy iron ones, came
 to be seen as superficial, and the two types of
 phenomena ultimately became unified in Maxwell's
 theory. And as the domains of scientific investiga-
 tion were thus shifted and altered, so too were the
 items making them up reconceived, reinterpreted,
 and often redescribed and renamed. The most far-
 reaching of such reconceptions occurred in the so-
 called Chemical Revolution of the late eighteeenth
 century, in conjunction with which Lavoisier and
 his associates proposed the renaming of all chemical
 substances according to their elemental constituents.
 And of course new discoveries added new items to
 domains, and even new domains.

 But how did these restructurings of scientific fields

 come about? I suggest that the very adoption of
 the piecemeal approach to inquiry-the laying-out
 of boundaries of specific areas of investigation-
 automatically produced a standard against which
 theories could be assessed. Whatever else might be
 required of an explanation of a particular body of
 presumed information (domain), that explanation or
 theory could be successful only to the extent that
 it took account of the characteristics of the items of
 that domain. This is of course rather vague. What

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1 * 3

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 were to be counted as "characteristics" of the domain
 items: How were we to decide what it was about,
 say, salts or magnetism, that had to be "accounted
 for"? To what extent did we have to "account

 of material substances by the 1860s or so--did show
 themselves to account to a considerable degree for
 their respective domains. Let us examine some of
 the factors involved in this.

 for" them: with complete exactness, or was nature
 just not so precise? And in what would such an
 "account" consist? Should it tell what the perfect
 state of the substance was, as in some alchemical

 views (I will call this the perfectionist approach to un-
 derstanding material substances)? Or should it take
 what might be called a compositionalist approach, deriv-
 ing the properties of the domain items from their
 consituent parts, the arrangement of those parts,
 and the forces holding those parts together-a view
 propounded in chemistry in (among others) Stahlist
 theory and coming to full expression in the theories
 of Lavoisier and his associates?

 In all these respects, what are naturally called
 "hypotheses" played a role; and there was, in ear-
 lier phases of science, little to go on in selecting
 these hypotheses. Or more exactly, the motivating
 considerations in selecting explanatory approaches
 might come from just about anywhere. Antagonism
 to Aristotelian forms, natures, and final causes,
 rather than the dictates of nature, entered into adop-
 tion of the mechanistic and atomistic approaches of
 the middle and late seventeenth century; Newton de-
 veloped his theories of motion (and thus of space
 and time) at least partly in the light of theologi-
 cal considerations, objecting to Cartesian physics on
 such grounds just as his own views were deemed
 atheistic by Leibniz and his followers. And in
 general, the large gap between scientific ambition
 and scientific conclusion had to be filled, under such
 circumstances, by considerations which we today
 would consider non-scientific, external, though at
 the time there was little or no ground to so distin-
 guish them. Indeed, even the ambitions of science

 at such stages were dictated, at least partly and per-
 haps largely, by considerations which would today
 be called external. For the distinction between the

 external and the internal to science was at best only
 rudimentary and in many cases did not exist at all.

 Under such circumstances, the only available op-
 tion, however little it was apparent to the par-
 ticipants, was to wait and see which if any of
 the various hypotheses as to domain classification,
 presumed distinctions between superficial and really
 important domain-item characteristics, and the na-
 ture of "accounts" would hold up--which if any,
 that is, would allow successful account to be given
 of the domain in question. As it turned out, cer-
 tain approaches-for example, the mechanistic ap-
 proach to the study of the motions of planets, fall-
 ing bodies, and projectiles by the late eighteenth cen-
 tury, and the compositionalist approach to the study

 One particular achievement of the mechanistic ap-
 proach was to show that accounts of domains could
 achieve precision, and that such precision was, at least
 often, expressible in mathematical terms. Things
 might not have been that way. Indeed, for Plato, al-
 though mathematics (geometry) was a necessary in-
 gredient for understanding the world of experience,
 of change, it was not sufficient, for that world
 was intrinsically indeterminate; and Aristotle held
 that mathematics, the category of quantity, could
 not provide understanding of the essence of things.
 The idea that all details of experience could be ex-
 plained precisely originated with Kepler. With him,
 it was based on a rationalistic theology which im-
 plied that there is (i.e., that God must have had)
 a sufficient reason for everything in nature, a prin-
 ciple with which Kepler associated geometrical exac-
 titude. Within the limits of available observational

 accuracy, it was shown to be an achievable ideal by
 the mechanical philosophy.

 The Newtonian version of the mechanistic ap-
 proach was able to do what it promised to do
 better than its rivals (Scholastic Aristotelianism,
 Cartesianism) were able to do what they promised to
 do; and because of the role played by mathematical
 precision, it was able to do what it did better than
 they did what they did. Some of this power was evi-
 dent from the work of Newton; but its full force came
 out only with Laplace, who brought together and ex-
 tended the work of a century and molded mechanics

 into an impressive tool for the analysis of prob-
 lems of celestial and terrestrial motions and forces.
 But from the perspective of our present problems,
 Laplace's work was important for another reason:
 with him, theological hypotheses began to become
 external to science. For Newton had not merely pos-
 tulated attributes of the Divine Will in constructing
 his theories; he also found in the laws of nature on
 which he based his system reasons which he believed
 required God to intervene in the events of His crea-
 tion. On various occasions he appealed to three im-
 plications of his laws. Thus, he pointed out, bodies
 lose momentum in impacts: the universe would run
 down unless there were intervention beyond the
 laws of nature to maintain that momentum-a job left
 by the laws of nature to God. Again, if the solar sys-
 tem were left to the governance of the law of gravita-
 tion, the mutual gravitational perturbations of the
 planets would pull them out of their neat Keplerian
 orbits; God would have to intervene every so often
 to maintain the order. And finally, there were the
 disturbing contradictions, pointed out so tentatively

 4 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES . Vol. 4, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (and incompletely) by Richard Bentley, concerning
 the possibility of universal gravitation in either a
 finite or an infinite universe; only God, Newton
 sometimes proposed in response to these difficulties,
 could maintain a universe in which universal gravita-
 tion operated.

 Though a fully statisfactory treatment of the argu-
 ment from loss of momentum would have to await
 the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, it had al-
 ready been rejected by most people by Laplace's day:
 momentum is conserved, at least in collisions of the

 elementary atomic constituents of things which were
 conceived as "perfectly elastic" (even if abolutely
 rigid); and if momentum appears not to be conserved
 in collisions of ordinary bodies, that must simply be
 because it has been transferred to those inner, in-
 visible constitutents. As to the stability of the solar
 system, though he did not complete the job, Laplace
 laid down the basic arguments to demonstrate that
 gravitational perturbations are in the long run self-
 correcting: the law is, after all, sufficient to account
 for the orderliness of the solar system.

 The Bentley paradoxes of gravitation were over-
 looked, indeed forgotten until the end of the
 nineteenth century; they were resolved only with
 the theory of general relativity. (Einstein, in pardon-
 able ignorance of the history of the problem, chris-
 tened it "Seeliger's Paradox.") Whether the story of
 his encounter with Napoleon is apocryphal or true,
 Laplace at least had solid arguments (as opposed to
 philosophical generalities) to offer for showing that
 science had no need of such hypotheses by counter-
 ing specific arguments purporting to show that it did.
 Though the matters involved were not yet completely
 settled, and would not be for a long while, argu-
 ments that theological considerations were relevant
 to science had been deflated; such considerations
 were external to science precisely because the laws

 of science had been shown (even if as yet imperfectly
 and incompletely) to be sufficient to account for cer-
 tain phenomena which had previously seemed to re-
 quire divine intervention.

 A similar portrayal could be offered for the devel-
 opment of the compositionalist approach to chemical
 explanation: as the nineteenth century wore on and
 questions concerning the nature of acids, the chlorine
 problem, and a multitude of other issues fell into
 place, the compositionalist approach came to be seen
 as clearly able to do a great deal toward the under-
 standing of material substances-far more than its
 by-then-dead rival, the "perfectionist" approach.

 The nineteenth century saw the vindication of
 many ideas for many domains: electricity, mag-
 netism, heat, light, many areas of chemical investiga-
 tion, and so on, these vindicated beliefs being of all
 levels of generality, from very specific beliefs about,

 e.g., particular substances or particular behavior of
 compass needles in particular circumstances to very
 general theories such as Maxwell's. Theoretical ac-
 counts of domains were shown to be highly success-
 ful with regard to their domains: the theories had
 a responsibility for accounting for a body of puta-
 tive information which was, in general, if not al-
 ways, well- delineated, and did so effectively within
 the range and limits of experiment and observation.
 Though there were problems with regard to many
 of these ideas, in many cases they had to do with
 specific reasons for supposing the theories to be in-
 complete rather than incorrect: they were not con-
 tradicted by any domain information, they just failed
 to take account of some item of their domain, and
 so, there was reason to believe, merely had to be
 extended rather than rejected or changed in fun-
 damental ways. (Electromagnetic theory still had to
 be extended to cover the electrodynamics of moving
 bodies, for example.)

 By now, several such theories had another ap-
 peal besides their success in accounting for their
 own circumscribed domains. For since Newton
 had fused terrestrial and celestial mechanics into

 a single theory, there had been increasing reason
 to believe that theories of different domains might
 well be the same. Electricity and magnetism,
 despite the differences noted by Gilbert and his
 successors, were gradually fused in a historical
 process beginning in the 1820s and culminating
 in Maxwell's theory; and that theory also incor-
 porated light. That unification itself required the
 prior unification (mainly by Faraday) of various al-
 leged kinds of electricity. Beginning with Davy and
 Berzelius, chemical bonding also began to be seen
 in terms of electrical attraction and repulsion. The
 process continued in the twentieth century, with the
 resolution of conflicts between electromagnetism and
 mechanics by special relativity, the unified accounts
 of spectra, atomic structure, chemical valency, and
 so on by quantum theory and ultimately by quantum
 mechanics; the quantum field-theoretic treatment of
 the domains of weak, electromagnetic, and strong
 interactions, resulting in the unified electroweak
 theory and movement toward grand and still grander
 unification. The trend was already evident in the
 nineteenth century, even though it was not always
 clear which type of theory should provide the basis
 for unification: should we continue to move toward

 a more complete mechanical world-view, absorbing
 electromagnetism and other areas into it, or vice-
 versa? (We see similar problems in the 1950s and
 1960s: should field theory be abandoned as the guid-
 ing program for unification, and replaced by some-
 thing else, like S-matrix theory? But notice that the
 questions were, in the twentieth century case as in
 the late nineteenth, resolved.)

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1 * 5

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From the viewpoint of our topic, though, the im-
 portant facet of such unification was this: that in ad-

 dition to its success in accounting for its domain, a theory
 could be judged in terms of its compatibility with theories
 of other domains. (There were, however, develop-
 ing constraints on such judgments: not all domains
 could be reasonably expected to be explained in the
 same terms. I shall ignore such qualifications here,
 though.) In addition to doubts based on its failures
 to account for its domain of responsibility, a theory
 can also be doubted on the ground that it fails to
 conform to a type of theory with which we believe it
 ought to conform-for example, because that type of
 theory has been successful in several other domains.

 Over the course of the centuries (the last few
 especially), a great many beliefs about nature have
 been found to have been both successful with regard
 to their domains of explanatory responsibility, and
 coherent with theories of other domains. This is not

 to say that there were not problems with regard to
 some of these theoretical beliefs. But in assessing
 the significance of such problems, we must be careful
 in three important respects. First, we must remem-
 ber that problems of incompleteness are not reasons
 for rejecting a theory, and do not become reasons
 even for doubting a theory until a great deal of effort
 has been put into attempting to extend it to cover
 the recalcitrant domain items. Second, the fact that
 a theory has been tested and foind successful and
 coherent with other theories only within certain ex-
 perimental limits (of accuracy, velocity, mass, and
 other relevant parameters) is not by itself a reason
 for doubting the theory-though of course it may be
 a reason for extending the tests of the theory beyond
 those limits.

 The third point is perhaps the most important.
 However much success and coherence a theory may
 achieve-however much it may be free of the specific
 doubts imposed by its specific failures to account
 for domain-items and to cohere with other theories
 with which we believe it should cohere-such doubts

 might arise in the future: there is always the general
 possibility of doubt. But the general possibility of
 doubt arising, insofar as it is a mere possibility, is not
 itself a ground for doubting any particular theory.
 The same may be said of all general possibilities as
 "I may always be dreaming," or "A demon might
 be deceiving me in all my beliefs," or "Perhaps I am
 only a brain in a vat." Applying as they do equally
 and indiscriminately to any claim whatever (including
 the negation of the claim itself), such universal doubts
 cannot count against any one claim in preference to
 another, and therefore in the actual knowledge-seeking
 enterprise they do not count as legitimate grounds for
 doubt. Many philosophers and sociologists of science
 have failed to recognize this point in their accounts of

 the dubitability of scientific claims; but it is ignored
 only at the peril of having failed to move beyond the
 approach to knowledge represented by Descartes'
 dream and demon arguments in the seventeenth
 century-arguments which play no role in science,
 except as reminders that specific doubts may always
 arise in the future.

 Keeping these three points in mind, we can see
 that it makes sense to speak of an accumulation
 of beliefs which, by virtue of their success and
 coherence, could be trusted by scientists. Many
 of these beliefs were free of any specific doubts in
 the senses I have just discussed, or at least close
 to it. The growth of such a body of beliefs was
 not a simplistic march of accumulation: many of
 the beliefs did fall subject to doubts, and had to be
 rejected. Other beliefs had their ups and downs: I
 have mentioned in passing the fortunes of quantum
 field theory in the 1950s and 1960s; more generally,
 that approach may be seen as promising in the
 early 1930s, with doubts increasing, satisfaction with
 regard to many of them in the late 1940s, doubts
 sufficient to lead many physicists to reject the ap-
 proach in the 1950s and 1960s, and triumphant suc-
 cesses in 1971 and thereafter from which it will not

 easily be displaced. But even though such doubts can
 arise with regard to any theory, even those regarding
 which there are at a given time no specific doubts,
 that body of beliefs which are, at a given time, free of such
 doubts (or even reasonably close to being free) constitute
 a basis on which science can alter its domains and build

 further hypotheses, methods, rules of reasoning, and goals.
 What has been developed through this process is

 a distinction between beliefs which can serve, from
 a scientific standpoint, as background in terms of
 which scientific change can proceed-in terms of
 which new scientific ideas, methods, goals, and so
 forth can be built-and those which it cannot employ
 in such building, at least in the sense that they have
 not been scientifically legitimated. It is, in short, a
 working distinction-one which has a function in
 the knowledge-seeking enterprise-between internal
 and external considerations in science. But it is a dis-

 tinction which has been forged in the very process
 of investigation of nature, not laid down in some
 edict from heaven or philosophy which determines
 what counts as scientific and what does not. The
 process is one of a gradual discovery, sharpening,
 and organization of relevance-relations, and hence
 of a gradual separation of the objects of its inves-
 tigations and what is directly relevant from what is
 irrelevant thereto: a gradual demarcation, that is,
 of the scientific from the non-scientific. Those con-
 siderations become internal, scientific, which have
 been found, as a matter of contingent fact, to be doubt-
 free (successful and coherent) and relevant to the

 6 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 4, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 domain under investigation. All other considerations
 become external, non-scientific.

 In the light of this process of internalization, it is
 easy to see why and how scientific change is so per-
 vasive. In the course of inquiry, domains come more
 and more to be formulated in the light of background
 beliefs which have proved doubt-free and relevant
 to the domain being investigated, rather than in
 terms of such criteria as sensory similarities. But
 the background beliefs which lead to such changes
 in domain structure and conception also lead to al-
 terations, sometimes profound, in other parts of the
 fabric of science. Sometimes it becomes necessary, in
 the light of problems that arise concerning a restruc-
 tured domain or a new theory of the domain so
 restructured, to reject or modify some of the very
 background beliefs which led to the restructuring.
 The problems associated with particular domains be-
 come altered, as do the lines between recognized
 "scientific" problems and questions that are classed
 as "non-scientific." What counts as "observation" of

 a subject-matter, too, may be altered; both the en-
 titities or processes to be studied, and the methods
 of observing them, can develop with the acquisition
 of new successful and doubt-free beliefs. New back-

 ground information, or old information formerly con-
 sidered irrelevant, is found to be relevant to a par-
 ticular domain. Old methods are rejected or rein-
 terpreted, new ones introduced; new standards of
 possibility and acceptability arise. Even the goals of
 science may alter, as in the transition from perfec-
 tionist to compositionalist matter-theory.

 Still, at any given stage, there is a body of
 background beliefs on which science relies. The
 hypotheses of current particle physics are not
 deduced or induced from a brute given; still less
 are they constructed in an intellectual vacuum.
 Their mode of formulation and their plausibility
 alike, despite their problems, are obtained from
 a prior background. Grand Unified Theories
 (GUTs) and their application to cosmology apply
 the idea of symmetry breaking using the Higgs
 mechanism previously employed in the highly-
 successful electroweak unification to join the latter
 with the newly functional theory of the strong inter-
 action, quantum chromodynamics; the electroweak
 theory and QCD in turn were based on the gauge-
 theoretic (more specifically, Yang-Mills) approach
 whose importance became clear with the estab-
 lishment of the renormalizability of such theories
 in the early 1970s. That approach itself was de-
 veloped in the light of a long background includ-
 ing the enormously successful theory of quantum
 electrodynamics and the even more central place
 which group theory, especially Lie groups, had come
 to play in physical theory. All these pieces of back-
 ground traced their pedigrees ultimately to quan-

 tum mechanics and its necessary logical extension
 through the application thereto of special relativity,
 the latter two theories, at least, particularly when so
 joined, having proved free of specific and compell-
 ing reasons for doubt, and thus having the status
 of scientific background beliefs suitable as bases on
 which to build.

 To make this process of scientific change clearer,
 it is necessary to call attention to one way in which
 reaction to traditional views of science has gone too
 far: namely, the rejection of the "given." For there is
 an important sense in which there is a "given" after
 all. True, it is not the given as imagined in classical
 and positivist myth; it is not, that is, a given in the
 sense that it is found as a result of pure perception,
 pure, that is, of any prior belief. Much less is it a
 given in the sense that, once recognized, it can tell
 us automatically the character of the world by which
 it is given. Nor is it even necessarily the product of a
 single effort, a look, but is often the product of many
 efforts, complete with the open possibility of error.
 Rather it is a given in the following three respects:
 that, (1) having been marked out as significant by our
 best available background ideas, (2) having been ap-
 propriately described in terms of those background
 ideas, and (3) having been made accessible by ap-
 plication of background ideas (a "theory of the instru-
 ment"), the specific character or value we find it to
 have is independent of-not determined by- those
 background ideas. Even with regard to it, doubt
 might always arise; but in its absence, the character
 or value of the "given" can lead to modifications in
 other beliefs.

 III

 Through what I have called a process of inter-
 nalization, science has found it possible more and
 more to achieve autonomy from external influences
 in building its future beliefs, methods, problems,
 rules of reasoning, explanatory patterns, standards,
 and goals. It has done so by relying on a body
 of background beliefs selected for their success in
 accounting for their domains of responsibility and
 for their coherence with theories of other relevant

 domains. It has learned how to learn. Things need
 not have turned out that way. Connections between
 things in nature might have been so tight that a
 piecemeal approach to inquiry would have failed;
 theories of different domains might not have been
 coherent with one another; and so on. The achieve-
 ment of internalization is a contingent matter, not
 one of logical necessity or of the nature of science.

 But because the degree of such autonomy is a func-
 tion of the available background beliefs, it is evident
 that the information will, in at least some cases, to

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1 * 7

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 some extent, be insufficient to guide the construction
 of new beliefs and research programs. And where
 our legitimized "internal" background beliefs are in-
 adequate, we must look elsewhere for guidance.
 Sometimes we will have to look to less well-founded
 beliefs, or to beliefs which, however well-founded,
 have not been shown to be unambiguously relevant
 to the domain under consideration. And although it
 is highly unlikely, for example, that new approaches
 in contemporary particle physics, if they do not come
 from within physics itself, will come from anywhere
 else except mathematics, there is nothing to rule out
 occasional success of purely external appeals.

 But the situation in modern science is radically dif-
 ferent from what it was in early periods. Then, as
 we have seen, choice of what background considera-
 tions to appeal to or rely on was very much open: the
 distinction between internal and external considera-
 tions, between the scientific and the non-scientific,
 had not yet evolved. To say that the hypotheses
 proposed, the problems conceived, the standards ap-
 plied, and so forth, were shaped or even determined
 by external (philosophical, political, economic, social,
 psychological) considerations, even in the majority
 or perhaps all cases, can be quite convincing. But
 to make similar all-embracing claims about modern
 physics, for example, is to ignore the substance of
 the subject. Sociology of science does itself a dis-
 service when (and if) it makes the blanket claim, as
 some adherents of the "Strong Program" frequently
 appear to do, that all alleged internal considerations
 in science are externally determined, or even the
 "weak" blanket claim that, though there are internal
 considerations, they must always be supplemented
 by external ones to permit scientific development.
 One of the reasons why such extreme views have
 been advocated has been the difficulty of seeing how
 the internal- external distinction could be formulated
 given the rejection of the traditional view of science

 which I surveyed at the beginning of this paper. But
 the view I have outlined here provides a formulation
 of that distinction which is completely coherent with
 the newer view of the pervasiveness and depth of
 scientific change.

 With this new formulation of the distinction in
 hand, it is possible to conceive more clearly the
 tasks of the sociology of science. To legitimize it-
 self as a subject it does not need to deny that
 there are internal considerations at work in science,
 or to claim that such internal considerations as
 there may be are inadequate to do the job of
 science. But the present view, while showing how
 the internal-external distinction is viable, and how
 much of science-increasingly through the process
 of internalization-is directed by internal considera-
 tions, leaves open the possibility that in some cases,

 even in the most modern circumstances, the inter-
 nalized background of science is in fact inadequate.
 What sociology of science needs are sharpened tools
 for deciding, on a case-by-case basis rather than in
 the light of a general thesis, if and when this hap-
 pens. That is, rather than presupposing, on the
 basis of very general philosophical arguments, that
 all science is (or should be viewed from the sociologi-
 cal perspective as) shaped by external considerations,
 it needs to be able to decide when "negotiation" is
 concluded in the light of scientific considerations and
 when and to what extent such conclusions are arrived
 at on the basis of factors other than scientific. (It
 might of course conclude that whether the factors
 involved in a particular case are external or internal
 is ambiguous-a possibility clearly permitted by my
 formulation of the distinction.) In other cases, the
 immensely important traditional task of the sociology
 of science remains: to show how extrascientific con-
 siderations often combine with internal ones to direct
 science, sometimes aiding, sometimes conflicting
 with, the direction that would be taken if internal
 considerations alone were operative. (Whether and
 how, for example, social and political conditions
 in England in the late seventeenth and eighteenth
 centuries4, or in Germany in the 1920s5, combined with
 internal factors to influence the course of science,
 rather than determining that course by themselves.)
 But for this purpose the sociology of science requires
 the distinction between internal and external factors,

 and that is why it does itself a disservice by denying
 it-in addition to the fact that denying it appears so
 perverse.

 For the sociology as for the philosophy of science,
 the day is past for sweeping universal theses
 about the nature of scientific thought based on
 a few general and questionable philosophical or
 methodological contentions, or on case studies which
 arguably presuppose rather than support those con-
 tentions. We need a closer look at the subject pur-
 portedly under investigation, one which recognizes
 the patent differences between the considerations
 relied upon in sophisticated science as scientific,
 and those which, while often influencing science (as
 science influences them), are de facto non-scientific,
 external to science. And we need a look which recog-
 nizes that the extent and character of those interac-
 tions may be quite different from case to case, and
 in some cases may even be non-existent. In short,
 it is time at last for a piecemeal approach.

 NOTES

 1. A good survey of current approaches in the sociology of
 science is Michael Mulkay, Science and the Sociology of Knowledge,
 (London: Allen and Unwin, 1979). The "Strong Program" is

 8 e SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 advocated in the writings of Davd Bloor, Harry Collins, Trevor
 Pinch, and many others.

 2. Further details of the view outlined here may be found in

 the essays collected in my Reason and the Search for Knowledge,
 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983); "The Concept of Observation in Science
 and Philosophy," Philosophy of Science, March, 1982, 485-526; and
 "Objectivity, Rationality, and Scientific Change," in PSA 1984, P.
 Kitcher and P. Asquith, eds. (East Lansing: Philosophy of Science
 Association, 1985); and "Method in the Philosophy of Science and
 Epistemology: How to Inquire about Inquiry and Knowledge," in
 The Processes of Science, ed. N. Nersessian, (Dordrecht: Nijhoff,
 forthcoming). In those and other works I argue, beyond the
 theses of the present paper, that the "internal" considerations,
 upon which science increasingly is able to rely, count as "rational"
 considerations, and that they can, and sometimes do, provide
 "knowledge." Those further contentions, however, are not re-
 quired here, where the sole purpose has been to outline the basis
 of the internal-external distinction and its relevance to the sociol-

 ogy of science as I see it.

 3. It would be impossible to list all the primary and secon-
 dary references relevant to the cases discussed in the follow-
 ing pages. Many such references are given in other writings
 of mine, especially Reason and the Search for Knowledge (see foot-
 note 2). A few major books on the cases discussed in this

 paper are the following: W.K.C. Guthrie, A History of Greek
 Philosophy, 6 volumes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
 1962-1981); G. Vlastos, Plato's Universe (Seattle: University of
 Washington Press, 1975); A. Koyre, The Astronomical Revolution
 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1973); R.P. Multhauf, The
 Origins of Chemistry (London: Oldbourne, 1966); M.P.Crosland,
 The Language of Chemistry (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
 1962); R.S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton
 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980); S.G. Brush,
 The Kind of Motion We Call Heat: A History of the Kinetic Theory
 of Gases in the 19th Century (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976);
 E.T. Whittaker, History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, 2
 volumes, (London: Thomas Nelson & Sons, 1951-1953). Needless
 to say, the interpretations of cases and the conclusions which I
 have drawn from them, which are expressed in this paper, have
 derived not only from these, but also from many other books and
 articles. That is not to say, of course, that those authors would
 necessarily subscribe to my interpretations and conclusions.

 4. Margaret Jacob, The Newtonians and the English Revolution

 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1976).

 5. Paul Forman, "Weimar Culture, Causality and Quantum
 Theory, 1918-1927," in Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences,
 ed. R. McCormmach, Vol. 3 (Philadelphia: University of
 Pennsylvania Press, 1971), 1-115.

 Comments and Reply follow on pages 10-23.

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1 * 9

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

