 

 

 

 

Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras
Author(s): N. Ciccoli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 3 (May 2015), pp. 311-326
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569554
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:19 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:311-326
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-015-0151-2

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations
 of Lie algebras

 Ν. Ciccoli1

 Received: 29 December 2014 / Published online: 7 April 2015
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract The rigidity of the real semisimple Lie algebra so(4,1) was first proved in
 a brief paper published by Fantappiè in 1954 (Rend. Accad. Lincei Ser. VIII 17:158—

 165, 1954). The purpose of this note is to provide some historical context for this

 work and discuss why no further developments of this result were pursued by Italian
 mathematicians at the time.

 1 Biographical notes on Fantappiè

 Luigi Fantappiè was born in Viterbo in 1901. He studied mathematics in Pisa, at the

 Scuola Normale Superiore, where he graduated under the direction of L. Bianchi in

 1922. Under the guidance of Bianchi his first mathematical research was on algebraic
 topics, namely directed to the study of Riemann zeta function (Fantappiè 1973, vol.

 I). Soon after graduation he moved to Rome, where he was in direct contact with two

 of the leading mathematicians of the time: Francesco Severi and Vito Volterra. Severi

 was, at that time, the rising star of Italian mathematics. He had just moved from Padua

 to Rome and despite the fact that he was a geometer he was appointed as professor of

 analysis. His reputation was undisputed and, after one year he was elected Dean of the

 Université "La Sapienza". Fantappiè was offered a position as assistant to Severi, a role

 that would imply taking notes of his lectures and implicitly following his advice. At

 the same time, however, Fantappiè had a chance to contact Vito Volterra, perhaps the

 Communicated by: Umberto Bottazzini.

 Η Ν. Ciccoli

 nicola.ciccoli@unipg.it

 1 Dipaitimento di Matematica e Informatica, Université di Perugia, Via Vanvitelli 1,

 06123 Perugia, Italy

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 312 Ν. Ciccoli

 most internationally renowned Italian mathematician in those years, though already

 in the second half of his career. Among his many and widespread scientific interests

 Volterra pioneered functional analysis in Italy. It was the outcome of such different

 interactions that stimulated Fantappiè to study a new class of functionals, generalizing

 previous works by Volterra from the real to the complex case. Beginning in 1924,

 Fantappiè defined analytic functionals and relatively rapidly his contributions to this

 field were recognized internationally (see Liitzen 1982; Struppa 1987 for a historical

 overview of this theory). As a result of his efforts he was promoted professor and

 appointed successively to Cagliari, Palermo, Florence and Bologna.

 In the ensuing years his relationship with each of his mentors diverged. Volterra

 considered Fantappiè his prize pupil, as Weil recalls (Weil 1992, p. 48). However,
 they had conflicting political opinions. While Fantappiè was a fervent Fascist from

 his arrival in Rome, Volterra was one of the leading figures of opposition to the

 regime. In 1932 Volterra was dismissed from the University for his refusal to take

 the oath of loyalty to the Fascist government. This was not enough to close scientific

 contacts between the two men, which were, however, definitely interrupted after the

 anti-Jewish legislation in 1938; Fantappiè welcomed the new law in front of the old

 Jewish professor. Conversely his relation with Severi grew stronger. Severi became

 the leading mathematician in Italy and the one with direct connections with the Gov
 ernment.

 Fantappiè was an ardent supporter of Severi, and they developed a close friendship

 strengthened by their sharing similar political, religious and scientific viewpoints.

 In 1933 Fantappiè accepted a position as foundation professor of mathematics at
 a new University in Saô Paulo, Brazil. His mission was both to establish the new

 mathematics Department and to strengthen relations with the large expatriate Italian
 community, a mission not devoid of political import. He remained in Brazil from 1933

 to 1939,1 founding the local mathematical newspaper, guiding the more promising
 students in research centered around analytic functionals and promoting the ideas of

 the Fascist regime in meetings and conferences throughout the country. In 1939 he

 left Brazil and went back to Rome where he was offered the Chair of Higher Analysis

 and was appointed vice president of the newly founded National Institute of Higher

 Mathematics (INDAM), directed by his former mentor Severi. During WWII he often

 travelled to Spain, where he developed a close connection with the University of

 Catalunya, and Portugal, and began enlarging his research interests. Starting in 1942 he

 proposed a mainly philosophical theory centered on the concept of sintropy which, in

 his intentions, should connect physics and biology and explain "finalistic phenomena".

 In later years he also proposed a "mathematical" proof of the existence of God and

 devoted some attention (in conferences and in published papers) to parapsychological

 phenomena (see Fantappiè 1993). Apart from these unconventional interests, from the

 late 1940s, his attention was drawn to the role of topological groups in physical and

 mathematical theories: he lectured on topological groups at INDAM and published

 papers centered on the role of symmetries in relativity theory. This was to be his last
 mathematical interest; in the summer of 1956 he suffered a fatal heart attack. Some

 See Zornoff Tâboas (2008) for a detailed description of Fantappiè's influences on Brazilian mathematics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 313

 additional details on his life can be found in the numerous obituaries (a quite complete

 one is Fichera 1957) and in the introduction to the first volume of his collected works

 Fantappiè (1973).

 2 Fantappiè's final relativity

 In looking at Fantappiè's list of scientific publications (as, for example, recorded in

 Fantappiè 1973), one sees a distinct gap between 1943 and 1948. This gap may not be

 immediately apparent since it does not consist of a complete lack of new publications.

 All his works, in those years, were not mathematical but focused on the development

 of sintropy with scientific considerations showing up just in the background.

 The theory of analytic functionals which had established his reputation was largely

 put aside. The problem of extending analytic functionals to more variables could not be

 easily solved by the techniques at hand in his school (as is nicely explained by Struppa

 in Struppa 1987). However, he did acknowledge it in lecture notes for a course in
 Barcelona in 1948.

 There were also external reasons, both social and personal, for this interruption.

 During 1943 Rome, the city where he was living, experienced the worst years of the

 WWII period. Despite propaganda to the contrary, it was clear by that time that the Axis

 powers had lost and in July that year the northward Allied advance had begun. Also,

 in July, the Allied bombing of Rome commenced with approximately 3000 casualties

 in a single day. It was going to be but the first of more than 50 bombings on the capital,

 in subsequent months. At the time, Fantappiè was in his villa just outside Viterbo, his

 birthplace, only 90 km from Rome; it is in fact reported that he later missed one of the

 INDAM's meetings due to difficulties in reaching Rome. Viterbo was also bombed

 toward the end of 1943. At the end of July the Fascist government was overthrown and

 Mussolini arrested. This marked the start of a long and difficult period of social unrest.

 By the beginning of September the new Italian government switched allegiance to the
 Allies and German military forces occupied the city. In October 1943, Nazis raided

 the Jewish ghetto in Rome, deporting more than 1.000 in concentration camps; all

 Italian young males unwilling to take arms against the Allies had to hide to escape

 immediate execution. It is no surprise that under such exceptional circumstances the
 University was essentially closed. Even after Rome's liberation on the fifth of June

 1944 the situation did not get any better. Severi, a prominent symbol of deposed

 Fascist regime and Fantappiè's mentor and personal friend, was suspended from all

 his University positions (Goodstein and Babbit 2012). Despite Fantappiè's outspoken

 Fascist support, there is little information he was similarly sanctioned. However, he

 was burdened by the additional role of INDAM's vice presidency until 1948 (though,

 according to Roghi (2005), Severi got back to his duties, not officially, already in
 1946).

 On a personal level, his life went through major changes as well. The death of his

 beloved mother, with whom he was living, was followed quite closely by his marriage

 with Maria Quadrani, a family friend, in 1946.

 £) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 314 Ν. Ciccoli

 Be it as it may, whether social, personal or scientific reasons prevailed in such turbu

 lent years, no new papers on pure mathematics were published by Fantappiè, in those

 five years. A new interest, however, arose: the role of symmetries in physical systems,

 with a special emphasis on relativity theory. In 1949 a note (Fantappiè 1949) appeared

 on Costruzione effettiva dei prodotti funzionali relativisticamente invarianti? This

 was the prelude to an almost complete change of direction in his scientific interest.

 Though he kept on assisting former students and young colleagues, in Rome as well

 as in Barcelona and Saô Paulo, in their efforts to further develop his theory of analytic

 functionals, his own research focused on the role of symmetries in physics. His last

 student, the physicist G. Arcidiacono, was the only one to follow him along this path.

 This change of direction was reflected also in his INDAM lectures (INDAM lectures

 at that time were analogous to nowadays PhD courses). In the difficult academic year

 of 1945/1946, the first after the end of WWII, he abandoned analytic functionals,

 the traditional subject of his course, and lectured on Mathematical tools of modern

 physics and Unitary Theory of the Universe? In 1950/1951 he switched again and,

 until his death in 1956, his lecture courses were devoted to Topological Groups and

 their application to Physics4 (Roghi 2005; Fantappiè 1961).

 Fantappiè's researches on symmetries in mathematical physics had to face a rather

 peculiar state of the art.

 The history of relativity theory in Italy has been much treated in the literature (e.g.,

 Bergia 2005; Pastrone 1998), and we will only recall some key points. After a very

 intense debate in the 1920s between a relativistic and an anti-relativistic side, by the

 1930s the situation was settled in favor of the first. This was not completely independent

 of the fact that the work of Levi-Civita was in favor of relativity theory, and he had

 a great scientific reputation. However, relativity was studied more in mathematics

 than in physics departments, and after Levi-Civita was discharged from the University

 as a consequence of racial laws, it started fading also from the attention of Italian

 mathematicians. Therefore, when Fantappiè undertook his researches in the field, this

 neglection of the topic was quite evident.

 Lie theory was a somewhat analogous situation. It is not too excessive to say that

 soon after Lie's work Italy became one of the leading nations in pursuing this line

 of research. Following the work of Cremona and Corrado Segre, who immediately

 saw how fruitful such theory could be, a number of people contributed relevant results

 (see Cogliati 2014 for a much detailed description of the earliest reaction to Lie

 theory, concentrated on infinite-dimensional continous groups). The first name to be

 mentioned is certainly that of L. Bianchi, whose treatise Bianchi (1918) rapidly became

 a standard in years to come. It was followed and surrounded by work of Enriques, Fano,

 Fubini, the already-mentioned Levi-Civita, Medolaghi, Segre and Vivanti, all between

 the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. A special mention should be

 given to the work of the young Eugenio Elia Levi, at the outbreak of the 20th century,

 that gave him a rapidly growing reputation abruptly interrupted by his death in action in

 2 An effective construction of relativistically invariant functional products; MR 0044942.

 3 Strumenti matematici délia fisica moderna e Teoria Unitaria deU'Universo.

 4 Gruppi topologici e loro applicazioni fisiche.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 315

 WWI. But all this attention faded rapidly. When a few years later U. Amaldi published

 his works concerning infinite transformations groups, he got almost no reaction from

 the mathematical community ("The work of U. Amaldi [... ] left no trace. This should

 not surprise us if we consider that also the fundamental work of Cartan on finite

 transformations groups was basically ignored until the 60s." (Rogora 2008, p. 64)5).

 It was the beginning of a long eclipse, during which Lie theory received a very limited

 attention in the Italian School of Mathematics. It is significant that in the standard

 comprehensive book on Italian Mathematics between the two world wars (Brigaglia

 and Scimone 1998), the name of Lie appears only twice, and always in connection to

 applications, either in differential geometry, following the work of Bianchi, or in the

 integrability of mechanical systems.

 Thus when Fantappiè undertook his new research, there was scant attention given

 in Italy to either of these areas. Conversely, there was much activity internationally

 which had generated a wealth of new results. Fantappiè himself was somewhat aware

 of this gap and would mention to his students his limited mathematical tools in com

 parison with those used by some foreign colleagues (I owe this remark to a personal

 communication with Prof. F. Succi, one of Fantappiè last students).

 Fantappiè was guided by the idea of realizing what he himself calls "an Erlangen

 program for physics", a classification of possible physical theories through their group

 of symmetries. With these words he ended (Fantappiè 1952, p. 290):

 From the previous, it then follows that, just as for the classification of geometries

 given by Klein in his Erlangen's program, also for possible "physics", or better

 "physical universes" as above specified, the most natural possible classification

 is the one in terms of the fundamental groups used to define "equality". Let us

 remark that here the term "fundamental group" has to be understood as maximal

 group of symmetries of the physical system.6

 The specific purpose of this first paper was to classify linear operators invariant
 under coordinate transformations. Though he lacked a description in terms of group

 representations and despite not clarifying on which function spaces such operators

 should act, he was moving toward the same goals as one can find in the contemporary

 works of Segal (among many others) that we will review below.

 In this Erlangen-kind of perspective the passage from classical mechanics to rel

 ativity theory can be interpreted as a change in the underlying stability group of the

 theory. As already explained in Minkowski (1909), while classical mechanics is invari

 ant under the action of the 10-dimensional Galilei group, special relativity is invariant

 under the group of Poincaré transformations.7 The former group can be recovered

 5 II lavoro di U. Amaldi [.. ·] passô praticamente inosservato. La cosa non deve stupire se si considéra che

 anche gli importantissimi lavori di Cartan sui gruppi continui finiti non furono praticamente letti fino agli
 anni '60.

 6 "Da quanto precede, inflne, segue allora che, come già per la classificazione delle geometrie data da Klein

 nel suo programma di Erlangen, anche per le "fisiche" possibili, ο meglio per gli "universi fisici" possibili,
 sopra specificati, la classificazione piu naturale che si puô fare è proprio quella che si ottiene in base al

 gruppo fondamentale, che serve a definire l'uguaglianza."

 7 Also referred to as the group of inhomogeneous Lorentz transformations.

 £) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 316 Ν. Ciccoli

 from the latter as a limit letting a certain parameter c, naturally interpreted in physics

 as the speed of light, go to +00.

 It is quite natural to ask, at this point, whether this procedure can be iterated, i.e.,

 if the Poincaré group can be replaced by other group of symmetries of which it is

 the limit, if this extension is unique, if it is further deformable and, finally, when this

 procedure will stop. In fact already in (Fantappiè 1952, p. 288), it was remarked that:

 It may happen that the 10-parameters Lorentz group, which will be denoted by

 Lzjij, in the evolution of our scientific knowledge, will face an analogous fate

 as the 10-parameters Galilei group Gl^j of classical physics and will end up

 being replaced by a more general group, like the group of isometries Ds^j of
 De Sitter space-time. This group, in fact has Lorentz group as limit case, when
 curvature of space-time goes to 0, as well as Lorentz group gives as classical

 limit Galilei group when the speed limit is sent to oo".8

 He postponed details of this limit procedure to a future publication.

 This question is, in fact, described by Freeman Dyson as part of one of the "missed

 opportunities" listed in his famous Gibbs' Lecture (Dyson 1972). In his opinion the

 reason for such missed opportunities was that physicists and mathematicians were

 "neglecting to talk to each other", and in the specific case Dyson stresses the missed

 opportunity to foresee an argument in favor of cosmological expansion. To be honest,

 it would be rather anachronistic to expect an approach like the one of Fantappiè at

 the beginning of the 20th century, as Dyson advocates. De Sitter's work is basically

 contemporary with the works of Elie Cartan on the classification of real semisimple
 Lie algebras (Cartan 1914) and the idea that such Lie algebras could somehow be
 generic in the set of all Lie algebra laws was yet to come. The missed opportunity that

 we would rather concentrate on is on how Fantappiè missed the chance to anticipate

 the theory of Lie group contractions and deformations, an idea for which, as we will

 see in the next paragraphs, times were ripe at the beginning of the 1950s.

 In the 1954 paper (Fantappiè 1954), Fantappiè proved that the inhomogeneous

 Lorentz group is, truly, a limit of the De Sitter group, which we would nowadays

 simply call the pseudo-orthogonal group 0(4,1). This proof is the mathematical core
 of his communication. He then proceeds to outline the basic ideas of a new relativity

 theory, which he calls final relativity, and to which he will devote some of his residual

 energies in one of his last published works (Fantappiè 1955, p. 158) emphasis as in

 the original):

 And in this Note we will show, indeed, that the Lorentz group is just the limit case

 of "another group", continuously depending on a parameter R, when R = 00.

 8 "Puô accadere che il gruppo di Lorentz, che indicheremo con Lz|® t (a 10 parametri) nella progressiva
 evoluzione delle nostre conoscenze scientiflche, finisca col subire una sorte analoga a quella del gruppo di

 Galileo Glj^., (pure a 10 parametri) délia fisica classica, e cioè finisca con l'essere sostituito da un altro

 gruppo più generale, per esempio dal gruppo Dsj® j dei movimenti in sè del cronotopo di De Sitter, che
 da proprio il gruppo di Lorentz come caso limite, quando il raggio di curvatura del cronotopo tende all'oo,

 cosl come il gruppo di Lorentz da come caso limite il gruppo di Galileo, quando la vélocité délia luce si fa
 tendere all'oo."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 317

 Since we will show that this other group cannot be the limit of a different group,

 we will call this new group the final group, and we will denote it with Fn^.9

 It has to be said that, from a physical viewpoint, his efforts did not generate results

 that matched his expectations. Despite the fact that his last student, Arcidiacono,

 devoted most of his scientific career to the development and promotion of Fantappiè's

 final relativity (see Arcidiacono 1988, and the bibliography therein), his construction

 was at best ignored and in some case openly criticized. A reflection of the rebuttal by the

 scientific community can be found in the increasingly sceptical reviews Arcidiacono's

 papers received in Mathematical Reviews.

 It is not, however, our aim here to judge whether the physical theory of final relativity

 received the attention it deserved. Our point here is to clarify to what extent and

 why also Fantappiè (and his students) missed a substantial mathematical opportunity,

 namely that of pioneering the theory of Lie group and Lie algebra deformations which

 was being developed at the same time in the USA.

 3 Fantappiè's rigidity proof

 In this section, we will describe in more detail the content of Fantappiè (1954). In

 particular, we are interested in how Fantappiè proved that the Lorentz group is the

 limit of a semisimple real Lie group which is not further deformable. This last result,

 in particular, is what we now term a rigidity result and would be proved with rather

 different techniques and considered to be standard, while, at the time, could have led

 to very interesting new speculations.

 We were referring to "Lie group deformations," but, to tell the truth, Fantappiè's

 first deformation result concerns more the action on a specific homogeneous space

 than the group itself. Starting from the Lorentz group Lz]® j together with its action

 as group of isometries of the flat Minkowski space he sought for a group G

 converging, in some limit, to Lz\+} and acting on a manifold M. Such manifold was
 required to fulfill the following:

 1. dim M = 4;
 2. G = Iso(M) has dimension 10;

 3. M is a semi-Riemannian manifold of signature 3 + 1.

 It has to be mentioned that in Fantappiè (1954), there is no explicit explanation of

 the meaning of one group being the limit of another one; it is just intended that there

 will be a group G = G(R) depending on some parameter R such that when R = oo

 then G(oo) = Lz]° j. We will further comment on this point later on.

 The reasons for asking for the deformed "cronotope" M to verify the above requests

 is explained, in the above-mentioned paper at page 159, as follows:

 9 E in questa Nota mostreremo, per l'appunto, che il gruppo di Lorentz è proprio il caso limite di un "altro"

 gruppo, dipendente con continuité da un paramètre R, per R = oo, e poiché dimostreremo che questo
 nuovo gruppo non pud più essere limite di un altro gruppo diverso, chiameremo questo nuovo gruppo il

 gruppo finale, e lo indicheremo con FnJ® j.

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 318 Ν. Ciccoli

 Now, the most certain information, valid in the most general case, is clearly what,

 referring to integer numbers (which cannot vary continuously) should coincide
 with the known ones, in the limit case.10

 This statement, given with no clarification on the topologies involved, may look at first

 somewhat vague. Though it makes perfect sense, since, no matter what topology is

 put on some topological space of cronotopes, whatever it may be, functions from such

 space to Ζ takes constant values on continuous paths. We just remark that no effort

 is made throughout this paper and subsequent works, on clarifying what a space of

 cronotopes could be.

 The necessity of looking together at G and M (but the same result would hold

 true without this request) is imposed by the fact that the author choses to rely on

 a much older result commonly credited to Bianchi,11 namely that if dim M = 4
 and dimlso(M) = 10 then M has constant curvature C. Having said so, Fantappiè
 utilized the classification of such spaces up to isometries to prove that the requirement

 on the signature of the semi-Riemannian structure forces M to be a sphere of radius

 R (where, obviously, R = 1/C2) and that in the limit R -*■ oo, the metric on this

 spheric cronotope reduces to the usual one on the flat Minkowski space K*+i· At this

 point he only needed to compute Iso(M), which he calls the final group Fn]0 and to

 show that Fnj° j ~ 0(4,1) as a topological (in fact Lie) group.12

 The second part of the note is centered on the proof of the fact that Fn]°, cannot be

 further deformed, and is opened by some considerations about Fn]0 j being simple.
 At this point (page 164) the argument goes as follows:

 We can remark that the existence of an invariant subgroup translates into van

 ishing of some structural constants and, therefore, simplicity translates into the

 fact that some such constants should be nonzero.13 If a simple group is a limit

 of another group, with the same number of parameters, i.e., can be obtained by

 another depending continuously on a variable a for a -> ao, then its structural

 constants will also depend continuously on a, and therefore, all those that are

 nonzero for a = ao will remain Φ 0 for a in a neighborhood of αο· In particular,

 if the limit group is simple, the variable group should also be simple for a close

 to ao; in other words a simple group can only be limit of simple groups.14

 10 Ora, le informazioni più sicure, che si possono avere nel caso più generale, sono evidenteraente quelle

 che, riferendosi a caratteristiche espresse da numeri interi (le quali non possono variare con continuité)

 debbono coincidere con quelle note, del caso limite.

 11 It is maybe worthwile to recall here that, as mentioned, Bianchi was Fantappiè's thesis advisor and most

 probably his main source of informations for anything concerning differential geometry.

 12 The choice of giving a special notation like Fn'®] for what is nothing but a pseudo-orthogonal group is
 not completely clear. On one hand, it is obvious that Fn stands for final. On the other hand since Lz stands

 for Lorentz and Ga for Galilei, it is difficult not to guess that Fn could stand also for Fantappiè and to ask

 oneself whether such ambiguity is intended.

 13 An invariant subgroup if in G identifies, via integration, a Lie ideal t) ç g. By choosing a suitable basis

 of g, one can indeed transform the ideal condition [x, h] e f), Vh € f), V* e g into vanishing of a subset of

 structural constants with respect to this basis.

 14 Si puô osservare infatti che la presenza di un sottogruppo invariante si traduce nelTannullarsi di varie

 costanti di struttura e quindi la semplicità del gruppo si traduce nel fatto che almeno alcune di queste costanti

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 319

 This argument is considered to hold for complex simple groups and implies rigidity as

 a consequence of the classification of complex simple Lie groups: no other complex
 simple Lie groups in dimension 10 exists. It may be considered of some interest that

 Fantappiè does not refer to Cartan's original paper but to his later work describing
 compact forms of complex simple Lie groups (Cartan 1929). He then looks at the

 same argument from a real point of view, recalling that 0(5), 0(4,1) and 0(3,2) are

 the only real simple Lie groups of the right dimension, and remarking that one of these

 cannot be deformed into another (but about this apparently innocent statement see the
 quote that ends this section).

 Let us now comment on such proofs.

 As for the first part, it has to be noted that the fact that Lz]® j is deformed by Fn^, is
 proved by Fantappiè's by differential geometric techniques (in a way his deformation

 takes place in the category of isometry groups of semi-Riemannian manifolds), though

 it is possible to prove it by purely algebraic techniques. And, in fact, as we shall see in

 the next paragraph, the existence of such deformation was considered to be quite obvi

 ous by contemporaries. Unicity, which is less trivial, was proved by algebraic means

 by Wigner's student W.T. Sharp in his Ph.D. thesis at Princeton (1960), as credited by

 Lévy-Nahas (1967). It is difficult to say whether Lévy-Nahas knew Fantappiè's paper
 (published in Italian on a not so widely known journal).

 As for the proof of rigidity of Fn^ j (which, we recall, is nothing but the real semi
 simple Lie group 0(4,1)) his argument is at the same time convincing and specious.

 Truly, he centers the main point: semisimplicity is an open condition and thus remains

 unchanged under small perturbations. However, his argument does not meet modern

 expectations for rigor. The fact that he is talking about structural constants seems to

 suggest that he is considering Lie algebras rather than Lie groups, a distinction he

 never made explicit, thus somewhat obscuring his reasoning. In this respect, his work

 looks closer to papers on Lie theory at the start of the 20th century, regardless as they

 are of worries about global considerations. This despite the fact that in the meanwhile,

 mainly on the basis of H. Weyl's work, topology had entered Lie theory in a substan

 tial way, as clearly explained in Hawkins (2000). While Fantappiè did acknowledge
 that he had such a distinction in mind, although not clearly expressed, it has to be

 noticed that the vanishing of some structural constants is strongly dependent, at the
 Lie algebra level, on the choice of a preferred basis, and since he makes no comments

 on dependence on the choice of this basis, nor on the choice of a canonical one, his

 argument cannot be regarded as completely conclusive. It has to be remarked that,

 if correct, this argument would work for a large class of real semisimple Lie groups.

 Fantappiè, however, does not seem to be interested in extending the range of his results
 beyond this specific case.

 Footnote 14 continued

 debbono essere diverse da zero. Se quindi un gruppo semplice è limite di un altro gruppo, con lo stesso

 numéro di parametri, si ottiene cioé da un altro, dipendente con continuità da una variabile a per a -> ao,

 anche le costanti di struttura di questo dipenderanno con continuità da a, e quindi tutte quelle che sono

 diverse da 0 per α = <*o, resteranno pure φ 0 per a abbastanza prossimo ad ag. In particolare, dunque,
 se il gruppo limite è semplice, anche il gruppo variabile deve essere semplice per a vicino ad ag, cioé un
 gruppo semplice non puô essere limite che di un gruppo pure semplice.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 320 Ν. Ciccoli

 In modern texts, the rigidity of real semisimple Lie algebras is proved by vanishing

 theorems for Lie algebra cohomology. Even if the Whitehead's lemmas were already

 known at the time (the original Chevalley-Eilenberg paper dates back to 1948), their

 link with rigidity was not still understood and would not be for some years (Nijenhuis

 and Richardson 1964; Gerstenhaber 1964). Still it is possible that a rigorous proof

 following Fantappiè initial suggestion, i.e., avoiding cohomological arguments, could

 be given already at the time. It is interesting to note the following remark by Goze and

 Liitz remark about the chance of proving rigidity of semisimple Lie algebras by direct

 algebraic computations in (Goze and Lutz 1981, p. 145):

 If you ask some specialists on Lie algebras about this question, he first will

 tell you that rigidity of semisimple Lie algebras is an evidence, since they are

 classified: for every n, there is only a finite number of non isomorphic semisimple

 structures on C"; hence it is clear, due to continuity, that the only possible

 limit points are in the class itself. Then you wonder about continuity versus

 finiteness; naively you think that you could approach μο15 jumping from one

 class to another. You claim for some details... At this point you get the following

 precisions:

 are rigid.

 (i) everybody knows that any Lie algebra with H2(g, g) = is rigid;
 (ii) it is well-known that semi-simple Lie algebras satisfy H2(g, g) = 0, hence

 This continuity versus cohomology is not an evidence for nonalgebraic-minded

 people, of course. If you throw an eye in the literature you discover that (i) is an

 important result of Nijenhuis and Richardson and that (ii) is a complicated conse

 quence of the existence of Weyl basis using Whitehead Lemmas or alternatively
 some computations on spectral sequences.. .On the whole algebraic evidence,
 isn't it?

 4 Comparison with Segal and Inonii-Wigner

 We will now consider two related and contemporary works using approximately the

 same arguments that are usually credited as the starting point for the deformation (and

 contraction) theory of Lie algebras. It has to be noticed that they both predate the

 work of Fantappiè by a few years; assigning priority is not a major concern. It is to be

 assumed that during and immediately after the war scientific communication was not

 at its best. Switching research topic under such circumstances may quite well result

 in a limited knowledge of the relevant literature. We have no reason to believe that

 Fantappiè knew such papers, we rather have an indication of the opposite; a collection

 of reprints he owned is preserved in Ferrara library, and there is no mention of them

 (Gambini and Pepe). Rather than discussing priorities, we will focus on differences

 between these works and the one of by Fantappiè.

 15 μ ο Is the seraisimple Lie algebra structure whose rigidity we would like to show.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 321

 4.1 The work of I.E. Segal on contractions

 The first paper we consider is by Irving Ezra Segal ( 1951 ), at that time a very young pro

 fessor in mathematical physics at the University of Chicago. The work was described,

 in an obituary (Baez et al. 1999) a wide-ranging article covering a very large array of

 algebraic and analytical approaches to quantum field theory.

 The focus of this work is to approach physical systems from an operator algebra

 point of view, which keeps track of symmetries. Observables are identified inside

 algebras of operators on Hilbert space (or irreducible representations of C* -algebras).

 The group of symmetries appears in determining such algebras; observables are gen

 erators of unitary representations in bounded or unbounded operators. The largest

 part of the paper consists of a very careful analysis of a number of technical problems

 which are encountered when representing locally compact groups (or rather their group

 C*-algebra) on Hilbert spaces, and when confronting continuous and smooth vectors

 under such representations.16 On page 255 Segal clearly states that he wants to clarify

 in what sense "one physical theory is a limiting case of the other", a situation that,

 in his words, from the point of view of operator algebras "is quite difficult to define

 precisely". This difficulty suggests to him to restrict considerations to deformations of

 Lie algebras. In a very modern approach (which was rediscovered 20 years later), he

 considers what we nowadays call the algebraic variety of Lie algebra laws and declares

 deformations to be continuous paths on such a variety. He furthermore proves that any

 compact Lie algebra is rigid, i.e., it does not admit a nontrivial deformation; in his

 words "the following proof of this fact makes strong use of a suggestion of Harish

 Chandra". As for the more general case that includes the noncompact real semisimple
 Lie algebra so(4,1) analyzed by Fantappiè, he says (Segal 1951, p. 257):

 It seems plausible that the result just obtained should be valid without the assump

 tion of compactness, and it can be seen from Cartan's classification of the real

 simple groups (by the method we use later in connection with the conformai
 group) that this is true in many particular cases. However, we know of no proof

 of the general result.

 From this citation it is evident that he was well aware that the rigidity of real semisimple

 Lie groups was an interesting and open problem. More than once in his papers and

 commentaries in the years to follow he expressed his regret for the fact that the starting

 idea of deformations of Lie algebras was credited mostly to the work of Inônii and

 Wigner, omitting mention of his 1952 paper. As an aside let us remark that in this

 work not only does he consider deformations of Lie algebras but also more general

 deformations of a compound system, which consists of a locally compact topological

 space M, a continuous action of a locally compact group G on Ms and a G-invariant

 measure on M; a compound system is a topological analog of the set of data Fantappiè

 is deforming to analyze his cronotope, cleared of the differential data.

 In the last part of his paper Segal proceeds to consider a specific situation quite

 close to the one in Fantappiè (1952). The rigid group of symmetries he ends up with

 16 It is no surprise the theory of smooth vectors in unitary irreps will be definitely set up by Eward Nelson,

 one of the first Ph.D.'s students of Segal.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 322 Ν. Ciccoli

 is the 15-dimensional conformai group 50(4,2). Considering its natural action on

 the 6-dimensional space is one way to treat at the same time the De Sitter, anti De

 Sitter and Poincaré group actions on suitable Minkowski space-times, and thus realize

 Fantappiè's deformation as a true limit inside a wider Lie group. Segal shows that

 S0(4,2) is not further deformable and sets the foundations of its application to physics,

 in a program to clarify some aspects of standard special relativity. It is reasonable to

 think that since he was able to prove rigidity of S0(4, 2), the rigidity of 5Ό(4,1) was

 also clear to him, but no explicit mention of this fact appears in his paper.

 Most of Segal's work, in later years, was devoted to the development of a new

 relativity theory based on the conformai group (in fact its universal cover), much

 as Arcidiacono devoted its life to building up in details final relativity (Arcidiacono

 1988). It is possible that Fantappiè's work and its later developments could be included

 as a special case in this wide-ranging theory. However, as Nelson states (Baez et al.

 1999, p. 661):

 Segal's work on the Einstein universe as the arena for cosmology and particle

 physics is a vast unfinished edifice, constructed with a handful of collaborators.

 A fate is somewhat curiously shared with Fantappiè's final relativity.

 4.2 The work of Inonii-Wigner on Lie group contractions

 Let us consider now some comments on (Inonii and Wigner 1952), a paper which had

 significant impact on mathematical physics, as evidenced by the 54 citations censed

 in Mathscinet from 1985 onwards. The introduction (p. 510) starts as follows:

 Classical mechanics is a limiting case of relativistic mechanichs. Hence the
 group of the former, the Galilei group, must be in some sense a limiting case

 of the relativistic mechanics' group, the representations of the former must be

 limiting cases of the latter's representations. There are other examples for similar

 relations between groups. Thus the inhomogeneous Lorentz group must be, in

 the same sense, a limiting case of the de Sitter groups.17

 Thus the initial intuition of Fantappiè (1952), for what concerns the existence of the

 deformation, is stated, immediately, as a fact (as we saw it goes back to Minkowski

 itself). In fact such an idea was folklore in US mathematical physics of the time

 (e.g., "If this group18 is regarded as the group of motions of a flat three plus one

 dimensional Riemannian space, it may be regarded as the limit for zero curvature

 of the group of motions of De Sitter space" in (Thomas 1941, p. 113). The second

 remark is that their emphasis is shifted from the beginning from Lie groups to their

 representations (Inonii-Wigner 1953). This is no surprise, since Wigner was one of

 the pioneers in the use of representation theory techniques in physics. This makes even

 17 The plural here refers to the fact that from a purely Lie theory point of view the Poincaré group may be
 reached as a contraction both of SO(4,1) and SO(3,2). A possibility that in Fantappiè (1952) is excluded

 by requirements on the signature of the space-time manifold.

 18 The inhomogeneous Lorentz group.

 "£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 323

 more evident how such a concept is never explicitly stated in any Fantappiè's papers.

 In fact a distinction he made in his lectures between the group and its adjoint (see,

 for example, the posthumous lecture notes of his INDAM course Fantappiè 1959)

 could be rephrased in terms of left and right action of the same group on a manifold

 (and on functions on the manifold); a rephrasing which would give a much easier

 understanding of some statements.

 Going back to Inônii-Wigner, the authors proceed to give a definition of the con

 traction of Lie groups, which has to be understood as the analog of the otherwise

 undefined limit in Fantappiè (1954). It is described in terms of structural constants in

 the Lie algebra, much as by Fantappiè, but with no doubt in more exact terms. Differ

 ently from Segal they do not insist on an abstract approach but they give a very clear

 contraction procedure from an operational point of view. Though such contractions

 are not as general as Segal's degenerations, as remarked already in the text,19 they

 allow very explicit computations in a number of cases. It has to be said that the first

 joint work of Inonii and Wigner was published in an Italian journal (Inonii and Wigner

 1952) exactly in the same years in which Fantappiè was developing his theory, and

 this paper establishes the source of interest in Lie contractions, as explained by the

 first author in (Ιηοηϋ 1997).20 However, this journal is a journal in physics and it is

 possible that Fantappiè was unaware of it.

 On the other hand, Inonii and Wigner never discuss the more difficult problem of the

 uniqueness of deformations; in a way, this is reasonable since they take the opposite

 point of view of contraction. In their approach, a reasonable question could have been

 the following: given a Lie group G list all its possible contractions. Answering such

 question would requite a complete classification of all its subgroups: a rather ambitious

 program. Still it is this work, with its limits, that is nowadays commonly credited as

 the starting point of Lie algebra deformation theory. It should be no surprise, since

 Wigner advised many students and coworkers to pursue this avenue, being thoroughly

 convinced of its fruitfulness in mathematical physics.

 5 Conclusions

 The work of Fantappiè that we discussed may be considered simply as a partly failed

 attempt by a mathematician during the end of his career. However, it is clear that his

 weaknesses, which we emphasized in comparison with the work of Segal and Inônii
 Wigner, were not accidental. The missed opportunity, in the words of Dyson, was

 that of foreseeing a fruitful field of study in the direction of Lie algebra deformations

 19 "The above considerations show a certain similarity with those of LE. Segal. However, Segal's consider

 ations are more general than ours as he considers a sequence of Lie groups the structure constants of which

 converge towards the structure constants of a non isomorphic group. In the above, we have considered only

 one Lie group but have introduced a sequence of coordinate systems therein and investigated the limiting

 case of these coordinate systems becoming singular. As a result of our problem being more restricted we

 could arrive at more specific results." (InOnii and Wigner 1952, p. 514).

 20 This historical note was presented for publication in the proceedings of the mentioned Workshop.

 However, such proceedings were never published. It is possible to find it on the internet at http://ysfine.

 com/wigner/inonu.

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 324 Ν. Ciccoli

 and their applications to mathematical physics. His initial intuition was certainly not

 without interesting developments, and his timing was good, as this work was developed

 at around the same years as the pioneering work of Segal and Inônu-Wigner; even

 more so if one considers that Fantappiè was, at that time, INDAM's vice president and

 therefore certainly in a position to have a lasting influence on future research directions

 in his country.

 However, several factors conspired to hinder the success of this initial intuition. First

 and foremost, of course, Fantappiè's own interest was much more centered on pursuing

 a new "final relativity theory" than in understanding the mechanism of symmetries

 deformation. Two factors, probably, contributed to this. A lack of interest in abstract

 considerations: this could be influenced by the fact that in the central years of his career,

 abstractness in Italy was viewed negatively as "Jewish mathematics" (as explained at

 various points in Guerraggio and Nastasi (2005) and, as an example, in the infamous

 Evola 1940). To elaborate further on this point Fantappiè was not avoiding generalities:

 he sought to construct a "final relativity" purely on the basis of its symmetries, for

 example. But he always concentrated on the operational sides of his theories rather

 than on its foundations, as he did in postponing a functional analytic treatment of

 analytic functionals.

 Furthermore he aimed at a complete theory of physics guided by symmetry which,

 together with his syntropy theory applied to biological systems, would reflect a com

 plete and rational view of the Universe. The idea of deriving such a grand scheme from

 few principles followed from his strongly religious views and from his attempts, more

 and more intense in the last years of his life, to reconcile faith and science; and effort

 to which he felt almost compelled (see some personal recallings in AA.VV. 1972).

 Aside from Fantappiè's personal motivation and beliefs it is important to understand

 the context and work environment; he worked on his "final relativity" in relative

 isolation. No other Italian mathematician would share his interests in Lie theory in

 those years, and the global weakness of the Italian school of algebra, especially for

 what concerned Lie algebras and their representations, was to remain unchanged for

 many years to come. For what concerns the more physical aspects of his construction

 it has to be said that in Italy no one took up the heritage of Levi-Civita, who died in

 scientific and social isolation, after racial legislation excluded all Jews from teaching

 in Italian Universities. Thus Fantappiè's work, written in Italian, in Italian journals,

 and devoted to themes which were not much considered by his local contemporaries,

 remained substantially underdeveloped. It is easy to think that, if health problems had

 not prevented Fantappiè from accepting an invitation to visit Princeton in 1951, the

 situation would have been very different. Segal, who was working at Princeton at the

 time, had the chance to interact with Harish-Chandra who was laying the foundations

 of the representation theory of semisimple Lie groups. Wigner, who had established his

 reputation with the use of representation theoretical arguments in particle physics, was

 also well positioned for his own students to advance his ideas about group contractions

 (he met Inônii exactly in 1951). The contrast with the two environments, at that time,

 could not be sharper.

 It is sometimes said that Fantappiè's work was neglected due to his beliefs held

 in religion, philosophy and politics. It is certainly possible that some of this more

 extreme attitudes (e.g., interest on parapsychological phenomena) may have alienated

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fantappiè's "final relativity" and deformations of Lie algebras 325

 him to an extent. However, it is also clear that internal mathematical reasons can be

 sufficient to explain why his works remained underdeveloped after his death. More than

 his personal situation, it was the effect of country's long period of isolation from the

 international mathematics community that is why after his death, Fantappiè's intuitions

 about deformations of Lie groups remained one of the "missed opportunities" in the
 Italian mathematics research of the time.

 Acknowledgments I would like to thank Prof. M. C. Nucci for encouraging me to write these notes and

 Prof. D. Struppa and Prof. Michael McNeil for generously devoting their time to improve an earlier version

 of this manuscript.

 References

 Math. 39: 55-65.

 659-668.

 AA.VV. 1972. Luigi Fantappiè: scienziato e matematico, R. Scipio ed., Viterbo: Agnesotti
 Arcidiacono, G. 1988. Luniverso di De Sitter, il gruppo di Fantappiè e la cosmologia del Big Bang. Collect.

 Baez, J.C., et al. 1999. Irving Ezra Segal 1918-1998. Notices of the American Mathematical Society 6:

 Milano: Marcos y Marcos.

 31:263-355.

 8: 1-34.

 Bergia, S. 2005. II contribute) italiano alla relativité. Boll. U.M.I. Serie VIII 8: 261-287.

 Bianchi, L. 1918. Lezioni sulla teoria dei gruppi continui finiti di trasformazioni. Pisa: Spoerri.
 Brigaglia, Α., and Scimone, A. 1998. Algebra e teoria dei nuraeri, in La Matematica italiana dopo l'unità.

 Cartan, E. 1914. Les groupes réels simples finis et continus. Annales Scientifiques École Normale Sup. Paris

 Cartan, E. 1929. Groupes simples clos et ouverts et géométrie riemannienne. Journ. Math. Pures et Appl.

 Cogliati, A. 2014. Early history of infinite continuous groups, 1883-1898. Hist. Math. 41: 291-332.

 Dyson, F.J. 1972. Missed opportunities. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 78: 635-652.
 Evola, J. 1940. Gli ebrei e la matematica. Difesa della razza 3: 24-28.
 Fantappiè, L. 1973. Opere Complete, vol. 2. Rome: Unione Matematica Italiana.
 Fantappiè, L. 1949. Fantappiè, Costruzione effettiva dei prodotti funzionali relativisticamente invarianti.

 Fantappiè, L. 1952. Caratterizzazione analitica delle grandezze della meccanica quantica. Rend. Accad.

 Ann. Di Mat. s. 4 XXIX: 43-69.

 Lincei Ser. VIII 12: 285-290.

 Fantappiè, L. 1954. Su una nuova teoria di relativité finale. Rend. Accad. Lincei Ser. VIII 17: 158-165.
 Fantappiè, L. 1955. Deduzione autonoma dell'equazione generalizzata di Schrodinger, nella teoria di rela

 tivité finale. Rend. Accad. Lincei Ser. VIII 19: 367-373.

 Fantappiè, L. 1959. Sui fondamenti gruppali della fisica. Collect. Math. 9: 77-136.
 Fantappiè, L. 1961. I gruppi topologici. Ed. F. Succi. Indam Lectures, Roma: Docet.
 Fantappiè, L. 1993. Conferenze Scelte, Roma: Di Renzo.
 Fichera, G. 1957. La vita matematica di L. Fantappiè. Rend. Mat. XVI: 143-160.
 Gambini, G., and L. Pepe. La raccolta di Fantappiè di opuscoli nella biblioteca dell'Istituto Matematico

 della Université di Ferrara, preprint, Université di Ferrara.

 Gerstenhaber, M. 1964. On the deformations of rings and algebras. Annals of Mathematics 79: 59-103.

 Goodstein, J., and D. Babbit. 2012. A fresh look at Francesco Severi. Notices of the American Mathematical

 Goze, M., and Lutz. 1981. Nonstandard Analysis: A practical guide with applications, Lecture Notes in

 Society 9: 1064-1075.

 Mathematics, vol. 881. Berlin: Springer.

 Mondadori.

 Guerraggio, Α., and P. Nastasi. 2005. Matematica in camicia nera - il regime e gli scienziati. Milano: B.

 Hawkins, T. 2000. Emergence of the theory of Lie groups, An Essay in the History of Mathematics 1869

 1926, Sources and Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences. New York: Springer.

 Inônii, Ε. 1997. A historical note on group contractions. In Workshop on Quantum Groups, Deformations

 and Contractions, http://ysfine.com/wigner/inonu.pdf.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Inônii, Ε., and Ε. Wigner. 1952. Representations of the Galilei group. Nuovo Cimento 9: 705-718.

 Inonii, E., and E. Wigner. 1953. On the contraction of groups and their representations. Proceedings of the

 National Academy of Sciences 39: 510-524.

 Lévy-Nahas, M. 1967. Deformation and contraction of Lie algebras. Journal of Mathematical Physics 8:

 326 Ν. Ciccoli

 1211-1223.

 Liitzen, J. 1982. The prehistory of the theory the distributions, Studies in the History of Mathematics and

 Physical Sciences, vol. 7. New York: Springer.

 Minkowski, H. 1909. Raum und Zeit. Physics Zeitschrift 10: 104-111.

 Nijenhuis, Α., and R.W. Richardson Jr. 1964. Cohomology and deformations of algebraic structures. Bulletin

 of the American Mathematical Society 70: 406-411.

 Pastrone, F. 1998. Fisica Matematica e Meccanica Razionale, in La Matematica italiana dopo l'unità.

 Milano: Marcos y Marcos.

 Roghi, G. 2005. Materiale per una Storia dell'Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica dal 1939 al 2003,

 3-290. V1II-A: Boll. U.M.I. La Matematica nella Società e nella Cultura Ser. VIII.

 Rogora, E. 2008. In Lopera di Ugo Amaldi nel conteste della diffusione delle idee di Sophus Lie in Italia,

 Conferenze, E. Rogora ed., Roma: Nuova Cultura.

 Segal, I.E. 1951. A class of operator algebras which are determined by groups. Duke Mathematical Journal

 Struppa, D.C. 1987. Luigi Fantappiè and the theory of analytic functionals, in Italian Mathematics between

 the two World Wars (Milan/Gargnano 1986), 393-429. Bologna: Pitagora.

 Thomas, L.H. 1941. On unitary representations of the group of De Sitter space. Annals of Mathematics 42:

 18: 221-265.

 113-126.

 Weil, A. 1992. The apprenticeship of a mathematician. Boston: Birkhàuser. (Original edition: Souvenirs

 d'Apprentissage, Birhâuser (1991).

 Zornoff Tàboas, P. 2008. Très momentos no desenvolvimento da Teoria dos Funcionais Analiticos segundo

 Luigi Fantappiè. Revista Brasileira de Histària da Matematica 8: 1-12.

 Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

