 

 

 

 

Felice Casorati's work on finite differences and its influence on Salvatore Pincherle
Author(s): Riccardo Rosso
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 2 (March 2015), pp. 153-215
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569623
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:20 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:153-215
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0143-7

 Felice Casorati's work on finite differences and its

 influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 Riccardo Rosso

 Received: 26 June 2014 / Published online: 18 September 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract This paper, which is mainly based on unpublished material, focuses on the
 scientific influence that Felice Casorati exerted on Salvatore Pincherle. This influence

 can be traced, in particular, in Casorati's work on the finite-difference calculus as

 conceived and published between 1879 and 1880 when Pincherle was living in Pavia.

 Casorati's work has an interesting back story related to his entry to the 1880 Grand

 Prix of the French Académie des Sciences that helps us in understanding Casorati's

 personality. Moreover, the correspondence that Casorati exchanged with other math

 ematicians on his work reveals that some of the results contained in Casorati (Annali

 di Matematica pura ed applicata 10(S. II): 10-45,1880b) had been obtained—though

 in a narrower context—in an early paper by Christoffel. Finally, the letters between

 Casorati and Pincherle contain a short unpublished note by Pincherle on a paper by
 Jules Tannery (Ann Sci. l'École Norm Super 4(S. II): 113-182,1875). This note offers

 the first evidence of the influence of Casorati (Annali di Matematica pura ed applicata
 10(S. II): 10-45, 1880b) on Pincherle's work on the finite-difference calculus.

 1 Introduction

 Felice Casorati (1835-1890) and Salvatore Pincherle (1853-1936) are representa
 tives of two successive generations of Italian mathematicians: Casorati, jointly with

 Francesco Brioschi, Enrico Betti, Eugenio Beltrami, and Ulisse Dini, played an impor

 tant rôle in the renaissance of Italian mathematics that intertwined with the political

 Communicated by: Umberto Bottazzini.

 R. Rosso (El)

 Dipartimento di Matematica "F. Casorati", Université degli Studi di Pavia,
 viaFerrata, 5,27100 Pavia, Italy
 e-mail: riccardo.rosso@unipv.it

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 154

 R. Rosso

 events leading to unification of Italy. An important step in this process was Italy's

 entry into the main stream of European mathematical research as cultivated in Paris,

 Gottingen, and Berlin. In this sense, the journey through Europe that Casorati, jointly

 with Betti and Brioschi, performed in 1858 cannot be underestimated, since first

 hand information on the main trends in mathematics were gained and then diffused

 in Italy (Volterra 1902). Casorati's relevant efforts culminated with the publication

 of the volume Teorica delle funzioni di variabili complesse (Casorati 1868) where he

 expounded the main results in complex analysis, with particular attention to Riemann's

 approach (see Bottazzini 1994, Chaps. IV and VI).

 Pincherle, jointly with Luigi Bianchi, Ernesto Cesàro, Giuseppe Peano, Vito
 Volterra, and Tullio Levi-Civita, belonged to the subsequent generation of mathemati

 cians who contributed to the strengthening of Italy's position within the international

 scientific community. His main contributions were in the field of functional (linear)

 calculus where he worked for more than thirty years along a route distinct from the

 one that Vito Volterra followed in the same period.

 Pincherle graduated from Pisa as a student of the Scuola Normale Superiore and

 spent his academic life entirely in Bologna. His first scientific interest was in the

 theory of capillarity which was the subject of his thesis (Tesi di Laurea) published
 in the Nuovo Cimento (Pincherle 1874) with a short addition (Pincherle 1875). In

 1875, when he moved to Pavia to teach at the Liceo Ginnasio "Ugo Foscolo", he was

 recommended to Felice Casorati by Ulisse Dini:1

 Busy as I am, / cannot write at length to you. Just a couple of words to introduce

 you Dr. Salvatore Pincherle, one of the best students of both our University and our

 Scuola, at present Professor at the Liceo in Pavia. You will find in him a studious young

 man, willing and very ingenious. Please, help him and advise him in his studies.

 November 5th, 75

 Occupato come sono, non posso in questo momento scriverti a lungo. Ti scrivo soltanto due parole per

 presentarti il Dr. Salvatore Pincherle, uno dei migliori allievi della nostra Università e della nostra Scuola,
 attualrnente Professore al Liceo di Pavia. Troverai in Lui un giovane studioso e volenteroso di fare e con

 molto ingegno. Ajutalo e consiglialo nei suoi studi.

 U. Dini

 5. 9bre 75

 Tuo aff. amico,

 U. Dini

 Dear Casorati

 Yours sincerely

 1

 Caro Casorati

 Credimi

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 155

 This short letter opened the way to Casorati's and Pincherle's personal relationship

 that lasted for 15 years, up to the untimely death of Casorati in 1890. Their correspon

 dence amounts to some 80 letters that have been kept in Casorati's archive.2 These

 letters provide some further information about Casorati's influence on Pincherle. At

 the very beginning of his stay in Pavia, Pincherle had devoted his interests to the the

 ory of minimal surfaces that formed the subject of three notes (Pincherle 1876a,b,c)

 published in 1876, but the interaction with Casorati turned his attention to differen

 tial equations. Shortly thereafter Pincherle obtained a fellowship to spend a year in
 Berlin, where he met Weierstrass, whose methods were to exert a decisive influence on

 his scientific activity (Bottazzini 1994, Chap. VI). Direct contacts with Casorati were

 resumed in 1878 when Pincherle came back to Pavia from Berlin. At the beginning of

 1879, Pincherle applied for the habilitation (libera docenza) in higher calculus at the

 University of Pavia. A local committee examined his application and, the judgement

 being positive, on May 9 the Faculty approved his habilitation, which was ratified by

 the Ministry of Education at the end of 1879.3 Consequently, in the fall semester 1879—

 1880, Pincherle gave a course in the higher calculus (Analisi superiore) that Beltrami

 and Casorati among others attended,4 ** where he offered an exposition of Weier

 strass's views on the theory of analytic functions. Pincherle's lectures and, more impor

 tantly, his long account of them published in Battaglini's Giornale di Matematiche

 (Pincherle 1880) contributed significantly to the spread of Weierstrass's ideas in Italy.5

 In the period 1878-1880 Pincherle also attended Casorati's lectures on higher calculus,

 as he reminded in the following letter addressed to Casorati in 1888:

 Bologna, li 25/3/88

 Dear Professor

 During the researches on fiinctional operations represented by definite integrals

 and on their inversion, on which I have been working for a while, it occurred to me
 to study linear differential equations, whose solution is a problem that arises as a

 particular case in the inversion of definite integrals; on this occasion, I rejoiced at
 having attended the lectures you gave on this subject, sparing to your audience the

 reading, and the not-too-easy digestion, of the Memoirs by Fuchs and Thomé (.. .).6

 2 Hereafter denoted as his Nachlass, after (Neuenschwander 1978), it is preserved by Casorati's descendants

 in Pavia. It has been made available to me by Prof. Alberto Gabba, to whom I address my warmest thanks.

 3 The original documents concerning Pincherle's habilitation are kept in the Historical Archive of the

 University of Pavia.

 4 See Bortolotti (1937).

 5 See (Bottazzini, 1994, Chap. VI).

 6 Chiarissimo Sig. Professore

 Nel corso delle ricerche che ho intraprese già da parecchio tempo sulle operazioni funzionali rappresentate

 da integrali definiti e sulla loro inversione, mi è capitato di dover studiare le equazioni differenziali lineari,

 la cui risoluzione è un problema compreso come caso particolare nell'inversione degli integrali definiti; ed

 in questa occasione ho avuto più di una volta da rallegrarmi di avere assistito aile lezioni che Ella ha fatto

 in proposito, risparmiando ai Suoi uditori la lettura e la digestione non troppo agevole delle Memorie di
 Fuchs e Thomé.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 156

 R. Rosso

 Actually, since the mid-1870s, Casorati had turned his attention to Fuchs's theory

 of linear differential equations in the complex plane that was consonant with his early

 concern with complex analysis,7 and in the academic years 1878-1879 and 1879-1880

 Casorati based his course in higher calculus on this topic, too. As a comment to the

 opening lecture, held on 16 November 1879, Casorati wrote in his log-book:

 I declare that I will carry out the theory of linear differential equations according

 to Fuchs, etc. as the first topic. They [the students] will find the original memoirs in
 Borchardt's Journal? (Casorati 1879).

 Casorati's influence on Pincherle had three aspects. Firstly, there was what could

 be called a political influence: Casorati knew personally most of the leading mathe

 maticians in Europe and, together with Betti, introduced Pincherle to Kronecker and

 Weierstrass when he got a fellowship to spend the academic year 1877-1878 in Berlin.
 Moreover, Casorati was a member of both the Committee that declared Pincherle eli

 gible for the chair of Infinitesimal Analysis in 1880 at Bologna ex aequo with Cesare

 Arzelà, who was preferred to Pincherle on that occasion, and the Committee that

 promoted Pincherle to a full professorship in 1888. In addition, Casorati supported

 Pincherle's election as a corresponding member (Socio Corrispondente) of the Accade

 mia dei Lincei in 1887. Secondly, there was an editorial influence. From 1868, Casorati

 was an effective member of the Royal Istituto Lombardo di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti

 based in Milan, and as such he presented some early papers by Pincherle to this local

 Academy for publication. More importantly, Casorati was a member of the editorial

 board of the Annali di Matematica pura ed applicata that had Francesco Brioschi
 as the editor in chief. In this capacity, Casorati presented Pincherle's first important

 memoir (Pincherle 1884a) on series expansions for publication in the Annali. Thirdly,

 there was a scientific influence that stemmed from Casorati's 1880 paper on the inter

 pretation of finite difference (Casorati 1880b), to which I will devote more attention

 in the present paper.

 An early acknowledgement of the close connection between Casorati's and
 Pincherle's researches on that topic was given in the foreword of (Guldberg and Wal

 lenberg 1911) where the authors stated (p. vi).

 In the meanwhile, another area of our discipline underwent a powerful develop

 ment, precisely the formal side of the theory of linear difference equations, due in

 particular to the analogy with algebraic equations, and to the extension of the analo

 gies with linear differential equations. Here, after Casorati, Pincherle with his students

 Bortolotti9 and Amaldi—above all—has built the foundations and, in particular, in

 7 For a historical account of the rôle of complex function theory on the research in differential equation,

 we refer the reader to Chap. 7 of Bottazzini and Gray (2013).

 8 Dichiaro che svolgerô per primo argomento la teoria delle equazioni differenziali lineari secondo Fuchs,
 ecc. Troveranno le memorie originali nel Giornale di Borchardt.

 9 Ettore Bortolotti, better known as a historian of mathematics, in his early days devoted several papers to

 the formal theory of finite differences, (see for instance Bortolotti 1895).

 ft Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 157

 Chap. 10 of his book on distributive operations,10 he has built the frame, so to say, for

 the edification of such a theory.11

 In his [1880b], Casorati had proved the necessary and sufficient condition for η

 functions of a variable that undergoes discrete increments to be linearly independent

 by introducing a suitably defined determinant, now known as the Casorati determinant,

 or the Casoratian. However, the aspect that Casorati emphasized there was the wide

 spectrum of applications of the classical finite-difference calculus by showing that,

 after suitable interpretations, classical results could be translated into complex function

 theory: in particular, Casorati noticed that the local behaviour of the solution of a linear

 differential equation around a singular point (Fuchs 1866) could be easily obtained by

 adapting finite-difference calculus appropriately.

 Casorati attached great importance to the results contained in his paper. Also urged

 by Brioschi, with great expectation, he decided to apply for the 1880 Grand Prix

 de Mathématiques announced by the French Academy of Sciences, and devoted to

 the theory of differential equations. However, his paper found in Halphen's memoir

 (Halphen 1884) an invincible obstacle to winning the prize, and Casorati had to content

 himself with a special mention shared with the young Henri Poincaré. Casorati's

 (1880b) paper also lies at the heart of a harsh argument that Casorati had with Ludwig

 Stickelberger, who was working somehow on the same topics. The paper (Stickelberger

 1881), published a few months after (Casorati 1880b), appeared to Casorati as an

 attempt to question, if not to deny, his priority in the applications of finite differences

 to complex analysis. Their controversy reached its climax with the publication of a

 short letter in the Annali (Casorati 1880c) where Casorati staunchly defended his

 primacy in bringing new life to finite-difference calculus.

 In Casorati's Nachlass, there is a folder where Casorati kept most of his correspon
 dence with several mathematicians concerning both (Casorati 1880b) and the Grand

 Prix. The content of those letters provides us with a vivid account of his personality and

 informs us of the unpredictable events that contributed to hamper his work. Moreover,

 copies of letters that Stickelberger and Casorati sent to Brioschi after the publication of

 (Casorati 1880c) also contain some valuable information, not only because they offer

 an idea of Stickelberger's point of view, but also because there Stickelberger pointed

 out that Casorati's criterion of linear dependence among functions of a discrete variable

 had already been established by Christoffel (1858).

 In Italy, the main results of Casorati (1880b) were made known to a broader audi

 ence through a detailed account that appeared in the Giornale di Matematiche by Paolo

 Cazzaniga, a relative of Casorati's, who presented them as a chapter of the symbolic

 calculus (Cazzaniga 1882). As we shall see, Casorati had denoted the operation map

 ping f(x) into f(x + 1) by Θ, and he had emphasized the importance of conceiving

 10 We will discuss below in detail the content of Chap. X of the monograph (Pincherle and Amaldi 1901).

 11 Inzwischen erfuhr aber ein anderes Gebiet unserer Disziplin eine mâchtige Fôrderung, ntolich die for

 mule Seite der Theorie der linearen Differenzengleichungen, insbesondere soweit sie sich auf die Analogien

 mit den algebraischen Gleichungen und auf die entsprechenden Analogien mit den linearen Differential
 gleichungen erstreckt. Hier hat nach Casorati hauptsâchlich Pincherle mit seinen Schiilern Bortolotti und

 Amaldi der Grundstein gelegt und besonders im 10. Kapitel seiens Buches iiber die distributiven Operationen
 gewissermaBen das Geriist fur den Aufbau einer solcher Theorie errichtet.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 158

 R. Rosso

 it as an operator mapping functions into functions. This is the aspect that most influ

 enced Pincherle's subsequent treatment of the θ operator. He first applied Casorati's

 operator to linear differential equations in a short note written in 1885. Even though

 this note was meant to appear in the Rendiconti of the Istituto Lombardo, it was left

 unpublished. There, resorting to Casorati's (1880b) approach, Pincherle re-obtained a

 theorem proved in Tannery (1875) by which Tannery had given a characterization of

 the integrals of a linear differential equation with uniform coefficients in the complex

 plane: a theorem that is the "pleasant converse to Fuchs's main theorem" (Gray 1986,

 p. 90). Pincherle explained his result to Casorati who, though appreciating the sim

 plicity of the latter's result, suggested him to add some more applications. Actually,

 he asked Pincherle to correct a point in Tannery's paper but, as Pincherle could not

 find any relevant mistake at the point indicated by Casorati, he did not insist in the

 publication, all the more so because he was diverted from this issue by the publication

 of a paper (Mellin 1886) where Mellin had bridged a differential and a difference

 equation by employing a transformation that was a particular case of a more general

 class just obtained by Pincherle: this urged the latter to write a note (Pincherle 1886a)

 to secure his priority on this topic.

 A few years later, in the academic year 1893-1894, Pincherle went back to Caso

 rati's θ operator that in his hands became the prototype of linear operators acting

 upon sets of analytic functions, i.e., the functions that Pincherle considered in his

 theory of linear operators where the symbolic calculus rose to the rank of a rigorous

 mathematical theory and ceased to be only a useful but dubious compact notation.

 The present paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we describe Casorati scientific

 activity in differential equations in the period 1875-1877 when he first interacted with
 Pincherle and then, in Sect. 3, we illustrate the content of Casorati (1880b). Section

 4 is entirely devoted to the history of Casorati's application to the Grand Prix des

 Mathématiques by examining the letters he exchanged with both Italian and foreign

 mathematicians (the original letters are transcribed in "Appendix 1"). Intertwined with

 this topic, there is the argument with Stickelberger that will be described mainly in
 its lesser-known aspects through the letters that both he and Casorati addressed to

 Brioschi after the publication of (Casorati 1880c): some excerpts of these letters have

 been also transcribed in "Appendix 1". Then, in Sect. 5, Pincherle will be back on stage

 as we examine the letters he exchanged with Casorati concerning his note devoted to

 Tannery's theorem: in particular, Pincherle's unpublished note will be translated into

 English, while the original, relevant letters have been transcribed in "Appendix 2".

 Finally, in Sect. 6 we will examine the impact that (Casorati 1880b) had on Pincherle's

 research in the last decade of the nineteenth century up to the publication of his treatise

 (Pincherle and Amaldi 1901). In a conclusive section, we will resume the outcomes

 of the analysis contained in this paper and point to directions for future work.

 2 Casorati and Pincherle interactions on differential equations

 During the period that Pincherle spent in Pavia, which spans from 1875 to 1880 with

 the exclusion of his Berlin year, Casorati's main scientific activity was in the field

 of ordinary differential equations. In fact, Casorati had resumed scientific activity in

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 159

 analysis in 1874 after a long break. As he wrote in a letter to Gaston Darboux on 3

 August 1879.

 .. .For a lot of different reasons, I seldom read [the Darboux Bulletin] in the years
 1872, 73, 74. In those years, as in the previous years 70, 71,1 lived as a stranger to
 mathematics.12

 In the period there alluded to, Casorati was intensely involved in teaching both in

 Pavia and in Milan, at Brioschi's Regio Istituto Tecnico Superiore—today the Milan

 Polytechnic—but in his personal life, Casorati also suffered several grievous events that

 impaired him to the point of hampering his research. He lost his beloved father—the

 renowned physician Francesco Casorati—in 1859; then, his mother, and his life-mate.

 The following passage from a 1880 letter to Joseph Bertrand (February 6th) clarifies

 Casorati's feelings:

 After that a cruel illness mercilessly led my father to death—he, who was the sun

 of my life, the man to whose goodness I will never be able to think without being com

 pletely affected—my heart and my health were no longer as before; that inexplicable

 grief and that cruel reality depressed my forces, annihilated the poetry of life, in short,

 they destroyed my person both physically and morally. Moreover, I had my mother

 suffering from cancer for six consecutive years, when our family was reduced to the

 two of us and, finally, she died; it will not be hard to believe for you that, for several

 years, 1 remained as suspended between life and death. Finally, I improved; but my

 soul has remained, and will always remain, ready to be frightened, to get disheartened,

 to overstate any misfortune, to suffer enormouslyP

 Looking at Casorati's scientific production on differential equations, we can single

 out two main periods, each of them with its own leitmotif. In the first period up to

 1878, Casorati's main concern was the research on singular solutions of differential

 equations, a topic on which mathematicians such as Cayley and Darboux also devoted

 their attention. Since 1878, Casorati was mostly influenced by Fuchs's theory of linear

 differential equations in the complex plane. Since Casorati's activity in the former
 period had little impact on Pincherle, I will limit myself to a few remarks.

 Following the definition given by Boole in his treatise (Boole 1859), a textbook on

 which Casorati often based part of his lectures on infinitesimal calculus,

 a singular solution of a differential equation is a relation between χ and y, which

 satisfies the differential equation "by means of the value it gives to the differential

 coefficients" gf> and c., but is not included in the complete primitive (Boole
 1859, p. 139).

 12 ..per un cumulo di cause diverse, avvenne che negli anni 1872, 1873,1874 non lo osservassi quasi
 mai. In quegli anni, come nei precedenti 70 e 71, ho vissuto da straniero alia matematica.

 13 Dopoché un morbo crudele trasse spietatamente alla tomba mio padre, il sole della mia vita, l'uomo
 alla cui bontà non potrô mai pensare senza commuovermi tutto, l'animo mio e la mia salute non furono

 più quelli di prima; quell ' indicibile dolore, quella feroce realtà abbatterono le mie forze, annientarono la

 poesia della vita, demolirono insomma tutta la mia persona fisica e morale. Avuta, per giunta, mia madré
 ammalata di cancro per sei anni consecutivi, mentre la famiglia riducevasi a noi due soli, ed essa infine

 soccombeva; non stenterete a credere come io dovessi per lunga serie di anni rimanerne come tra questo e

 l'altro mondo. Finalmente migliorai; ma l'anima mia è rimasta e rimarrà sempre pronta a sgomentarsi, ad
 avvilirsi, ad esagerarsi ogni contrarietà, a soffrire senza misura.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 which is a singular solution of (2.1) since there is no value of c for which (2.2) yields
 (2.3).

 160

 R. Rosso

 As an example, Boole considered the equation (Boole 1859, p. 150)

 ^_^+(1+ι2)(|)2 = , (2.υ

 whose general solution (or complete primitive) is given by

 y = cx + \/l - c2, (2.2)

 where c is an arbitrary constant. However, it is also solved by

 y = Λ2 + 1 (2.3)

 Casorati focused his attention on algebraic differential equations whose coefficients

 are polynomials in both the dependent and the independent variables:

 A first-order differential equation between two variables u and ν is called algebraic

 differential when it yields a constraint among u, v, du and du that can be expressed

 by a finite number of algebraic operations,14 (Casorati 1875 = (Casorati 1952, p. 10).

 If ^(u, v) are m +1 polynomials, then it is always possible to reduce such an equation
 to the form

 to k—0 V '

 <Pm-k(u, v)(du)k(dv)m k = 0

 where ^ ^ are binomial coefficients and m determines the degree of the equation.

 Dissatisfied with the procedures he found in the relevant literature, Casorati pro

 posed a new theory for dealing with singular solutions of algebraic differential equa

 tions of first order and second degree (Casorati 1876). Specifically, the equations

 considered by Casorati are

 a(u, u)(d«)2 + 2β(μ, i))di<du + y(w, v)dv2 = 0 (2.4)

 where the polynomials α, β and γ have no common factors. Casorati made the hypoth

 esis that (2.4) has an algebraic complete primitive.

 For an equation of the first order and the first degree, that is,

 A(x, y)dx + B(x, )>)d;y = 0

 (2.5)

 14 Unaequazionedifïerenzialediprimoordinetraduevariabiliuevvadettaalgebrico-differenzialequando
 consista in un legame tra u, v, du e du esprimibile mediante un numéro finito di operazioni algebriche.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where G and H are irreducible polynomials of degree n, and λ is a parameter. By

 using the differential of this equation to get rid of λ, an equation of the class (2.5) is

 obtained. Pincherle resorted to the geometric meaning of (2.5) to obtain analytically

 a result geometrically established by Cremona 15 years before:

 In a family of curves of order m, there are 3 (m — l)2 double points (Cremona 1862,

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 161

 Jakob Rosanes had worked out a condition under which this is the case, in Rosanes

 (1871). It is precisely to equations like (2.5) that Pincherle turned his attention before

 his leaving for Berlin. He explained his reflections on algebraic differential equations
 to Casorati in a meeting (Conferenza) on 5 February 1877, a few weeks before pre

 senting the note (Pincherle 1877) at the Istituto Lombardo. Like Rosanes, Pincherle
 emphasized the geometric meaning of (2.5) that can be generated by taking a one

 parameter family of algebraic curves

 G(x,y) + XH(x,y) = 0 (2.6)

 p. 67).

 In the second part of Pincherle (1877), Pincherle followed the opposite direction:

 under the hypothesis that (2.6) is an integral of (2.5), he aimed at finding its explicit

 expression in terms of A and β. The results obtained in this part of the paper are subject
 to restrictions—as Pincherle himself stated in his 1887 curriculum vitae submitted for

 the election at the Lincei. Actually, these restrictions were pointed out to Pincherle

 by Casorati on September 1878, that is, almost eighteen months after the presentation

 of the note. These limitations concern some terms that were omitted by Pincherle,

 but taken into account by Casorati in his research on this subject. All this might

 be surprising, as Casorati had himself read the note to the members of the Istituto

 Lombardo but, presumably, on that occasion, he did not take too much care over

 the details of Pincherle's note since he relied on the meeting he had had with the

 latter a few weeks before. On the other hand, in 1878, when Casorati was working
 on equations like (2.5) (Casorati 1878b), he read Pincherle's paper more accurately,
 and pointed him out that the generality of his conclusions had to be considerably
 reduced.15

 3 Casorati's paper on finite differences

 In the history of mathematics, Casorati is best remembered for the Casorati
 Weierstrass-(Sokhotskii) theorem he published in (Casorati 1868). However, his
 name has also been linked to a special determinant—the Casoratian or the Caso

 rati determinant—that plays a rôle in linear difference equations analogue to the one

 played by the Wronskian in the theory of linear differential equations. This determi

 nant was introduced in Casorati (1880b), the paper by Casorati that mostly influenced

 Pincherle. This long memoir had a history that I review in the next section, after having
 examined its content.

 15 Casorati met Rosanes in Parpan (Switzerland) on 27 August 1879, and on that occasion, they discussed
 of research on the equation Adx + Bdy = 0.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 162

 R. Rosso

 Casorati applied the formalism of finite differences to study the behaviour of a

 function y of a complex variable χ in the neighbourhood of a point jci. By taking a

 point χ in a circular annulus surrounding x\ within which y is free of singularities,

 and by performing a simple closed contour starting at x, Casorati set

 Ay(x) := y(x + e2jTl) - y(x)

 and he noted that

 t(x) :=

 log(x -*i)
 2πί

 is such that At = 1. Moreover single-valued (monodromic) functions are such that

 Ay = 0 and so they play the same rôle as that played in standard calculus of differences

 by periodic functions / whose period is equal to the constant increment h = 1 of the

 independent variable. Casorati introduced an operator—the θ operator—defined by

 9y(x) := Ay(x) + y{x) = (Δ + l)y(*) (3.1)

 which is clearly the counterpart of the operator mapping / (i ) into / (î +1 ). In this new

 interpretation 0y yields the value of y after that the closed contour has been completed
 once. Casorati remarked:

 It is well known that, in the Calculus of differences, together with the differences

 Ay, A2y of a function, it is also important to consider the values that it attains at the

 values t + 1, t + 2,... of the variable. These values are mostly denoted as follows:

 But there is a great advantage in denoting these values with another notation, such as

 the following

 that makes it possible to consider θ as a symbol of an operation, that is, of that
 operation which yields »+] when it is performed on »16 (Casorati 1880b, p. 13;
 Casorati 1951, p. 320).

 16 Si sa che nel Calcolo delle differenze importa di considerare insieme con le differenze Δ>', A2 y di una

 funzione, anche separatamente i valori che essa prende corrispondentemente ai valori t+\,t + 2,... délia

 variabile. Questi valori vengono per lo più significati come segue:

 Ma vi ha grande vantaggio a significare questi valori con altra notazione, come la seguente

 Λ+i. yt+2> ■ ■ ·

 9y, e2y

 Λ+1> yt+2. ···

 6y, 62y

 la quale si presta a lasciar riguardare θ come un simbolo di operazione, cioè di quell'operazione che eseguita

 su yt dà per risultato yt+\.

 <?j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 163

 Such an operator interpretation is in the spirit of Pincherle's subsequent views as

 clearly stated, for instance, in his major memoir on Laplace transform (Pincherle 1887)
 where he considered the function

 the integration being performed along a line in the complex plane. Pincherle observed

 that f(x) is an analytic function if <p(y) is analytic as well, and hence,

 in this paper, we will consider this transformation under a new point of view: that is,

 as a functional operation (...) defined by some characteristic properties17 (Pincherle

 1887, p. 125).

 The most remarkable property of the operator θ is that it is eminently distributive

 (eminentemente distributivo), (Casorati 1880b, p. 13; Casorati 1951, p. 321) since it

 is not only linear but it also obeys

 (3.2)

 and

 9F(u(x), v(x), w(x),...) = F(9u(x), θν(χ), θιυ(χ),...), (3.3)

 for any operator F that yields a unique result when applied on functions uix), v(x),
 w(x),.... The main result contained in Casorati (1880b) is the following theorem,
 proved in Chap. 2:

 Theorem Among the functions y\(x), yi (x), ...,y„ (x) of a complex variable χ there
 exists or not a linear, homogeneous relation with coefficients that are single-valued

 (monotropi) in an annulus centered atx — χ \ according to whether the determinant

 y ι η ■■■ yn

 Θ _ Qy\ 0y2 ... 9yn

 9"~lyi en~xy2 ... θ"'1yn

 vanishes or not (Casorati 1880b, p. 19; Casorati 1951, p. 329).

 The direct theorem is easy to prove since, assuming that

 η

 =0

 17 In questo lavoro si vuole considerare questa trasformazione sotto un punto di vista nuovo: si vuole cioè
 riguardarla come unaoperazione funzionale (...) definite daalcune sue propriété caratteristiche.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 164

 R. Rosso

 and observing that θ φι = 0 as these functions are single-valued, then θ(φιγι) =
 θψίθγί = 0. Thus, also

 η

 y, <PiOkyi = 0 VA: = 0 η - 1
 ί=1

 and so the determinant Θ vanishes. Casorati proved the converse by induction on the

 number of functions y;. When η = 2, from

 it follows that

 *'(5. «»)=0

 Qyi _ yi

 9y2

 <p\y\ + <P2y2 = ο

 and since θ ^ j = he concluded that the ratio ^ goes back to its original value,
 when its argument has performed a complete tour. Hence it is a single-valued function,
 say and the relation

 holds. Induction from η — 1 to η is then performed by resorting to a transformation of

 determinants given in Hermite ( 1849). We note that, as a result of the new interpretation

 of finite-difference formalism, the linear, homogeneous relation between the functions

 yi (λ) has variable coefficients, contrary to its counterpart based upon the Wronskian.

 As a first application in Chap. 3 Casorati employed his formalism to study the

 structure of the roots of the algebraic equation

 Zn + ψ\Ζ"'1 Η h ψη-lZ + ψ„=0,

 where ψ, are single-valued functions of a complex variable χ. In doing this, Casorati

 simplified considerably the analysis contained in Puiseux's long memoir (Puiseux

 1850). In Chap. 4 Casorati applied the theorem on the Θ determinant—that is the

 Casoratian—to the linear differential equation with single-valued coefficients pi(x)

 in the complex plane

 Dmy + p{Dm~xy + --- + pm-\Dy + pmy = 0, (3.4)

 where D := ^. Given a point x\, Casorati associated to the Eq. (3.4) a homogeneous
 difference equation that is linear and of the /nth order as well but with constant coeffi

 cients, whose general solution he had recalled in Chap. 6. Actually, Casorati observed

 that, when y denotes the general integral of (3.4), then (3.4) itself can be viewed as a

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 165

 linear, homogeneous relation with single-valued coefficients p, among the functions

 y, Dy,..., Dmy, and so the corresponding Θ determinant vanishes, that is

 However, since θ commutes with D,

 y Dy
 θ y 9Dy

 Η =

 Dmy
 eDmy

 = 0.

 I θ"1 y 0mDy

 9mDmy

 J Dy
 0y D9y

 Η =

 Dmy

 Dm0y

 = 0

 emy D9my

 Dmemy

 follows, that can be viewed as the Wronskian determinant of the functions

 y,6y,... ,6my. Hence, it follows that these functions obey a linear difference equation
 with constant coefficients

 A0emy + Αχθ"1 *)> + ·■· + Am-{9y + Amy = 0

 (3.5)

 that can be used in turn to gain information on the behaviour of the function y around
 the point χ = x\. When χ = x\ is a singular point of (3.4), Casorati applied the

 correspondence between (3.4) and (3.5) to revisit §3 of Fuchs (1866), and to obtain

 quickly the local form of the canonical fundamental system of solutions of (3.4) with a

 cursory mention to the fact that also the structure of the integrals forming Hamburger's

 subgroups (Hamburger 1873) can be similarly obtained, an issue that will be the core
 of the subsequent paper (Casorati 1881a).

 The operator θ admits other interpretations. For instance, by setting

 it is possible to view periodic functions with period ω as the fixed points of θ. By

 introducing another operator Θ' such that

 θ fix) = fix + ω)

 Θ' fix) = fix+co')

 it is possible to study systems of difference equations

 Ao9myix) + Aiem~xyix) + · · · + Am_i0;y(*) + Amyix) = 0
 Β0θ'"γ(χ) + Bxe'n-Xyix) + · · ■ 4- tf'yix) + Bny(x) = 0

 (3.6)

 where the mn coefficients A,·, Bj are constants. As a special case, Eqs. (3.6) embody
 those arising in a problem just tackled by Picard (1879) where the latter generalized

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 166

 R. Rosso

 the concept, due to Hermite, of doubly periodic functions of the second kind with

 periods 2Κ and 2iK', by looking for uniform functions f(x) such that

 f(x + 4K) = Af(x)+Bf(x+2K) and f(x+4iK') = A'f(x) + B'f(x + 2LK').

 The same path followed to associate (3.5)—(3.4) also works for a linear differential

 equation with periodic or doubly periodic coefficients, and Casorati devoted Chap. 7 of

 Casorati (1880b) to investigate the structure of the general solution of these equations

 that will been studied intensively also by Floquet (1883, 1884).

 As a final interpretation of the θ-operator, in Chap. 8 of his paper, Casorati consid

 ered functions in ρ independent variables that are multiply periodic, so that

 f(X\,X2,...,Xp) = f{x 1 +ωΐ,Χ2+(02 Xp+(Op)

 holds for a set of periods ω\,..., ω p and now θ is interpreted as the operator

 θ : / h* θ/{χ ι,Χ2, ...,Xp) = f(x ι +ω\,χ2 + ω2,. ..,χρ + ωρ).

 4 Chronicle of a missed prize

 From the introduction of Casorati (1880b) we realize the importance that Casorati

 attached to his paper:

 Researches that employ complex variability rely—at least in part—in an essential

 way upon relations that stem from considering the way in which functions of a com

 plex variable behave when the variable turns around a particular value. This remark
 prompted me to investigate and determine once and for all, in advance and indepen

 dently of any particular study or aim, the properties and the general formulae that it

 is important, and possible, to obtain to the benefit of further, particular researches;

 in such a way to form a theory in itself from which all those who begin investigations

 on functions with complex variables from now on can avail themselves as a common

 instrument18 (Casorati 1880b, p. 10 ξ Casorati 1951, p. 317).

 At the beginning of November 1879, Casorati, influenced by Brioschi, decided to

 apply for the Grand Prix des Sciences Mathématiques that the French Academy of

 Sciences proposed for the year 1880, whose theme perfectly matched the topic of his
 researches:

 18 Le ricerche che si fanno colla variabilité complessa si basano, almeno in parte, essenzialmente sulle
 relazioni che scaturiscono dal considerare i modi di comportarsi delle funzioni di una variabile complessa

 al girare di questa intorno a suoi valori particolari. Questa osservazione mi fece nascere il pensiero di

 investigare e stabilire, una volta per sempre in anticipazione ed indipendentemente da ogni studio ο scopo

 particolare, le propriété e le formole generali che da siffatte relazioni fondamentali importa ed è possibile di
 ricavare a beneficio delle singole ricerche ulteriori; cosl da costituire una teorica a sè, délia quale, come di

 strumento comune, possano valersi tutti coloro che d'ora innanzi vorranno intraprendere studî sulle funzioni

 di variabili complesse.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 167

 Improve in some important point the theory of linear differential equations in only

 one variable.19

 Casorati kept all the correspondence concerning (Casorati 1880b) and the prize,
 and in this section, we outline the content of part of these letters whose original

 texts are displayed in "Appendix Γ'.20 We should note that at the beginning of the

 correspondence Casorati had not published yet either (Casorati 1880b) or anything else

 on the interpretation of finite differences. We also recall that the letters sent by Casorati

 are known through his minutes, whereas those addressed to him are the originals. They

 cover more than one year: the first letter is dated 27 December 1879 and the last letter

 was written on 17 April 1881. Letters 1-5 contain the correspondence between Casorati

 and Joseph Bertrand, the Sécretaire perpetuel of the French Academy. Casorati asked

 for general information on the competition and, curiously enough, at the beginning of

 the correspondence, he pretended that the applicant was a fellow-countryman of his,

 probably to secure anonymity: it was only after the long-waited reply from Bertrand

 that Casorati disclosed the identity of the applicant. From these letters, we learn that

 the topic for the prize was chosen by Bertrand who wished to reward Edmond Nicolas

 Laguerre for the results on linear differential equations that had impressed him so
 much. As an aside, we note that, apparently, Laguerre did not apply for the prize.

 Casorati was not willing to wait the end of the competition to publish his results but,

 from Bertrand replies, we also realize that published papers could be eligible for the

 prize, provided that no member of the judging Committee raised formal objections.

 A second group of letters (Letters 6-9) are concerned with the turbulent editorial

 process related to the publication of Casorati (1880b), whose content had been pre

 sented to the Istituto Lombardo in February 1880. In fact, a strike of the typographers

 was unduly delaying the publication of his notes: besides (Casorati 1880b), Casorati

 illustrated applications both to Fuchs's theory and to Floquet's theory of differential

 equations with periodic coefficients in Casorati (1880a). He then wrote to his friend

 Luigi Cremona, asking him to present a revised version of the manuscript to the Annali
 at the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome. Casorati not only called attention to applica

 tions to differential equations, but also to algebraic equations that might seem more

 interesting to Cremona who, in turn, presented the manuscript on March 7th21. The

 long strike in Milan went on, and the deadline of June 1 for applications to the Grand

 Prix was approaching: Casorati withdrew the first version of Casorati (1880b) from

 the Annali and worked on the manuscript that was finally sent to the Académie on

 May 22nd. As to the epigraph, he chose a passage from Blaise Pascal's Pensées:
 Nous sommes si malheureux, que nous ne pouvons prendre plaisir à une chose qu 'à

 condition de nous fâcher si elle réussit mal (Pascal 1835, Chap. IV, Art. V. p. 153).

 This epigraph was inserted in the billet cacheté together with an explanatory note

 where Casorati summarized the history of the manuscript that could not be sent in

 a printed form. We remark that the judging committee for the prize was formed by

 19 Perfectionner en quelque point important la théorie des équations différentielles linéaires à une seule
 variable indépendante.

 20 We did not transcribe Fuchs's letter to Casorati, dated March 30th, 1881 on the Stickelberger controversy,

 as it has been already published in Neuenschwander (1978).

 21 Memorie della Reale Accademia dei Lincei, 5, S.III, 195-208, (1880).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 168

 R. Rosso

 Bertrand, together with Ossian Bonnet, Charles Hermite, Victor Puiseux, and Jean

 Claude Bouquet, as communicated in the Comptes Rendus of April 12th, 1880.

 Casorati applied to another competition, the second edition of the Premio Bressa

 proposed by the Royal Academy of Sciences in Turin (Letter 10). With respect to the

 Grand Prix, the Bressa prize had a broader spectrum, as it aimed at rewarding the

 best work written by an Italian scholar in the period 1877-1880 on a subject ranging

 from pure and applied mathematics to pathology and geology. To have a chance, it

 was then important that the mathematicians in the Turin Academy could appreciate

 the importance of Casorati's work. For this reason, since the principal analyst in Turin

 at that time was Angelo Genocchi, Casorati wrote him a letter (June 21st, 1880, not

 published here) asking for an appointment, since he was going to visit Turin with

 Beltrami. In this occasion, he would have explained the importance he ascribed to his

 findings. The meeting with Genocchi took place at the end of June and, according to

 Casorati's short account of it to Brioschi, Genocchi was favourably impressed. Thus

 Casorati asked Brioschi and Betti, both members of the Turin Academy, to support

 his paper: in spite of these efforts, however, the 2nd Bressa prize was awarded to the

 natural scientist Luigi Maria d'Albertis.

 At the beginning of August, with his manuscript finally published in the Annali,

 Casorati sent offprints of it to many mathematicians, both in Italy-for instance to

 Francesco Siacci—and abroad, including Fuchs, Klein, Lindemann, Mittag-Leffler,

 Dillner, Kronecker, Picard, and Weierstrass. In all his accompanying letters, he stressed

 the importance of the theorem on the Θ determinant. As an example, letters 11 and

 12 of "Appendix 1" are those that Casorati sent to, and received by, Émile Picard.

 So far, we followed only the correspondence concerning the Grand Prix, but at this

 point, the events concerning the prize intertwined with a polemics involving Caso
 rati and Ludwig Stickelberger. By the end of 1880, Casorati received a memoir—an

 Akademische Antrittsschrift (Stickelberger 1881)—that accompanied Stickelberger's

 entry as a professor at the University of Freiburg. There the author employed finite

 differences to study the behaviour of the solutions of a linear differential equation in

 the neighborhood of its singular points, thus obtaining results in the same vein as those

 contained in Chap. 4 of Casorati (1880b). Casorati was really hurt by a sentence placed

 in the Introduction to the Antrittschrift, where (Stickelberger, 1881, p. 4) had referred

 to Casorati's procedure as inadvisable (nicht rathsam). Moreover, since Stickelberger

 referred to papers by Riemann (1857) and Hamburger (1873) where the use of the

 logarithm of the independent variable had been made, Casorati felt that Stickelberger

 was attempting to diminish the importance of his own findings. Hence, at the end

 of 1880, he sent a letter to Brioschi to be published in the Annali (Casorati 1880c).

 This letter is firm in making it clear that Casorati's memoir had a broader aim than

 Stickelberger's and that the applications to differential equations were just an example

 to show, in a significant topic, the versatility of his ideas.

 Admittedly, Casorati reply was excessive and, in my opinion, the reasons for his

 attitude could have been the following: (a) he was concerned with the priority of the

 theorem, now known as the Casorati-Weierstrass theorem, which he had proved in §88

 of Casorati (1868), and had then been published by Weierstrass in (Weierstrass 1876)

 without any reference to Casorati's work (Neuenschwander 1978) [it should be noted,
 however, that there is some evidence that Weierstrass had known the theorem since

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 169

 1863 (see Neuenschwander 1978; Bottazzini and Gray 2013, p. 436)]; (b) the great

 expectations he had about the impact of his work that were now brought into question

 by Stickelberger's remark; (c) the familiar concerns (see Letter 6 of "Appendix 1") he

 had to face when working on the final version of Casorati (1880b) and that interfered

 strongly with his scientific activity. The short letter (Casorati 1880c) was probably also

 written in a hurry, and Casorati did not properly separate relevant scientific comments

 from personal feelings. A few months later, on 6 February 1881, Casorati wrote a long

 letter to Ossian Bonnet (Letter 13) where he separated personal animosity from scien

 tific judgements. There Casorati was appreciative of some aspects of Stickelberger's

 paper so that his judgement of (Stickelberger 1881) contained in the central part of the

 letter to Bonnet resembles a standard referee's report. First, he praises Stickelberger's

 use of the results obtained by Cauchy (1827), a paper devoted to symbolic calculus.

 There, using the notation

 Ay = Axy := fix + Ax) - f(x)

 for the finite difference of a function y = / (χ ), and Df for ^, Cauchy had also proved
 (Cauchy 1827, pp. 228-230) that, if Fix) is a polynomial with constant coefficients

 having only simple roots Π, r2, ■ · ·, rn, then the general solution of the differential

 [difference] equation

 F(D)y(x) = f(x) [F(A)y(x) = fix)], (4.1)

 could be rewritten as

 m = (,2)

 ~ F iTk) D-rk

 >'(x) = enx J e-r*'/(i)df

 exists. On the contrary, if r\ = rj = · · · = rm = ρ, the first m terms in the expression

 (4.2) had to be replaced by the residue of the function

 at ζ = ρ, so that the contribution of these terms to the solution of (4.1) was

 1

 (r - z)Fiz)

 Yr /<*>

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where F'(n0 is the shorthand for ^r\n and denotes symbolically the solution
 of the first-order equation (D - rk)yix) = fix), for which the representation

 R. Rosso

 1 dm-k / em \

 m~k (m - Λ)! θε"1-* \/(ρ + ε))ε=0

 170

 where

 given by

 and, again, represented symbolically the solution of (D - Q)ky(x) = /(λ),

 ■J e~nt f (t)dtk.

 Actually Cauchy's version of the theorem was more general, but this application is

 enough for our purposes, as it is this classification of the solution according to the
 presence or not of coincident roots in the characteristic equation F(x) = 0 that
 bridges Cauchy's and Fuchs's theories. However, in all the equations considered by

 Cauchy the coefficients of F(x) are constant, and so the worlds of differential and

 difference equations remained distinct, though parallel, in his work. As noted before,

 it is the change of variable u := that makes it possible to export methods of
 finite-difference calculus to linear differential equations with variable coefficients.

 The second remark made by Casorati on (Stickelberger 1881) concerned the resort

 to Weierstrass's theory of elementary divisors (Elementartheiler) to classify solutions

 of (3.4). Casorati did not think that Stickelberger's approach is optimal, and this view

 was the starting point of the notes he alluded to in this letter to Bonnet, and that also

 appeared in the Comptes Rendus (Casorati 1881a).

 Casorati's disappointment with Stickelberger's behaviour reappears strongly in a

 letter, dated 22 February 1881, he intended to write to Frobenius, with whom Stick

 elberger had scientific connections, but that was never sent. This sudden change of

 mind might have been caused by the final decision of the Committee charged to award

 the Grand Prix, communicated on February 14th: Georges Halphen was the recipient

 of the prize, and two special mentions—mentions très honorables—were granted to
 two other memoirs: to Poincaré's essay on Fuchsian functions that remained unpub

 lished until 1923 (Poincaré 1923) (see Chap. 3 of (Gray 2013), for a detailed account
 of Poincaré's achievements)— and to Casorati's who, unlike Poincaré, decided to

 remain anonymous (see vol. 92 of the Comptes Rendus, pp. 551-554 for the reports

 on the three best memoirs among the six manuscripts sent to the Academy). The

 outcome of the competition did not satisfy Casorati who feared that his prestige as

 a professor could suffer a serious blow (Letter 15), despite of the appreciation that

 his work received from Bertrand (Letter 14) and Darboux. In particular, the attitude

 of Casorati, who was prone to be bewildered in front of misfortune, appears in his

 letter to Bertrand. We note that, on writing the report on behalf of the Committee,

 Hermite meant to point out a preference for Poincaré's memoir over Casorati's since

 the order of the mémoires by Casorati (N. 3) and Poincaré (Ν. 5) was shifted from the

 natural one: Casorati asked Bertrand (on February 26th) to correct it unless it meant

 a difference in quality between the two memoirs.

 From the historical point of view, Letters 16 and 17 are the more significant. Stick

 elberger replied to Casorati (1880c) by writing to Brioschi twice to have his rebuttal

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 171

 published in the Annali: Letter 16 is the second one written by Stickelberger. Since

 these letters provoked another bitter reply from Casorati, Brioschi finally decided not

 to proceed with publishing Stickelberger's defence. Stickelberger stated he received

 the paper (Casorati 1880b) from Ferdinand von Lindemann in August 1880, when he

 had already obtained his main results but, more importantly, he quoted a 1858 paper by

 Christoffel (1858) where Casorati's condition of linear independence—with constant

 coefficients—among functions depending on a variable undergoing discrete incre

 ments had already been obtained. Casorati admitted to Brioschi that he was unaware

 of Christoffel's result and promised to quote it as soon as possible—a promise he did

 not fulfill as he ceased to work on this topic.

 Christoffel's paper—which also had a continuation first published in his Collected

 papers (Christoffel 1910)—is divided in two parts: for our purposes, the discussion

 in Sects. 1-2 of Christoffel (1858) is the most important. There he considered η + 1

 functions {/(m), f\(m),..., fn(m)} with /, : Ζ μ>· M and, supposing that they are

 linear dependent for the values of m ranging from /no to mo + η + ρ, with ρ > 0, he

 distinguished three cases according to whether, for these values of m,
 (a) only a relation Af(m) + A\f\(m) Η l· Anfn(m) = 0 holds;
 (b) at least two relations Af(m) + A\f\{m) -f · · ■ + Anfn(m) = 0, Bf{m) +

 B\f\{m) Η l· Bnfn(m) = 0 hold for the same values of m, and so the rank of the
 matrix

 / /On) Mm) ■■■ fn(m) \

 A f(m + 1) fi(m + 1) ··· fn(m + 1)

 \f{m + n) fi(m + n) ■■■ fn{m + n),

 is strictly lower than in case (a);

 (c) it is possible to single out q + r intervals, each consisting of at least η elements,

 such that in q of them, case (a) holds, whereas in remaining r intervals case (b) holds.
 (Casorati 1880b) is consistent with case (a) of Christoffel's treatment. Here Christoffel

 wrote down the linear system

 Af(m) + A\f\(m) H h Anfn(m) = 0
 A/(m + 1) + A\f\(m + 1) H + Anfn{m + 1) = 0

 Afim + n) + Aifi(m + η) H h Anf„(m + n) = 0 :

 denoting the determinant of the matrix A by Δ (m ), and the minor obtained by removing

 the /zth column and the last line of A by Αμ(ηι), he obtained

 Αμ = ωΔμ(ηι)

 where the factor ω is undetermined, while A(m) = 0 guarantees existence of the

 solution in the unknowns Αμ. To prove the converse statement (Christoffel 1858, §2)
 supposed that A(m) vanishes at m = mo, mo + 1,..., mo + p, but that it does not

 vanish at mo - 1 and at mo + ρ + 1: then, the functions {/, /i, ...,/„} are linearly

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 172

 R. Rosso

 dependent at m = mo, mo + 1,... ,mo + ρ + n. Christoffel set

 <p(m) \= Af(m) + Ai/i(m) + · · · 4- A„fn(m)

 and selected the η 4- 1 coefficients Ai such that the η equations

 φ(τη) = ψ{ηχ + 1) = · · ■ = φ(ιη' + η — 1) = 0

 hold, for a yet unspecified value m! of m. By adding to these equations either

 Af(m' - 1) + A\f\{m' - 1) 4- f Anf„(m' - 1) = ιp(m' - 1)

 Af(m' + n) + A\f\(m' + n) 4 h Anf„(m' 4- n) = <p(m' + n),

 then

 A^A(m'-l) = (-l)n(p{m' - 1)Δμ(/η'), or AllA(ml)=<p(m/+η)Δμ(ιη') (4.3)

 follows, respectively. Hence, when m! is set equal to one of the values mo, mo 4

 1,..., mo + p, the left-hand side of (4.3)2 vanishes by hypothesis and so

 Δ·μ,{τη')φ(τη' 4-n) = 0 :

 if at least one of the minors Δμ(/η;) does not vanish, then (p(m' 4- «) = 0, and lin
 ear dependence of {/, fi,..., /„} is guaranteed. As a consequence of his analysis,
 Christoffel obtained that

 The n-1-1 assigned functions {/(m), f\(m),..., /«(m)} are linearly independent

 for any value of m if and only if their determinant Mm) is different from zero for all

 values of m22 (Christoffel 1858, p. 288).

 Christoffel's paper is not mentioned even in treatises on finite differences that have

 rather extensive bibliographies like (Nôrlund 1924; Guldberg and Wallenberg 1911),
 and (Pascal 1897a). It was quoted in passing by Boole (Boole 1880, p. 232) as a

 remarkable paper though for a different reason, and it did not escape the encyclopedic

 history of determinants by Muir who actually reviewed both Christoffel's (Muir 1911,

 pp. 225-228) and Casorati's papers (Muir 1923, pp. 242-243), though he did not feel

 the need to note any interrelation between them, apart from inserting both of them in

 chapters on Wronskians. We note in passing that Ernesto Pascal made a short reference

 to Christoffel's paper in another book on determinants, for a theorem on Wronskians

 (Pascal 1897b). Looking at the outline (Butzer 1981) of the main achievements by

 Christoffel in mathematics, (Christoffel 1858) does not occupy the first rank, and the

 22 Damit gegebene η + 1 Functionen {/(m), f\(m), (m)} fiir aile Weithe von m linearunabhângig
 sind, ist erforderlich und hinreichend, dass ihre Déterminante A(m) fiir aile Werthe von m von Null ver
 schieden ist.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 173

 episode discussed in this section certifies once more a certain difficulty in appreciating

 the content of Christoffel's paper by the scientific community.

 We can conclude that the novelty of Casorati's approach is the interpretation he

 gave to the formalism of finite differences. Curiously enough, his theorem on the Θ

 determinant has been later applied as a tool in the standard theory of finite-difference

 calculus where, however, Casorati had been partially anticipated by Christoffel.

 5 An unpublished note by Pincherle

 In 1875, Jules Tannery wrote a long memoir (Tannery 1875) in which he aimed at

 clearly explaining the main principles upon which the theory of linear differential

 equations rests. In doing this, he had as models the relevant papers by Thomé and,

 more importantly, by Fuchs. The memoir was actually Tannery's thesis, which was
 discussed at the Faculty of Sciences in Paris on 28 November 1874. It is divided

 into five parts: the first and the second part illustrate general basic properties of the

 solutions of linear differential equations while the third part, on which we will focus
 attention, is concerned with the behaviour of a fundamental set of solutions in the

 neighbourhood of a singular point; finally, the fourth part is concerned with a special

 class of differential equations, namely those that only admit integrals with poles of

 finite order at the singular points of the equations and at infinity, and the closing fifth

 section is devoted to applications. Casorati, who was given a copy of the thesis by

 Tannery himself, expounded parts of Tannery (1875) in his 1878-79 course devoted

 to differential equations (Casorati 1878a) and, as we shall see later on, he made some

 critical remarks on (Tannery 1875) that played a rôle in the history of Pincherle's

 unpublished note. Tannery's paper was noted also by Goursat in Goursat (1883) where

 he generalized the representation of the hypergeometric series as definite integrals

 depending on parameters. Actually, both Goursat and Pincherle were interested in the

 same theorem (Tannery 1875, pp. 130-132):

 Let yi, j2, · · ·. y m be m functions of χ that are continuous everywhere, except at

 some singular points isolated from each other, and that are uniform within the portions

 of the plane (or of the sphere) with a simple boundary that do not contain singular

 points: if, whenever the variable makes a complete tour around a singular point, the
 new values

 [yi]\ [y2Ï,...,[yn]'

 of these functions are related to the previous ones by linear equations with constant

 coefficients, (...), these functions are the integrals of a linear differential equation

 with uniform coefficients,23

 23 Soient y\, yi, ■ ■ ■, y m m fonctions de χ continues, sauf pour des points singuliers isolés les uns des

 autres, uniformes dans les portions de plan (ou de la sphère) à contour simple qui ne contiennent pas de

 points singuliers: si, lorsque la variable fait le tour d'un point singulier, les nouvelles valeurs

 W. [»]' [ynY

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 174

 R. Rosso

 Since the converse of this theorem is true (Tannery 1875, pp. 129-130) the property

 analysed by Tannery characterizes the integrals of a linear, homogeneous differential

 equation, with uniform coefficients (Goursat 1883, p. 21). With this remarks, we can

 now follow the letters between Casorati and Pincherle on this topic in the period
 1885-1886: the original texts are available in "Appendix 2".

 On 21 July 1885, Pincherle communicated to Casorati (see Letter 1) that he could

 prove Tannery's theorem quickly by resorting to the formalism of the θ operator
 proposed in (Casorati 1880b). We note that Casorati had lectured on some results

 then published in Casorati (1880b) during the course of Higher Calculus in the aca

 demic year 1879-1880, when Pincherle was in Pavia. Pincherle had only an indi
 rect knowledge of Tannery (1875) via Goursat's memoir (Goursat 1883) that he

 was studying during his researches on integrals.24 Actually, Pincherle's work on

 the θ operator is an impromptu since at that time he was more concerned with the

 representation of analytic functions by definite integrals that form the content of
 Pincherle (1885b, 1886b) (Letters 3 and 5). In any case, Casorati (Letter 2) sug
 gested that Pincherle read (Tannery 1875) because he might find new applications

 therein for the θ operator. While in Letter 2, Casorati seemed to consider the pres

 ence of these applications as not so stringent a requirement if he were to present

 Pincherle's note for publication, he then changed his mind (Letter 4) and his doubts
 cooled Pincherle who, however, was still convinced that Casorati's method pro
 vided the right way to obtain an easier proof of the theorem (Letter 5). At this
 point Casorati felt that Pincherle had taken his doubts too seriously, and encour

 aged him in writing the note (Letter 6). As a result, Pincherle asked Casorati for the

 volume of the Annales containing (Tannery 1875) that was unavailable in Bologna,
 and that might give him new ideas for a possible expansion of his note (Letter
 7).

 Letter 8, dated 9 January 1886, is the most important letter of this correspon

 dence as it contains the note that, as we shall see, will remain unpublished. Pincherle

 proved Tannery's theorem under slightly weaker hypotheses, since he assumed that the

 coefficients could also be multi-valued functions, though of a specific type: uniform

 functions of an analytic point.25 Here is the translation of Pincherle's note attached to
 that letter.

 Analysis: On a theorem of Mr. Tannery

 Footnote 23 continued

 de ces fonctions sont liées aux prèmieres par des équations linéaires à coefficients constants (...), ces
 fonctions sont les intégrales d'une équation différentielle linéaire à coefficients uniformes.

 24 Pincherle started reading Goursat's memoir on June 18th, 1885 as noted in Vol. V of his Ricerche e

 Saggi, an impressive collection of notebooks on which Pincherle annotated his reflections on the scientific

 literature, and wrote down drafts of his own papers and letters. The notebooks are kept in the library of the

 Mathematical Department of the University of Bologna.

 25 These functions are uniform on their Riemann surface which, in turn, consists of a finite number of sheets.

 Here Pincherle follows Paul Appell who introduced this concept in his Appell (1882a,b). Giulio Vivanti,

 who also studied with Pincherle, devoted (Vivanti 1887) to study their properties. In this paper, Vivanti also

 gave this informal definition (p. 54): Uniform functions of an analytic point are uniform functions in two

 variables that are related by an algebraic equation.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ε — c\E\ + C2E2 Η \-cnEn, (1)

 where the coefficients c are arbitrary constants; if the variable varies following a

 contour enclosing a\, and if we denote by θ the Casorati operator, it follows that

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 175

 This short note aims to show, by a new application, the advantages in the study

 of analytic functions, and of their behaviour in the neighborhood of given points, of

 the method envisaged by prof. Casorati and exposed in his Memoir: "II calcolo delle

 differenze finite interpretato26 etc, Annali di Matematica, S. II, T. X." Here I apply

 this method to prove a theorem stated by Mr. Tannery in his Memoir "Propriétés des

 intégrales des équations différentielles linéaires, Annales de l'Ec. Normale, S. II, T. IV,

 p. 130;" this theorem is remarkable both in its own, and for an important application

 given by Mr. Goursat.27

 The theorem is as follows, though in a modified form: "Let E\, E2,..., En be
 η analytic functions that are regular in the neighborhood of any point of a simply

 connected set T, apart from a finite number of points 01,02,..., ap, and among
 which there is no linear relation with constant coefficients; if, when the variable moves

 around any of the points 01,02,... ,ap without leaving the set T, the new values of the
 functions are related to the former ones by linear relations with constant coefficients,

 then these functions are the solutions of a linear differential equation with coefficients

 that are single-valued in the set 77'
 In fact, let us consider the function Ε

 θ Ε = αθΕχ + C20Ê2 Η 1- cn9En

 and, by hypothesis,

 similarly

 ΘΕ = kit\E\ + ^1,2^2 + ■ · · + &i,nEn; (2)

 Θ^Ε = ki,\E\ + k2,2E2 + · · · + k2,nEn,

 θηΕ = k„tiE\ + k„:2E2 + · · · + kn,nEn\

 (3)

 if we eliminate I, E\, E2,..., En in Eqs. (1), (2), and (3), an equation

 ΚηθηΕ + Κη-\θη~^Ε + · · · + K0E = 0

 is obtained; this equation, however (Casorati, loc. cit. § 10), shows that Ε obeys a linear

 differential equation

 φ0Ε{η)+φιΕ(·η-ν + ··· + φηΕ = 0,

 26 See a detailed account of this Memoir in "Bulletin de Darboux, S. II, T. VI, 1882 "

 27 In the Memoir "Sur une classe des fonctions représentés per des intégrales définies. Acta Mathematica,
 T.II".

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 176

 R. Rosso

 with coefficients that are single-valued in a neighborhood of a\ and having Ε as its

 general integral. From the same proof, it also follows that φο,φ\,... ,cpn are single

 valued in a neighborhood of «2» «3 ap, whence the theorem follows.

 If the set Τ covers all the sphere once, the functions φο, ψ\,..., ψη are uniform.

 The case in which the set Γ is a Riemann surface, reduced to be simply connected by

 means of appropriate cuts, is not ruled out; in this case, the functions ιρο, ψ\ ψη

 would be uniform functions of an analytic point.
 S. Pincherle

 The important application by Goursat alluded to here is Theorem I of Goursat

 (1883). There Goursat considered functions f(x, u), where both χ and u are complex

 variables such that, for any fixed value of x, f(x, u) admits only a finite number

 m = n +ρ of singular values v\,... ,vm, some of which (a\,..., an) are independent

 of x, whereas the remaining ones (mi, , up) do depend on x. For instance, the
 function

 f(x, u) \= (u - ai)fcl_1(« - a-i)b2~X ···(«-an)b"~l(u -χ)*-1 (5.1)

 has υι = a\ vn = an, vn+\ = u\ — χ as its critical values. Goursat considered
 the functions

 (ViVh)(x):= f(x,u)du

 fVh

 J Vf

 where the integration is performed along the straight line joining υ,· to Vh. To define
 these functions, one has first to make sure that none of the singular points t>, fall on

 the path of integration : if, in (5.1), &,· and bh have a positive real part, in defining

 (atah) = f£h f(x, u)du we need to suppose that none of the remaining points a} lie
 on the segment joining a,· with ah, and the Jt-plane must have cuts (coupures, after

 Hermite 1881) along the segment (a,, a^), to ensure that the singularity u\ does not

 enter the domain of integration. However, this is not enough to guarantee that (a,, ah)

 is a uniform (single-valued) function of χ since, when χ makes a complete turn along

 a close curve surrounding the segment (α,·, a/,), then the integral (a,·a/,) turns into

 (a,·, a/,)e±27ra that, in general, does not coincide with (α,α^): new coupures must be

 introduced to guarantee that (α,a/,) is uniform. Goursat applied Tannery's theorem to

 prove that all the integrals (ujVh)(x) that can be formed from a function f(x,u) obey

 one and the same linear differential equation with uniform coefficients of order m-I.

 Pincherle's proof simplified Tannery's proof, and Casorati himself had considered

 the possibility of applying the results of Casorati (1880b) to simplify Tannery's analy

 sis, though at another point. In fact, in a footnote on p. 336 of Casorati (1951), the
 editors of Casorati's collected papers—either Luigi Berzolari or Silvio Cinquini—

 report on an unpublished manuscript where Casorati commented upon the advantages

 of (3.5) to reobtain both the main results of Fuchs (1866) as well as Tannery's results
 on the local behaviour of the general solution of (3.4) as exposed on pp. 139-140

 of Tannery (1875). However, as we mentioned in Sect. 4, after the outcome of the
 Grand Prix, and the stress induced by Stickleberger's controversy, Casorati avoided

 any publication somehow related to Casorati (1880b).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 177

 With Pincherle's note at his disposal, Casorati changed his mind again. On the

 envelope containing Letter 8, he wrote:

 On going to Modena, I have to take Tannery [memoir] with me, to tell Pincherle that

 it would be a good thing that the note to be published should contain the correction of

 pp. 132-133 of Tannery's [memoir]. Without this or without something more, I would

 not publish the Note.28

 Casorati and Pincherle met shortly in Modena, not far from Bologna where Pincherle

 taught, at the beginning of 1886, and it is clear from Letter 9 that Pincherle followed

 Casorati's advice, though he was unable to find errors on the pages indicated by

 Casorati, apart from a trivial misprint. Casorati remarked (Letter 10) that he had

 in mind something more serious than a typo. To understand his doubts, we have

 to summarize the content of (Tannery 1875, pp. 132-133), where Tannery aimed at

 obtaining the linear differential equation satisfied by the roots of an algebraic equation

 f[x, y) = 0, / being a polynomial of the mth degree in y, with the coefficient of ym

 a constant, for simplicity. The m roots of this equation are functions of * that, when

 χ moves around a singular point, are simply shuffled so that by Tannery's theorem

 they have to satisfy a linear differential equation of order m at most, the order being

 strictly less than m when the roots of fix, y) = 0 satisfy a linear relation with

 constant coefficients. To find this differential equation Tannery eliminated y between

 the equations

 thus obtaining

 fix, y) = 0 and §£ = 0

 dy

 <p(x) = f(x, y)A(x, y) + Bix, y) = 0,

 dy

 for suitable polynomials A and Β of degree m - 1 and m — 2 in y, respectively. By

 taking y as a function of x, the implicit function theorem yields

 dy % *jj fl Q
 d* % Af + B% ^x)

 where fix, y) = 0 has been used to write Β = Af + Βand to arrange Βso
 that it contains y up to the power m — 1. Iteration of the procedure makes it possible
 to conclude that

 dky Pkix,y) wl 1
 d? = w ( '

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 28 Andando a Modena, portar meco il Tannery, per dire al Pincherle che starebbe bene far si che la Nota a

 pubblicarsi contenesse lacorrezione delle pp. 132-133 del Tannery. Senza di ciô ο di qualche altra cosa, io
 non pubblicherei la Nota.

 178

 R. Rosso

 where all the polynomials Pk(x, y) contain y up to the power m — 1. From equation

 (5.2) Tannery concluded that clearly (visiblement) the following equation is satisfied
 by y(x):

 dmy y Qdx) dm~ky
 dxm ~ [<p{x)]k dxm~k

 where Qk are polynomials in χ only, since all the powers of y from y2 to ym~x can be

 eliminated. Casorati criticized this argument by producing a counterexample, in the

 case m = 2, by setting

 f(x,y) = ay2 + by + c

 where a, b, and c are polynomials in x. Hence, by standard manipulations he wrote

 <p(x) = ac -b2 = (ay2 + 2by + c)xa + (2ay + 2b) ~

 whence, following Tannery's recipe he obtained

 d y ay + β d2y _ yy + S
 dx αφ(χ) ' dx2 α2ψ2

 where α, β, γ, δ are polynomial functions of a, b, c, and of their first and second

 derivatives with respect to χ. If the terms not containing y are eliminated, the equation

 d2y S dy αδ-βγ
 ρ j 2 a 2 2 y
 dxz αφ dx αΔφΔ

 arises where, contrary to Tannery's claim, the coefficient β fails to be a constant.

 Actually, Casorati had had the same doubt a few years before in 1879, when he
 studied Tannery's memoir (p. 1286 of his unpublished mathematical diary). We note

 that Casorati's example concerns the case m = 2 for which there are no powers of

 y with exponent larger than 1 in (5.2). Essentially, to keep the order of the equation

 equal to 2 he eliminated from the expressions of ^ and gj the terms independent of
 y. In Pincherle's Memorie e Saggi for the year 1891, Pincherle went back to Tannery's

 method to obtain a differential equation satisfied by an algebraic function. He repeated

 all the passages up to (5.2) and then he remarked that:

 It is possible to eliminate y2, y3,..., ym~l among the m equations

 dy Pi d2y _ P2(x,y) dm~xy Pm-i(x,y)
 dx φ(χ) ' dx2 [φ(χ)]2 ' dxm~l [<p(x)]m~x

 whence an equation like

 Springer

 <p(;c)m~1)>(m~1) + aiip(x)m~2;y('n~2) Η l· amy = R.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 179

 is obtained. To eliminate R one has to further differentiate this equation.29
 The outcome, however, is similar to Casorati's remark because, after differentiations

 to get rid of the polynomial R(x) one is led to an equation with a constant coefficient

 in front of the highest derivative, as in Tannery (1875), but now the structure of the

 denominators in the remaining terms differs from that suggested by Tannery. More

 importantly, the order of the differential equation is larger than m.

 In Letter 9 Pincherle attempted to prove a generalization of Tannery's result: any

 algebraic function satisfies a linear differential equation but, again, his results eluded

 the question asked by Casorati that concerned the structure of the coefficients.

 In my opinion, the example proposed by Casorati played an important rôle in
 Pincherle's decision not to publish his note: in fact, he could not find the error in

 Tannery's paper, and looking for other interesting applications of Casorati's method

 would have probably taken him too much time. Moreover, Pincherle was soon urged

 to write another short note (Pincherle 1886a), and he again resorted to Casorati (Letter

 11) to have it published, if possible. In this note, Pincherle introduced the function

 where φ(γ) is an analytic function without singularities along the curve ρ of the

 complex plane. By performing an integration by parts, and selecting ρ so that the

 boundary terms disappear, he obtained

 (5.4)

 and, by iterating the procedure, he arrived at

 to)

 [ <P{r\y)yXyx 1d;y = (-l)'"(* + l--l)(x + A--2)---(* + X-r)/(.r + A-r).
 he)

 When (5.4) is applied to the linear differential equation

 η m

 r=0 λ=0

 ΣΣαλ.'?νΓ) ω = ο,

 29 Fra le m equazioni

 Êl = JÛL d2y - dm~1y _ Pm-i(x,y)
 dx <p(jc) ' d*2 [<ρ(*)]2 d*"1"1 ~

 ii pud eliminare y2, y3 ym~l e viene un'equaz.[ione] délia forma

 ç(x)m-ly(m-i) + ai<p(x)m-2y(m-2) -| μ amy — /}.

 Per eliminare R bisogna derivare ancora.

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 £Σ(-1)Γαλ,Γ(* + λ - 1)(*+λ-2) · · · (χ + λ - #·)/(;χ + λ - Γ)θλ~Γ /(*) = 0
 r—0 λ=0

 180

 η m

 then it is transformed into the linear difference equation

 R. Rosso

 that Pincherle wrote down by resorting to Casorati's operator Θ. Pincherle noted that,

 if the boundary terms do not drop out in (5.4), then the latter transformation embod

 ies that adopted by Mellin (1886, pp. 79-80), in which he obtained a correspon
 dence between fundamental sets of solutions of a linear homogeneous differential
 equation and of a functional equation. Actually, the publication of Mellin (1886)

 prompted Pincherle to have (Pincherle 1886a) published in order to secure his priority
 (Letter 12).

 For a while, the interest in Casorati (1880b) remained quiescent, but in the next

 section, we will see how Pincherle expounded and then extended Casorati's approach

 to finite differences in his papers written after Casorati's death.

 6 The influence of (Casorati 1880b) on Pincherle's work

 Pincherle's interest in finite-difference equations and, more generally, in functional

 equations remained alive during all his long career. In a conference held in 1926, and

 published in Pincherle (1926), considering the lack of attention to the calculus of finite

 differences in textbooks of mathematical analysis, he wrote:

 The development of differential and integral calculus, with its numberless applica

 tions; the supremacy of the concept of limit and the criticism that, raised by the need

 to make more precise this concept, led to an unavoidable revision of the foundations

 of calculus; the interest originated by the seminal results of the theory of functions of

 one real variable on one hand, and of analytic functions, on the other hand, and the

 appealing questions posed by the theory of aggregates [set theory]: all this left little

 room to a branch of science in which the concept of limit is almost foreign at a first

 sight, and also those branches of analysis in which that concept plays a minor rôle, 1

 mean higher algebra, Galois's theory, the study of finite groups, did not seem to offer

 any relation with the calculus of finite differences.

 However, a more careful examination not only suggests that this branch of science

 is still worthy of attention, but [it suggests] also the expectation that, thanks to the

 new paths recently opened, it can tend to a more brilliant future^ (Pincherle 1926,
 pp. 233-234).

 30 Lo sviluppo del calcolo differenziale ed integrale, colle infinite sue applicazioni; il signoreggiare del
 concetto di limite e le critiche, che, nate dalla necessità di precisare questo concetto, conducevano alia
 necessaria revisione dei fondamenti del Calcolo; l'intéressé destato dai fecondi risultati della teoria delle

 funzioni di variabile reale d' una parte, delle analitiche dall' altra, e dalle attraenti questioni della teoria degli

 aggregati: tutto cid lasciava poco spazio ad un capitolo della scienza in cui il concetto di limite appariva a

 prima vista pressochè estraneo, mentre anche quei rami dell'analisi in cui quel concetto ha minore parte,

 intendo dire Γ algebra superiore, la teoria di Galois, gli studi sui gruppi finiti, non parevano ofîrire, col
 calcolo delle differenze finite, alcun addentellato. Perô, un esame più attento fa nascere non solo il pensiero

 che questo ramo della scienza sia ancora degno di interesse, ma la fiducia che, in grazia delle nuove vie che

 di recente gli vennero aperte, possa giustamente aspirare ad un più brillante avvenire.

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 181

 In my opinion, Casorati's views on the calculus of finite differences belong to these

 new paths that were given to this discipline. In this section, I will consider only those

 of Pincherle's results that can be related to Casorati (1880b): essentially, they were

 published in the last decade of the nineteenth century and they form the backbone

 of Chap. X of the monograph on functional calculus written by Pincherle and Ugo
 Amaldi in 1901. It should be clear that Pincherle also contributed to other areas of finite

 differences. Notably, the close relation between difference and differential equations

 that had been revealed new aspects after the publication of Poincaré (1885) soon

 captured Pincherle's attention, leading him to the concept of a distinguished integral

 of a difference equation (Pincherle 1892): for the relations between Poincaré and

 Pincherle I refer the reader to Chap. VI of Bottazzini ( 1994) and to Dugac (1989), where

 a couple of letters between the two mathematicians have been published. Moreover, it

 is from finite-difference equations that Pincherle was led to generalize the algorithm

 of continued fractions (see, for instance, Pincherle 1890), a topic on which he had a

 correspondence with Charles Hermite.

 Turning back to the θ operator, we start from the Academic year 1893-1894, when

 Pincherle gave a course on hypergeometric functions, a long account of which was then

 printed in Pincherle (1894). There, for pedagogical reasons, Pincherle inserted several

 sections devoted to difference and differential equations where he gave a detailed expo

 sition of Casorati (1880b), reproducing part of the results and qualifying Casorati's

 method as extremely ingenious (genialissimo) because

 [it] offers an unrivalled simplicity and an interest that is not only scientific but also

 pedagogical1 (Pincherle 1894, pp. 210-211 s Pincherle 1954, p. 275).

 In Chap. 2 of Pincherle (1894), devoted to linear difference equations, Pincherle

 emphasized the importance of the theorem on the Θ determinant, of which he gave

 a proof that coincides, apart from a slight change of notation, with the original one
 proposed by Casorati. Then, in Chap. IV (§27) Pincherle reviewed the content of

 Chaper 2 of Casorati (1880b) where applications to Fuchs's theory of differential
 equations had been illustrated. It is interesting to remark that whenever Pincherle
 considered the distinctions of solutions in subgroups, he never mentioned (Casorati
 1881a), neither in Pincherle (1894) nor in Pincherle and Amaldi (1901) whose Chap.

 XII is devoted to this subject.

 If in Pincherle (1894), there are no original results on the θ operator, in 1895

 Pincherle published a series of papers (Pincherle 1895a,b,c) where the operatorial

 nature of θ plays a major rôle. In these papers, Pincherle laid the basis of his functional

 calculus, based upon the properties of linear operators (operazioni distributive) acting

 on a set of analytic functions, or to a properly delimited subset.

 In Pincherle (1895a) Pincherle, soon after the definition of Θ, quoted Casorati to

 emphasize the large spectrum of distributivity endowed by this operator, recalling Eqs.

 (3.2) and (3.3). Then, in §2, he started to study the properties of the set of operators

 F := ao(x) + α\(χ)θ + α2(χ)θ2 Η h am(x)em, (6.1)

 31 Offre una semplicità senza pari ed interesse scientifico non meno che didattico.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 182

 R. Rosso

 where {α&(*)} are given functions. Pincherle called operators like (6.1) linear differ

 ence forms (forme lineari aile differenze) of the /nth order. They map a function f(x)
 into

 / t-»· F(f):=ao(x)f(x)+ai(x)f(x + l)+a2(x)f(x + 2) + 1- am(x)f(x+m).

 Up to §20, Pincherle (1895a) is devoted to forms of finite order and there Pincherle did

 not insist on the nature of the functions α,·( Jt) : ao(x) is only supposed not to vanish at

 the points x+k, so that after a rescaling, it can be set equal to unity. On the contrary, in

 the second part of Pincherle (1895a), devoted to series in Θ, he sketched the elements

 of the systematic presentation of the theory contained in Pincherle and Amaldi (1901)

 where much attention is devoted to characterize a suitable general functional space V

 where θ is defined. Pincherle considered a region ao of the complex plane lying in the

 strip 31(jc) e [0, 1] and then he defined the region

 00

 where α* is obtained by translating ao of k units along the real axis. In any a* Pincherle

 considered a meromorphic function oik(x) and defined another meromorphic function

 α (χ) in α such that

 α(χ) = ctk(x) if χ e at :

 the set V of all meromorphic functions defined in this way is, by construction, an

 invariant set for the operator θ and Pincherle considered forms (6.1) with coefficients

 belonging to this set. [In particular, if ctk(x) is independent of k, we have linear

 difference forms with constant (periodic) coefficients].

 Pincherle was careful about the algebraic properties of the sets of operators he

 considered, not only those in the class (6.1) but, in general, throughout his functional

 calculus. As an early example of this attitude, we can quote the papers (Pincherle

 1884b, 1885a) that were markedly influenced by the works of Kronecker (1882) and

 Dedekind and Weber ( 1882). To give a flavour of his attitude in the present context, we

 now look at: (a) the extension of the Ruffini rule to form the quotient and the remainder
 obtained when a form F is divided by the first-order form Ea := θ — a(x); (b) a

 criterion to decide when a form Β divides another form A. We follow the presentation

 as given in Pincherle and Amaldi (1901), which is more complete than the original

 treatment in Pincherle (1895a).

 After defining the non commutative product of a form A of order m time a form Β of
 order η as the form AB mapping f(x) A[B(f(x))], Pincherle aimed at extending
 the classical Euclidean algorithm to linear difference forms. By assuming η < m he
 looked for a third form Γ, of order m - η, such that

 Α-ΓΒ

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A ^ah(x)eh, Β := &(*)#*. and Γ := ]Γ η(χ)θι,

 the requirement on Γ yields the following linear system for the m — η + 1 coefficients
 Yi(x)·

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 183

 is of order η - 1, at most. By setting

 m η m—η

 h=ο k=ο ;=ο

 Clm(x) - Υηι-η{χ)βη(χ + m - ή) = 0
 am-\(x) - γ/η-η(χ)βη~ι(χ + m — η) — ym_„_ι(χ)βη(χ + m- n- 1) = 0

 am-r(x) - Σ;=0 Ym-n-j(x)Pn-r+j(x + m - Π - j) = 0

 that can be solved provided that

 βη(χ)βη(χ + \) ■ ■ ■ βη(χ + m - η- 1 )βη(χ + ηι - η) Φ 0, (6.3)

 a condition automatically satisfied in Pincherle (1895a) where βη (χ) ξ 1. When (6.3)

 is satisfied, the form Γ is uniquely determined, and it can be called the quotient of the
 forms A and B. When the remainder vanishes one has A = Γ Β so that Β divides A.

 When Β = θ - γ the conditions (6.2) become

 βτη-\(x)=am(x)
 βη,-2(χ) = am-i(x) + am(x)y(x + m - 1)
 βηι-3(χ)=0ίηι-2(χ)+0ίηι-\(χ)γ(χ + m - 2)+α,„(χ)γ(χ+ηι-1)γ(χ+ηι-2)

 β0(χ) = aiC*) +αχ(χ)γ(χ + 1) Η h αη(χ)γ(χ + 1) · · · y(x + m - 1),

 (6.2)

 (6.4)

 that is the analogue of the classical Ruffini's rule to obtain the coefficients of the

 quotient between a polynomial and binomial χ - a.

 In terms of higher algebra, Pincherle defined irreducibility of a linear difference

 form A with coefficients in a set Ω that is a field V say, (campo di razionalità, i.e
 the Italian term for Rationalitatsbereich): A is irreducible in Ω if there is no linear

 difference form with coefficients in Ω that divides A (Pincherle 1895a, §6, Pincherle

 and Amaldi 1901, §295). In §296 of Pincherle and Amaldi (1901), the analogue of a
 lemma employed repeatedly by Galois is stated:

 Let Φ be a form of the order n, irreducible in a certain field, and let Φι another

 form of the order m > η that shares a root φ with Φ, and whose coefficients belong

 to the same field. Then, Φι is necessarily divided by Φ Ρ

 32 Sia una forma Φ, d'ordine n, irriducibile in un determinate) campo di razionalità, e sia Φι una forma di

 ordine m > n, i cui coefficienti appartengono a quel campo, e che abbia una radice φ comune con Φ. La
 Φι è allora necessariamente divisibile per Φ.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 184

 R. Rosso

 We recall that in Pincherle's language a root of a linear difference form (6.1) is an

 element ω(χ) of V such that F(ω(χ)) = 0. Finally, in §297 of Pincherle and Amaldi

 (1901) the dependence of irreducibility of a form on its domain is mentioned, together

 with the fact that irreducible forms can be made reducible by adjoining suitable func
 tions to the field where the coefficients lie.

 We now turn to the second part of Pincherle (1895a) where Pincherle introduced

 series in θ. There he clearly stated a difference between the traditional way of con

 ceiving symbolic calculus and his own. As for series like

 00

 n= 0

 2>„(*)0" (6.5)

 he remarked (Pincherle 1895a, pp. 107-108) that

 These series (...) have been conceived more as a concise style of symbolic repre

 sentation rather than a means apt to yield the element of a genuine theory: here, we

 aim at showing how, by placing suitable constraints on the functions that are acted

 upon by these series, they can be taken as the basis of a truly rigorous calculus.33

 As a consequence of this programme, Pincherle explored sufficient conditions for

 the expressions (6.5) to make sense. He considered functions an(x) that belong to V,

 and defined the functional field of convergence (campo funzionale di convergenza) of

 (6.5) referred to the point jto 6 α as the subset of V such that (6.5) converges absolutely

 in a neighbourhood of xo proving that any series (6.5) admits a non-empty field of

 convergence. As an example of an elementary condition guaranteeing the convergence
 of (6.5) Pincherle (1895a, p. 109) (see also §311 of Pincherle and Amaldi 1901, p.
 250) stated that:

 Let (λη(χ)) be a sequence of functions that are finite in the set ao■ If the series

 is absolutely convergent, and if the element φ{χ) is such that, Vx e ao,

 00

 ^αη(χ)λη(χ)
 n=0

 φ(χ + η) < γ(χ)\λη(χ)\

 for η > no, where γ(χ) is both positive and finite in a neighbourhood of a point
 χ = xo e ao, then <p(x) belongs to the functional field of convergence of (6.5),

 relative to the point xo

 Let us now turn attention to the concept of functional derivative A' of a linear

 operator A defined by Pincherle (1895b) as

 Α'(φ) := Α(χφ) — χΑ(φ),

 (6.6)

 33 Tali serie (...) sono state considerate più come un modo conciso di rappresentazione simbolica che

 come atte fornire l'elemento di una vera teoria: noi qui ci proponiamo di mostrare come, assoggettando a

 convenient! limitazioni le funzioni su cui si opera, queste serie siano suscettibili di essere prese a fondamento

 di un calcolo perfettamente rigoroso.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 185

 provided that φ(χ) and χφ(χ) belong to the domain of A. The Casorati operator θ

 coincides with its derivative or, equivalently, it satisfies

 θ' = θ

 and so it plays a distinguished rôle, analogue to the exponential function in classical

 calculus. Actually, in Pincherle (1895b), Pincherle showed that an operator A satis
 fying A' = A has the form A = ΜΘ, where M is the multiplication by a suitable
 function. In fact, by setting ε(χ) = A(l) and by using (6.6), the requirement A' = A

 implies that

 A(;t) = A(x ■ 1) = (x + l)e(;t) A(xn) = (x + 1 )"£(.*)

 so that, if<p(x) belongs to the set «S1 of functions whose series expansions centered at

 the origin have radius of convergence larger than 1, then

 Α{φ{χ)) = ε(χ)φ(χ + 1) = ε(χ)θ.

 As we have already seen, Casorati emphasized that the operator θ is distributive also

 with respect to other operations besides sum. Pincherle deepened this property in

 (Pincherle 1895b,c) where he introduced the operation of substitution (sostituzione),

 denoted with S or Sa, that amounts at replacing φ(χ) with <p(a(x)), where a(x) is an

 assigned function. By definition, the operation Sa satisfies

 SW) = SWS(« and =

 \Ά/ S (ψ)

 like the operator θ that clearly corresponds to the particular choice a(x) = χ + 1 (see

 also §122 of Pincherle and Amaldi 1901). In fact, it satisfies the first order symbolic

 differential equation

 S'a = (a(x) - x)Sa (6.7)

 which, as we have just seen for the operator Θ, is a characteristic property of substitu

 tions since any solution of (6.7) is of the form MS, where 5 is a substitution, and M

 is the multiplication by a certain function. Proceeding in parallel with Fuchs's theory

 of linear differential equations, Pincherle considered nth order symbolic differential

 equations

 λ0(χΜ(π) + ÀiU)A(n_1) + · · · + λη(*Μ = 0 (6.8)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 186

 R. Rosso

 and he proved that η operators A\,..., A„ solving (6.8) are linearly dependent if and

 only if the determinant

 A\ A2 ... A„
 A' A' A'

 Δ := A2 ... A„ (69)

 4(1—1) 4(1-1) 4(1-1)
 /ij /I2 ... rt-n

 is equal to zero (see also Chap. VI of Grévy 1894 for an analogue statement). Then he

 proved that it is possible to build a fundamental system of solutions of (6.8) starting

 from a particular set of substitution operators, defined as Sa„, where the η functions
 ai(jt),..., an(x) are the roots of the characteristic equation

 f(z) := λ0(χ)(ζ -x)n + λι(χ)(ζ -x)n~l Η μλ„_ι(Λ)(ζ -χ) + λη(χ) = 0.

 Chapter XIV of Pincherle and Amaldi (1901) is devoted to a detailed study of the

 expressions

 m

 k=0

 called linear substitution forms (forme lineari aile sostituzioni). There, a parallel of the

 theory to the one already illustrated for linear difference forms is drawn by referring

 to results by Grévy (1894).

 Given that, besides the Wronskian and the Casoratian determinants, there is also

 (6.9), the question arises of looking for larger classes of operations for which a theorem,

 analogous to that of the Wronskian, holds34 (Pincherle and Amaldi 1901, p. 430).

 Chapter XV of Pincherle and Amaldi (1901) is devoted to answering this question

 by looking at the common structure of the "Wronskian-like" theorems: to find out a

 necessary and sufficient condition for η regular enough functions φ\,..., φη to satisfy
 a relation

 cm Λ-^φιΛ + cn(pn =0

 where not all the coefficients c, vanish. The coefficients c,· are constant with respect to

 a suitable linear operator A: if A = D = ^ then c,· are really constants; if A = θ then
 Ci are periodic functions with period equal to 1; if A = 5μ, then c, (x) = c;(/x(.x)).

 Pincherle and Amaldi note that the crucial steps to obtain a Wronskian theorem are:

 (a) to show that

 A(Ci) = 0

 34 Ricercare se esistano classi più ampie di operazioni, per le quali sussista un teorema analogo a quello
 del Wronskiano.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where α,·7· and β, are functions that are not completely independent. In fact, by imposing

 that A Op ψ) = A(yr<p)andthentesting(6.10)on ψ = 1 they got the simpler expression

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 187

 and (b) to show that a multiplication theorem holds, that is, a particular relation among

 Α(φψ), Α{φ) and Α (ψ ) whose meaning, however, slightly varies on passing from D

 to θ and to 5μ :

 Β(φψ) = Ό{φ)ψ + φΰ(ψ) θ{φψ) = θ(φ)θ(ψ) 5μ(φψ) =

 As a consequence, Pincherle and Amaldi restricted their attention to single-valued

 linear operators such that

 Α(φψ) = αοοφψ + α0\φΑ(ψ) + α\οψΑ(φ) + α\\Α{φ)Α{ψ)

 +βϊφΑ(φ) + β2ψΑ(ψ), (6.10)

 Α(φψ) = ξ(αξ - ί)φψ + (1 - αξ)[φΑ(ψ) + ψΑ(φ)]+αΑ(φ)Α(ψ) (6.11)

 where oc := au and ξ := Λ(1) are independent from one another. If a = 0, the most

 general linear operator satisfying (6.11) is

 where ξ ι = A (χ) and Mç represents pointwise multiplication by ξ. On the other hand,

 if α Φ 0 such a rôle is played by

 A = (£i — ξχ)ΰ + Μξ,

 A = —Ξμ + Ai* ι :
 a * a

 7 Conclusions

 The main obituaries of Pincherle, namely Amaldi (1937) and Tonelli (1937) refer to

 the influence exerted by Casorati on some aspects of Pincherle's research. Resorting to

 unpublished documents kept in the Casorati Nachlass, we have examined some aspects

 of their relationship. In particular, we have found an unpublished note by Pincherle

 centered on a paper by Tannery (1875) where Casorati's θ operator is used in the

 new interpretation envisaged by Casorati himself to export finite-difference methods

 in the realm of complex analysis. Casorati's paper (1880b) had the most influence

 on Pincherle, as we showed in Sect. 6 through an overview of Pincherle's work on

 this topic, culminating in the publication of his monograph (Pincherle and Amaldi

 1901). Moreover, other documents of the Nachlass made it possible to investigate the

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 hence, linear differential forms and substitution forms exhaust the class of linear oper

 ators satisfying (6.11). For this class of operations, an analogue of the Θ-determinant
 holds (see Pincherle and Amaldi 1901, §455). With Pincherle's work the results of

 Casorati (1880b) found their natural place within functional calculus.

 188

 R. Rosso

 complex history behind Casorati's participation in the 1880 Grand Prix de Sciences

 Mathématiques and to add some detail on the controversy he had with Stickelberger.

 In particular, we have seen that Stickelberger claimed that the theorem on the now

 called Casorati's determinant had already been proved by Christoffel more than 20

 years before the publication of Casorati (1880b), though in the context of classical

 finite-difference calculus. We plan to deepen other aspects of Pincherle's early career

 in future publications.

 Acknowledgments As already remarked in the text, most of the original documents are preserved in
 the Casorati Nachlass at Pavia. It is a pleasure to thank once more Prof. Alberto Gabba for his kindness

 in disclosing the Nachlass to me: without him, this paper would not have been written. 1 would like to

 thank also prof. Umberto Bottazzini, prof. Salvatore Cohen, and prof. Otto Liess for useful information on

 Pincherle's unpublished Ricerche e Saggi preserved in the historical section of the library of the Department

 of Mathematics in Bologna; dr. Anna Biavati and dr. Claudio Cappelletti who helped me during my visit

 at this library. I also acknowledge the kind assistance of dr. Alessandra Baretta and dr. Maria Piera Milani

 during my visits at the historical archive of the University of Pavia. Finally, I express my gratitude to prof.

 Mario Ferrari for his constant encouragement.

 Appendix 1: Original letters concerning the 1880 Grand Prix des Mathématiques

 Letter 1 : Casorati to Bertrand

 Caro ed illustre Amico

 Pavia, 27 dicembre 1879

 Un mio compaesano, discontinuo ma passionato cultore dei nostri studî, è riu

 scito a scoperte analitiche di grande momento, segnatamente efficaci nelle moderne

 ricerche basate sulla variabilità complessa. (...) Egli ha già potuto impossessarsi dei

 lavori [che sono] stati fatti in Germania, e vi ha subito introdotto belle ed importanti

 semplificazioni, cosi da avere la certezza di figurare con onore tra concorrenti anche

 fortunatissimi. Ma poiché i suoi concepimenti hanno un'importanza generale, e ripeto

 grande, e non subordinata al tema su citato, cost egli, giustamente nell'interesse dei

 suoi studî e nel suo, non vorrebbe tenerli segreti sino alia fine del 1880. Perô d'altra

 parte, egli vorrebbe comportarsi in modo da conseguire la grande soddisfazione di un

 premio dell'Accademia di Parigi, la quale vedrà con piacere uscire in luce le nuove

 idee per mezzo delle sue pubblicazioni.35 Interessatissimo pel mio compaesano, pensai

 di ricorrere in segreta confidenza a voi per consiglio; fidente nell'interessamento che

 voi avete sempre altamente mostrato per i nostri studî, e nella benevolenza che avete

 sempre accordato a chi vi scrive. Io dunque chiedo non al Segretario Perpetuo, ma

 35 Casorati added the following comment, that was not included in the letter: Qualunque sia per essere

 I'esito del concorso, deploro di aver scritto questi pensieri. Essi erano naturali quando un fatale inganno

 mifece credere commutativi due simboli d'operazione e mi condusse quindi a conseguenze d'incredibile

 importanza. Ma rum dovevo estemarli subito, come feci, ad uno straniero; dovevo lasciar passare almeno

 qualche giorno, secondo le buone regole, che non si violano impunemente. Che cosa potrebbe aver detto
 Bertrand, se avesse letta bene la mia lettera? Ε perché, dopo riconosciuto il mio traviamento, non gli

 scrissi per avvertirvelo ? Cid che rimaneva di accertato nelle mie ricerche era pur sempre meritevole, a mio

 giudizio, di molta considerazione.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 189

 all'amico benevolo, come dovrebbe il mio compaesano comportarsi? Se stampasse

 anonime una parte delle cose sue, potrebbero essere ancora valutate in un manoscritto

 presentato al Concorso? [...]

 II vostro devotissimo

 F. Casorati
 F. Casorati

 délia Université di Pavia

 Pavia, 28 genn. 80

 Letter 2: Casorati to Bertrand

 Ch. mo Prof. (Bertrand)

 (...) Questo silenzio, ch'io credo non meritato, ha già naturalmente prodotto il suo

 triste effetto, di scoraggiare chi forse meritava incoraggiamento, di dissuaderlo dal

 continuare in quelle applicazioni che aveva cominciato felicemente, con quell'ardore

 che guida sempre a qualche risultato non volgare.

 Ho sempre creduto che, come la grande maggioranza delle persone colte guarda
 a Parigi con ammirazione ed affetto, come alia gran madre d'ogni progresso
 dell'umanità, cosl voi Parigini, e voi particolarmente membri dell'Istituto, dobbiate

 guardare con benevolo affetto tutti gli opérai del progresso, più ο meno distinti che

 sieno, giovani ο no, purché onesti, purché sinceramente intenti al meglio dell'umanità.

 Ma non aggiungerô altro, perché, rattristato come sono, vi riuscirei troppo molesto.

 Letter 3: Bertrand to Casorati

 Obbl.mo vostro

 F. Casorati

 dell'Université di Pavia

 Paris, 31 janvier 1880

 Très cher monsieur

 (...) Je ne puis malhereusement engagé à l'avance ni l'académie, ni la Commission,

 qui n'est pas même nommée et qui sera souveraine. Elle fera tout, j'en ai la convinction,

 pour courronner une mémoire importante et les questions du forme, celles même du

 publications antérieure, n'ont pas l'habitude du prévaloir sur le mérite du fond. Je peut

 vous citer l'example du Kummer qui a obtenu le prix proponi pour le théorème de

 Fermât, sans avoir concouru, son mémoir publié en langue allemande depuis plusieurs

 annés, et traduit en Français depuis plus d'un an, a été jugé digne du prix et l'a obtenu

 au grand étonnement du l'auteur qui n'y songeait pas. Je conseillerai donc à votre

 ami d'imprimer en langue italienne les principaux résultats et d'envoyer un mémoire

 détaillé qui, j'en ai la convinction, sera lu et jugé avec le même empressement que si

 tout était inédit. Le secret qui doit être gardé sur le nom de l'auteur, sera, il est vrai,

 violé: un juge formaliste pourrait y voir une difficulté et je n'ai pas le droit d'affirmer

 £] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 190

 R. Rosso

 que cela n'arrivera pas, mais je ne pense pas, d'après mon habitudes et les ideés que

 je connais à mon Confrères, que cela soit à craindre.

 Je ne veux pas vous cacher que le sujet a été proposé pour moi et que j'avais pensé

 en le rédigeant à la possibilité de récompenser les travaux de Mr. Laguerre sur les

 équations differentiélles lineaires et particulièrement sur les invariants. Mr. Laguerre

 lui même ignore d'ailleurs cette arrière pensée dont je n' ai pas fait part à mes Confrères,

 mais si lui vient l'idée de concourir, il sera, vous le voyer, dans le même cas que votre
 ami. (...)

 J. Bertrand

 Pavia, 6 febbraio 1880

 Letter 4: Casorati to Bertrand

 Carissimo Signore (Bertrand)

 (...) Ora vi faccio una confessione. Il mio compaesano è quegli stesso che vi scrive.

 Ma venendo ormai alPargomento, vi dirô, che, ritornato con lena agli studî dopo

 un lungo soggiorno sulle Alpi, fui condotto ad interpretare il calcolo delle differenze

 finite, diretto ed inverso, in modo da farlo diventare un potente ausiliario delle moderne

 ricerche basate sulla variabilità complessa. Naturalmente, a questa interpretazione

 aggiunsi alcuni teoremi affatto nuovi. Allorché poi Γutilità di queste mie cose mi

 parve largamente dimostrata dall'applicazione alio studio, ora tanto in voga, delle

 equazioni differenziali lineari, pensai che avrei potuto concorrere al premio proposto

 dalla vostra Accademia su quest'argomento, e mi risolvetti a scrivervi la mia prima
 lettera.

 Perd voi avete interpretato questa lettera in un senso che io era lontanissimo dal

 darle. Dite "Je ne puis malhereusement engage à l'avance ni l'Académie, ni la Com

 mission, qui n'est pas même nommée et qui sera souveraine." Io lo credo bene! Ε non

 avrei mai imaginato [sic !] di pretendere cose ingiuste. Ma tutto ciô sia come non detto.

 L'essenziale ora si è che la vostra lettera mi ha rialzato e soddisfatto pienamente.

 Accettando il vostro consiglio, farô stampare subito negli Annali di Matematica di

 Milano una parte délia interpretazione suddetta con Fapplicazione per ora aile pro

 priété fondamentali degli integrali delle equazioni differenziali lineari a coeff.[icienti]

 monodromi. Ε non mandero alcun manoscritto; parendomi non necessario giacché mi

 basta di sapere dalla vostra lettera, che la Comm.[issione] potrebbe anche prendere

 in considerazione lavori pubblicati per la stampa. Io non avrei nessun gusto di fare

 concorrenza al sig. Laguerre. Sono abbastanza pago di poter credere che ove il sig.

 Laguerre non si risolvesse a concorrere, potrebbe essere presa in considerazione anche

 la Memoria che io adesso pubblichero, e quelle altre sulle equazioni lineari ancora e

 su altre ricerche con variabilità complessa che avessi agio di pure redigere in netto e

 stampare.

 Perdonatemi tutto questo disturbo, pur troppo grande per voi certamente accerchiato

 da mille cose, ed aggradendo l'attestazione délia profonda mia stima e del mio affetto,

 vogliate conservarmi la vostra preziosa benevolenza.

 Dev.mo vostro

 F. C.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 191

 Letter 5: Bertrand to Casorati

 Paris, 15 février 1880

 Cher monsieur,

 J'ai reçu votre lettre avec grand plaisir très heureux de voir qu'il ne reste rien du

 malentendue dont j'ai été, bien sans inténtions, la cause.

 Je ne puis, comme je vous j'ai dit, prendre aucun engagement au nom d'une Com

 mission qui n'existe pas encore et vous l'avez parfaitement compris mais je crois de

 vous avoir laissé prendre pour une habitude de l'académie ce qui a été fait une fois

 or deux seulement dans des circumstances exceptionelles. Les commissions peuvent

 décerner le prix à des mémoirs imprimé et non envoyé au concours mais elles ne l'ont

 fait que très rarement, en l'absence de plis régulièrement envoyés au concours et digne

 de disputer le prix et lorsqu'aucune membre de la Commission n'envoquait la lettre

 des programmes pour s'y opposer.

 Si donc vous avez obtenu... .36 des résultats importants et si votre désir bien naturél

 est de les faire courronner par l'académie des Sciences de Paris, il est prudent de les lui

 envoyer et s'ils ont été imprimés par entier, vous pouver citer le pubblications, mais en

 mettant sous les yeux des commissaires un37... complet de votre travail. En procèdent

 autrement, vous ne rendrez pas le succès impossible parce qu'il y a des examples qui

 sont tout semblables, mais vous en diminuerez singulièrement les chances. [...]

 Letter 6: Casorati to Cremona

 Caro Cremona,

 J. Bertrand

 Pavia, 25 febb. 1880

 Sono scampato anch'io da una grave disgrazia. La mia Eugenia veniva assalita da

 pleurite con minaccia di tifo, cosî da metterne per qualche giorno in pericolo la vita.

 Fortunatamente il tifo non si sviluppô e la pleurite va attenuandosi. Benché sventata,

 questa minaccia ha tanto prostrato le mie forze che non sono peranco capace di appli

 carmi per un'ora alio studio. L'essersi ammalata in Milano, e il dovervisi naturalmente

 fermare ancora molto tempo fa sî che non posso più vedermi nella solitaria casa di
 Pavia.

 Al principio di questo mese avevo fatto comunicar una mia lettera all'Ist.[ituto]
 Lombardo alla quale tenevo assai. Ma nella seduta ultima mi mancava ogni lena
 per spiegare come avrei desiderato ai colleghi mat.[ematici] le cose mie. Ora poi lo

 sciopero degli opérai tipografi impedisce la stampa dei Rendiconti. Perciô avrei piacere

 di fare ai Lincei la Comunicazione suddetta, e per mezzo tuo, che sai sostenere cosî
 bene i tuoi clienti.

 La comunicazione ha per titolo: "Il calcolo delle differenze finite interpretato ed

 accresciuto di nuovi teoremi a sussidio principalmente delle odierne ricerche basate

 sulla variabilité complessa".

 36 It was hard to decode Bertrand's manuscript here. It seems to me: comme j'en suis content

 37 Same remark as before. It looks like: essai.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192

 R. Rosso

 In virtu della medesima moltissime ricerche che costarono gran fatica a matematici

 valenti diventano ovvie traduzioni di quanto già da tempo è stato fatto nel calcolo delle

 differenze finite. In questa prima Comunicazione dimostro la importanza della mia

 interpretazione facendone applicazione a due argomenti: alio studio delle equazioni
 algebriche a coefficienti monodromi; ed a quello ora di moda delle eq.fuazioni]
 diff.[erenziali] lineari.

 Potrai vedere nella la applicazione come riducasi a poche linee una metà delle

 celebri e lunghe "Recherches sur les fonctions alg.[ébriques] del sig. Puiseux" e nella
 2a corne scendano immediatamente dalle note formole d'integrazione delle equazioni

 aile differenze finite lineari e coi coeff.[icienti] costanti le propriété e le espressioni

 degli integrali delle equaz.[ioni] differenziali lineari con coefficienti monodromi che

 costarono tanta fatica al sig. Fuchs ( la sua Memoria) e diedero da fare ai signori Thomé

 Frobenius Hamburger, Jurgens.

 pure il determ.[inante] H.

 Quel teorema sul determ.[inante] Θ parvemi veramente bello e di grande uso. Utile

 Ero molto soddisfatto di questa interpretazione che sembrami di poter qualificare
 come una scoperta analitica di grande fécondité, e m'avviavo a farne moite altre

 applicazioni, quando la malattia dell'Eugenia venne a spaventarmi ed istupidirmi.

 Se non ti displace di fare per me questa comunicazione nella prossima seduta Lincea

 ti manderè il manoscritto, che in parte feci già leggere a Beltrami.

 Non t'avrei dato questo disturbo se il ministère t'avesse trascinato già sino d'ora,

 come si cominciava a dire, nel suo vortice.

 Mille affettuosi e rispettosi saluti alla sig. Elisa ed aile tue care figlie, ed a te una

 cordiale stretta di mano.

 Letter 7: Casorati to Bertrand

 Car.mo ed. illustr. Signore

 Tuo F. C.

 Pavia, 3 aprile 80

 ( ) Mi sarei deciso di ritirare il manoscritto destinato agli Annali, ampliarlo e

 riscriverlo meglio che potrô, e spedirlo al Segretario délia vostra Accad.femia] entro il

 maggio, conformemente aile riflessioni della vostra ultima lettera. Ma devo pregarvi di

 una risposta alla seguente domanda: Posso mandare un manoscritto in lingua italiana,
 ο devo tradurlo in francese? Se aveste la bontà di darmi questa risposta, ve ne sarô

 sempre più obbligato, e spero che sarà l'ultimo disturbo che vi avrô arrecato.

 Perô non posso chiudere la lettera senza pregarvi vivamente, per quando riceverete

 il mio articolo stampato dai Lincei, di volergli dare un'occhiata. Voi troverete tutto

 facilissimo, e mi è caro sperare che il teorema pel determin.[ante] Θ, e le applicazioni
 che ho indicate alla fine, e la évidente molteplicità delle altre applicazioni possibili,

 non abbiano a parervi indegne della vostra attenzione.

 Vostro devotissimo

 F.C.

 Univ.[ersità] di Pavia

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 193

 Letter 8: Bertrand to Casorati

 Il n'y a pas de temps perdu, aucun mémoire n'a été envoyé jousqu'ici et la Com

 mission qui doit les juger n'est pas encore nommée.

 Un manuscrit en langue italienne sara certainement reçu et la lecture, j'en suis

 certains, sera facile à tous les commissaires. Je pense cependant que si cela ne vous

 est trop pénible, il vaut mieux écrire en Français; vous serait jugé plus facilement et

 sans porter atteinte ou secret qui, éxigé pour les noms des concurrents, ne l'est pas

 pour leur nationalité, mais reste cependent préferible. [...]

 Paris, 7 avril 1880

 Cher monsieur,

 Votre amis très dévoué,

 J. Bertrand

 ce 22 mai 1880

 Letter 9: Casorati in the billet cacheté

 Félix Casorati

 Professeur à l'Université de Pavie-Italie

 Le manuscrit concernant les interprétations du Calcul aux différences dont j'ai fait

 mention dans la préface a été comuniqué à Γ Institut Lombard de sciences et lettres dans

 sa séance du 19 février, et devait être publié tout-de-suite dans les Annali di Matematica

 (Milano). Mais une longue trêve des ouvrièrs interrompit tout travail dans l'imprimerie

 des Annali. Alors j'ai comuniqué une copie de ce manuscrit à YAcadémie R. des Lincei

 dans sa séance du 7 mars. Mais l'excès des travaux académiques à imprimer et une
 grave malheur domestique, qui détournait mon esprit des études, retardèrent aussi
 l'impression de cette comunication. Les deux manuscrits, maintenant quelque peu

 amplifiés, vont enfin paraître publiés dans peu de jours. Mais leur lecture serait tout

 à-fait inutile pour qui connaît le manuscrit présenté avec ce billet au concours.

 Letter 10: Casorati to Brioschi

 Madesimo presso Pianazzo

 sullo Spluga, 31 luglio 80

 Carissimo sig. Direttore (Brioschi)

 Già le dissi in Milano di aver fatto qualche pensiero sul premio Bressa da conferirsi

 stavolta all'Italiano che nel quadriennio 1877-1880 a giudizio delPAccad.[emia] di

 Torino avrà fatto il miglior lavoro "sulle scienze fisiche e sperimentali, storia natu

 rale, matematiche pure ed appl.[icate], chimica, fisiologia e patologia, non escluse la

 geologia, la storia, la geografia e la statistica".

 In verità, per la moltitudine delle materie ammesse a concorso, è assai poco proba

 bile che il premio venga dato ad un matematico. Perè, dappoiché ciô è possibile, e

 dappoiché a me sembra che la Memoria, che ora le dirigo (Il calcolo delle diff.[erenze]

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 194

 R. Rosso

 ecc.), sia la più importante tra le apparse nel quadriennio, in primo luogo per la estesa

 applicabilité delle idee che vi sono esposte, in secondo luogo per la importanza dei teo

 remi (specialmente quello del Θ ο Δ) e delle applicazioni che già in questo primo sag

 gio potei abbastanza minutamente indicare, penso che sarebbe quasi colpevole negli

 genza in me che ho famiglia, il nulla fare per mettermi in vista all'Accademia. Sentito

 il parère di Beltrami, ne parlai con Genocchi, il quale aggradi moltissimo l'esposizione

 che gli feci di una parte délia Memoria, allora non per anco uscita dalla Tipografia.

 Ma a portare vie più l'attenzione dell'Accademia sulla medesima, servirebbe egregia
 mente la proposta di Lei, quale socio dell'Accad.[emia], come pure quella di Betti.

 Ε pertanto, lo scopo délia présente lettera è pregarla a voler dare un'occhiata alia

 Memoria, ed a voler poi, nel caso che ne ricevesse impressione abbastanza favorevole,

 scrivere due semplici righe all'Accademia, come già altri fecero pel 1° premio (...)

 Ed ora devo pregarla di scusarmi, se, per questa eccezionale circostanza dovetti

 lodare un mio lavoro. L'assicuro che questa necessità mi spiace assai, e che non penso

 di prendere da qui le mosse per seguire le consuetudini dei francesi. (...)

 Letter 11\ Casorati to Picard

 il suo aff.mo F. Casorati

 Pavie, ce 11 décembre 1880

 Monsieur (Ε. Picard)

 Vos travaux, et tout ce que m'a dit des vous M. Mittag-Leffler, en me visitant il

 y a quelque mois, et la nouvelle de vôtre prochain marriage avec une fille du grand

 Géomètre38, qui est une des plus pures et plus hautes gloires de la France, tout cela

 m'ispire une vive estime et sympathie et, par conséquent, le désir d'établir avec vous
 quelques rapports personnels. C'est pour cela que je me suis décidé à vous envoyer
 tous les exemplaires qu'il m'est possible, des mes travaux de mathém.[atique] pure,

 (deux paquets) avec cette lettre, en vous priant d'avoir la bonté de les agréer et de

 vous souvenir possiblement de moi, lorsque vous dispenserez les exemplaires de vos

 propres travaux.

 Je vous enverrai dans une autre occasion quelques autre Mémoires, dont une partie

 est déjà imprimée, contenants bon nombre d'applications du Calcul des différences

 finies, lesquelles vous intéresseront, j'èspere, beaucoup. Dans pluiseurs d'entre elles

 joue un rôle très important et très-élégant le detérminant

 h h ■■■ fn
 Δ/ί Δ/2 ... Afn

 Δ"-1/! Δ"_1/2 ... Δ"-1/»

 38 Picard was going to marry Charles Hermite's daughter.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 195

 formé avec les différences successives de pluiseurs fonctions f\,..., /„, d'une même
 variable t, le quel j'écris aussi comme il suit

 /l h ■■■ fn
 θ fl θ f2 ... Bfn

 en~lf\ en~lf2 ... θ"~1/η

 en écrivant 9f, Θ2 f,... au lieu de /(f + 1), /(f + 2),.... De telle manière, on peut
 regarder θ comme un symbole d'opération, ce qui est, comme vous verrez, très utile.

 En envisageant la variabilité de t de plusieurs point des vue différents et en relations

 avec d'autres variables qui jouent elles-mêmes le rôle de variables indépendantes,

 on obtient plusieurs interprétations différentes du symbole θ, et autant de manières

 correspondantes de traduire toutes les formules ou propositions, qui ont été acquiséz
 jusqu'ici dans l'analyse directe et inverse des différences finies, dans des résultats

 concernants d'autres branches de l'analyse mathématique. Le Calcul des différences

 finies si négligé dans ces dernièrs temps acquiert par là une importance très-grande et

 inattendue même pour l'analyse infinitésimale.

 Mais je ne veux pas être trop indiscret, en vous entretenant plus longtemps sur mes

 travaux. Veuillez donc agrée, je vous en prie de nouveau, les séntiments d'éstime et

 de sympathie qui m'ont fait écrire cette lettre, et soyez si bon de me pas m'oublier
 tout-à-fait.

 Votre serviteur

 F. Casorati

 Prof, à l'Université de Pavie

 Italie

 Je vous serai très-obligé si vous voudrez m'assurer par quelques mots d'avoir reçu

 les paquets.

 Letter 12: Picard to Casorati

 Toulouse, ce 17 décembre 1880.

 Monsieur

 J'ai été très flatté de votre aimable lettre et je serai très heureux d'établir avec vous

 de relations amicales. Je vous remercie vivement des exemplaires de vos travaux que

 vous m'avez envoyés; la plupart d'entre eux m'étaient déjà connus, et quant à votre

 traité sur les fonctions d'une variable complexe c'est un livre excellent et que j'ai
 pu apprécier d'autant mieux que les sujets qui y sont traités me sont extrêmements

 familiers. Tout ce que vous me dites des différences finies et notamment du déterminant

 des Δ, m'intéresse extrêmement, et j'attends avec impatience les résultats complets

 de vos études sur ces importantes questions.

 Je vous enverrai très prochainement les mémoires ou notes qu'ai publiés et dont

 j'ai encore entre le mains de tirages et vous pouvez être assuré que dans l'avenir je

 me ferai un devoir et un plaisir de vous réserver toujours un exemplaire de ce que

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 196

 R. Rosso

 je pourrai faire. Ce sont surtout les questions de la théorie générale des fonctions de
 variables complexes qui m'ont beaucoup occupé depuis quelque temps. Les beaux

 résultats de M. Weierstrass ont été le point de départ des mes propres récherches et

 vous trouverez dans mon mémoire sur les fonctions entières un théorème qui, si je

 ne me trompe, a peut être quelque importance. Je viens de corriger en ce moment les

 épreuves d'un mémoire qui va prochainement paraître dans le Journal de Crelle,39 et

 qui est relatif aux équations linéaires à coefficients doublement périodiques; j'espère

 qu'il vous intéressera. Ce sont les recherches de M. Hermite sur l'équation de Lamé

 qui m'ont jeté sur la voie des résultats auxquels je suis parvenu.

 En ce moment, monsieur, mon mariage est la grand action qui me préocupe; j'ai du

 revenir à Toulouse pour faire quelques cours à la Faculté et j'attends avec impatience

 mon départ pour Paris, qui aura lieu dans trois jours.

 Soyez persuadé que je recevrai toujours vos lettres avec joie et je serai heureux de

 toutes les communications mathématiques que vous voudrez bien me faire. Permettez

 de vous assurer de sentiments d'estime et de sympathie que je conserve pour vous.

 professeur à la Faculté des Sciences

 Emil Picard

 de Toulouse.

 Pavie, ce 6 février 1881

 Letter 13: Casorati to Bonnet

 Cher Monsieur et ami (Ossian Bonnet)

 Avec ces lignes je vous envoye la traduction française d'une lettre que j'ai fait
 insérer dans les Annali de M. Brioschi, à cause d'une Note publiée récemment par M.

 Stickelberger;40 et je profite de l'amitié dont vous m'avez toujours honoré pour vous

 prier de vouloir l'observer, et de compatir mon irritation, en égard à la peine que j'ai

 dû essayer en voyant malveillance et, peut-être, mauvoise foi de la part d'un collègue.

 Mon mâitre bien-aimé M. Brioschi me conseillez d'adresser à M. Hermite une

 Note, pour être insérée aux Comptes Rendus, dans le but de faire toujours mieux

 constater ma priorité dans l'application du Calcul des différences à la théorie des

 équations différentielles linéaires. Cependant dans cette Note je n'ai rien dit qui pût

 avoir l'aspect de personnalité, en me bornant à rappeller mon Memoire, et du rest

 complétant la détermination des sous-groupes d'intégrales faite par M. Hamburger;

 ce qui peut intéresser indépendamment de toute question personnelle.

 Mais dans une lettre confidentielle à un ami, quelque manifestation de mécontente

 ment personnel pourra être pardonneé.

 L'année dernière je m'étais occupé avec ardeur de la theorie des équations différen

 tielles linéaires, mais une maladie très-grave de ma fille ainée, étant survenue [à] trou

 bler ma tête et deranger mes plans, je n'ai pu ne m'a permis de rediger mes recherches

 qu'en partie d'une manière convenable pour être imprimées. Comme si cela n'était

 pas assez pour me fâcher, M. Stickelberger vient maintenent essayer d'approprier à soi

 39 It is the paper (Picard 1881).

 40 This French version of Casorati (1880c) is (Casorati 1881b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 197

 même et à Riemann et a M. Hamburger une partie des idées qu'il m'a été cependant

 possible de publier dans cette année malheureuse. Mais sa tentative ne peut qu'échouer.

 Je n'ai pas la pretension que personne ne s'occupe de l'application du Calcul des dif
 férences à la dite théorie ou à d'autres branches de l'analyse de la variabilité continue.

 Au contraire je dois voir de bon gré paraître des travaux fondé sur les idées que j'ai

 conçues et chercher à expliquer. Mais je ne puis pas être content que l'on cherche à

 m'ôter ce qui m'appartient.

 En redigeant sa Note avec calme, sans l'idée injuste de la faire passer pour con

 temporaine de mon Mémoire, il aurait pu la livrer au public sous une forme beaucoup

 meilleure et il n'aurait pas certainement suscité de récriminations de ma parte. La

 méthode de Cauchy à la résolution du système d'équations aux différences, qui est
 l'object de la première partie du §1 est bien faite; et la combination des formules

 de résolution ainsi obtenues avec la formule de Weierstrass, effectué dans la première

 partie du §3, vient à-propos; quoique ce tour ne soit nécessaire, comm'il semble croire,

 pour arriver à la forme la plus simple de la distinction des intégrales en sous-groupes.

 Mais, dans l'empressement de faire paraître sa Note, il ne s'est pas aperçu que le
 seconde partie de ces deux paragraphes et les paragraphes restants (hormis le dernier

 qui se rapport à un autre point) sont trop remplis de répétitions et des calculs superflus.

 Le §2 particulierment, tout plein de calculs assez ennuyeuse, pouvait se remplacer par
 quelques observations brèves, claires et sans calculs.

 La personne à laquelle je fais allusion, au commencement de ma lettre imprimée,

 est M. Frobenius, qui a travaillé et publié plusieurs articles en communion avec M.

 Stickelberger. C'est pour cela que j'ai terminé cette lettre en rappellant mon chapitre
 sur le determinant

 yi ■■■ y η

 yi ■■■ yn

 Θ =

 ou son égal Δ =

 θη~χγ\ ... θη~\

 Δ"-1?! ... A"~lyn

 M. Frobenius tient fort beaucoup à ce qu'on le regarde comme l'auteur qui a le plus
 soigné le determinant

 y ι ··· yn

 D

 D"-ly1 ... Dn~xyn

 et M. Stickelberger déclare pompeusement dans son dernier § qu'il désignera, d'après

 M. Frobenius, par D(y\, yi,..., y„). N'est ce donc pas étonnant qu'il puisse oublier

 mon chapitre susdit, qui comprend, comme cas particulier, tout ce que l'on peut dire

 sur le determinant D? Mais le temps fera justice, car les applications nouvelles, qu'il

 m'arrive de faire chaque fois que je reviens à ce determinant Θ, ne me laissent plus

 douter qu'il soit pour prender une place distinguée parmi les instruments les plus utiles

 et les plus élégants de l'analyse. Permettez-moi d'ajouter, qui je partage la répugnance
 de la plus part des géomètre contre l'utilisation de notations ou dénominations nou

 velles. Mais l'introduction d'un symbole (tel que Θ), pour désigner par 9f ce que une

 fonction f devient par effet de la variation d'une nature prefixée, de certaines éléments

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 198

 R. Rosso

 dont elle dépend, m'a paru trop utile pour y renoncer. Parmi les advantages ce n'est

 pas petit celui-ci, de pouvoir comprendre sous un même énoncé des propositions qui

 se rapportent à des sphères des recherches très différentes. Dans les unes, la variation,

 supposée par θ pourra consister dans le tour qu'une variable ou plusieurs variables

 imaginaires, dont nos fonctions dépendront, doivent faire autour d'un ou plusieurs
 systèmes des points singuliers; dans d'autres, la variation pourra consister dans un

 système d'accroissement que les éléments variables doivent prendre dans d'autres,

 enfin, la variation pourra consister dans tout autre chose. Et il va sans dire qu'il est

 très utile, de pouvoir aussi employer plusieurs symboles θ, Θ',... simultanément.

 Je voudrais bien vous entretenir un peu plus sur cet argument, mais je crois d'avoir

 absorbé déjà trop de temps à vos occupations. Et la note de M. Stickelberger aurez

 vous eu le temps et l'envie de la lire? Dans le cas négatif je serais encore plus coupable

 d'indiscrétion! Mais votre bonté a été toujours très grande; j'èspere donc, même dans

 ce cas, votre pardon. Et plus ancore, je compte aussi sur votre bienveillance pour

 l'avenir, de sorte que pourrai toujours me souségner

 votre ami dévoué

 F. Casorati

 Soyez aussi indulgent pour les

 fautes que j'aurais commisés
 en écrivant en français

 Letter 14: Bertrand to Casorati

 Paris 15 février 1881

 Je vous remercie bien cordialement, très cher Monsieur, de la nouvelle, pour moi
 si flattante, que vous voulez bien m'annoncer. Je ne suis pas digne de succeder à
 mon illustre ami Mr· Chaises et n'en dois que plus de recoinnaissance à ceux qui ont

 bien voulu songer à moi.41 Vous voudrez bien leur transmettre l'expression de mes

 sentiments les plus sincèrement et entièrement dévoués.

 L'Académie a décerné hier le Prix de Mathématiques pour la question des équations

 linéaires. Un très beau et ingenieux mémoire dans laquel l'étude des point critiques est

 éclairci et simplifiée par l'emploi des équations aux différences, avait attiré l'attention

 de la Commission qui n'a pu cependant lui accorder qu'une mention très honorable.

 Que le savant auteur veuille bien attendre pour condamner ses juges, la lecture du

 mémoire très considérable qui a été couronné et dont l'auteur est Mr Halphen; notre

 compatriote s'y montre beaucoup plus grand géomètre encore que les excellents debuts

 ne l'avaient promis. Il étudie les changements d'une équation linéaire quand on rem

 place la variable indépendante par une autre ou quand on multiplie l'inconnue par une
 fonction choisie de manière à simplifier l'équation qui ne cesse pas d'être linéaire. Il

 me semble qu'il équisse le sujet en tirant un très grand partie des invariants introduits

 par M. Laguerre qui je crois n'a pas concours.

 Veuillez recevoir, cher Monsieur Casorati, l'assurance de mes sentiments les plus

 J. Bertrand

 41 Bertrand refers to his election to the Istituto Lombardo on Febraury 10th, 1881.

 affectueuse.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 199

 Letter 15: Casorati to Bertrand

 Pavie, ce 21 février 1881

 Cher Monsieur

 je vous remercie de votre comunication, adressée à Milan m'est parvenue en ritard,

 du 15 février, et particulièrement des expressions affectueuses dont vous confortez mon

 esprit dans une circostance [sic!] où il en a vraiment tout le besoin. Car, je l'avait dit

 avec Pascal dans ma devise, nous ne pouvons prendre plaisir à une chose qu'à condition

 de nous fâcher si elle ne réussit pas. Et je ne puis à présent m'empêcher d'être fâché

 douloureusement d'autant plus que j'ignore les terms précis du rapport. Vos Comptes

 Rendus ne sont pas seulement la pubblication la plus observée par les professeurs de

 mon Université, mais ils sont lus aussi par les étudiants qui sont inscrits dans l'école
 normale annexée maintenent à cette Facultés des Sciences math.[ématiques] etc.

 Un professeur de cette même Université, feu M. Codazzi, qui avait concouru au

 prix relatif à la théorie des surfaces applicables l'une sur l'autre, a pu rester satisfait

 de la simple mention qu'on lui avait accordée en Mars 1861. Mais alors le rapporteur,

 que vous connaissez très-bien, avait écrit: "Les trois autres Mémoires, inscrits sous

 les nos. 1, 2, et 5, remplissent complètement le programme tracé par l'Académie. Si

 l'un quelconque des trois avait été présenté seul à notre examen, nous lui aurions sans

 hésiter accordé le prix."42

 Maintenent, qui sera le rapporteur?

 Et connaîtra-t-il assez une position scolastique pour prendre bon soin de la ménager

 par quelques expression de la valeur de celles que je vient de citer? Ce serait pour

 lui d'autant plus facile que mon travail et celui de M. Halphen n'admettent pas, il

 me semble, une comparaison rigoreuse; leur points de départ et leur directions étant

 différents; et mon travail contienant aussi incontestablement des perfectionnements
 importants. Je ne doute pas de la haute valeur du Mémoire du jeune géomètre que

 vous avez couronné; mais son mérite n'exclut pas que mes applications du Calcul aux
 differences soient tout-à-fait nouvelles, et que leur portée ne soit née à l'étude des

 intégrales autour des points critiques, faite par M. Fuchs, comme on peut perçevoir

 par mon manuscrit et comme on verra toujours mieux dans la suite.

 A la vérité l'expression très honorable contenue dans votre lettre devrait me ras

 surer; mais je vous prie de compatir ces craintes, dont je ne sais pas me délivrer sur

 le moment. Du reste, je vous prie aussi de croire que je ne voudrai pas mal à mes

 juges, ni à mon maître bien aimé, M. Brioschi, qui m'a inspiré l'idée du concours. Je

 ne ferai que répéter ce que j'ai pensé dans d'autres moments de ma vie: d'être né sous
 un étoile assez malheureuse.

 Pardonnéz moi, cher Monsieur Bertrand, cette lettre trop longue et trop triste et

 veuillez me conserver votre bienveuillance toujours précieuse.

 42 In fact, Bertand had written this report.

 F. Casorati

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 200

 R. Rosso

 Letter 16: Stickelberger to Brioschi.43

 Schaffhause [sic!], 9 avril 1881

 Monsieur le directeur

 Puisque vous avez accordé quelque pages de vos annales à la lettre de M. Casorati,
 ecrite à l'occasion de mon mémoire "Zur Theorie der linearen Differentialgleichun

 gen", j'éspère que vous voudrez bien inséré dans le même recueil une response de ma

 part, qui, du reste, ne sera pas longue.

 M. Casorati part de la supposition que j'aie commencé mon travail ayant conais

 sance de son mémoire; il me reproche d'avoir employé sa méthode sans en indiquer

 l'origine. Voici ce que je pourrais lui répondre. C'est seulement après avoir trouvé

 les principaux résultats des paragraphes 1 à 4 de mon écrit, que j'en parlai avec M.

 Lindemann en faisant mention spéciale du calcul aux differences finies, et c'était pré

 cisément cette mention qui l'engagea à me faire parvenir le mémoire de M. Casorati

 que celui-ci venait de lui envoyer. Mais je crois ne pas avoir besoin de repondre au

 [sic!] long à une imputation qui ne trouvera aucun credit auprès de tout ceux qui me
 connaissent.

 Au reste il est evident que M. Casorati n'a pas pris la peine de lire mon mémoire

 en entier avant d'écrire sa lettre. S'il avait fait, il aurait remarqué que ce qui, pour lui,

 est une idée cardinale, n'est pour moi qu'un moyen pour arriver à un but determiné;

 il ne m'aurait pas demandé, pourquoi j'ai passé sous silence les recherches contenues

 dans son chapitre deuxième et, en particulier, le théorème relatif à la condition pour

 l'existence d'une équation linéaire à coefficients périodiques entre plusieurs fonc

 tions d'une seule variable indépendante. D'ailleurs, s'il avait en lieu d'employer ce

 théorème, je ne l'aurais pas emprunté à M. Casorati, mais à un Mémoire de M. Christof

 fel "Ûber die lineare Abhàngigkeit von Functionen einer einzigen Verândlichen" pub
 lié en 1858 dans le Tome 55me du journal de Borchardt, où ce suject est traité d'une

 manière aussi elegante que complète. J'ai coutume de citer, dans toutes les questions

 importants, les auteurs qui, à ma connaissance, ont proposé les prèmiers les théorèmes

 dont je fais usage.

 M. Casorati m'accuse d'avoir manqué de politesse vis-à-vis avec lui. Je laisse
 aux lecteurs des Annali le soin de juger, s'il est plus courtois d'employer, dans une

 critique purement objective, les mots "nicht rathsam", ou bien de se servir, dans

 une résponse toute personnelle, d'éxpressions telles que "disgusto, malvolere, cattivi

 pensieri".

 Agréz, Monsieur, l'expression de mon plus profond respect

 Votre dévué

 L. Stickelberger

 Pavia, 17 aprile 1881

 Letter 17: Casorati to Brioschi

 Carissimo sig. Direttore (Brioschi)

 43 In the Nachlass there is a copy written by Casorati's daughter, Eugenia.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 201

 Ho letto la Memoria di Christoffel del 1858 e vi trovai infatti il teorema che la

 eguaglianza

 ^r±/(nt)/i(m + 1) ■ ■ ■ fn(m + n) = 0

 è condizione necessaria e sufficiente affinché le funzioni

 /(m), /ι(m),..., fn(m)

 délia variabile discreta m abbiano tra loro una relazione lineare a coefficienti costanti.

 Se avessi conosciuto questa Memoria, non avrei mancato di citare il Christoffel
 nell'occasione del mio déterminante Θ come non mancherè di ricordarlo in una Ven

 tura occasione. Ma il Christoffel non allude mai ai coefficienti periodici e molto meno

 a coefficienti che sieno fiinzioni di una variabile complessa, monodrome intorno ad

 un punto. Non puo essere che il malvolere dello Stickelberger capace di insinuare che

 queste idee fossero implicite in quella Memoria. (...)

 Appendix 2: Original letters concerning Pincherle's unpublished
 note on Tannery's theorem

 Letter 1: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Chiarissimo Sig. Professore

 Bologna, li 21/7/85.

 Nella Memoria del Sig. Goursat (Sur une classe de fonctions representeés par des

 intégrales définies—Acta Math., 1883) ho trovato l'enunciato di una proposizione data
 dal Sig. Tannery, che è la seguente:

 Se η funzioni sono tali chefacendo qualunque giro colla variabile intorno a ρ punti

 ai, 02,..., ap, si ritrovano sempre combinazioni lineari a coefficienti costanti delle
 η funzioni, esse funzioni soddisfano ad un'equazione differenziale lineare omogenea

 a coefficienti monotropi rispetto ai punti a\, ai, ■ ■ ■, ap.

 Non ho potuto vedere quale sia la dimostrazione che il Sig. Tannery dà di questo

 teorema, essendo esso pubblicato nelle [sic!] Annales de l'Ecole [Sic!] Normale, che

 non si trovano nella Biblioteca di Bologna.

 Perô questa dimostrazione risulta come conseguenza immediata dal di Lei metodo

 per lo studio dei valori di una funzione nell'intorno di un punto singolare, contenuto

 nella Sua memoria II calcolo delle differenze finite ecc. (Annali di Matematica, t. X);

 e spero che non le sarà discaro di leggere questa dimostrazione. Eccola in due parole:

 Formiamo colle η funzioni date, e con η costanti arbitrarie, la funzione

 E — c\E\ + C2E2 H \~cnEn;

 eseguendo un giro intorno ad ai, ed essendo θ l'operazione da Lei introdotta nella
 citata Memoria, sarà

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 202

 R. Rosso

 θ Ε = Υ.αθΕί
 (·=1

 η

 η

 θ Ε = YkuEj

 1 = 1

 e per l'ipotesi fatta:

 e cosî

 ΘΓΕ = ^^kriEi, (r = 2, 3,..., η) :

 η

 ι=1

 da queste eliminando \e Ει, E2,..., E„, viene:

 ΚηθηΕ + Κη-ιθη~ιΕ + · · ■ + ΚιθΕ + K0E = 0,

 dove le Ki sono costanti. Ma questa equazione (Casorati, mem. [oria] citata, § 10) indica

 che la Ε soddisfa ad un'equaz.[ione] differenziale lineare a coefficienti monotropi in

 a 1, sia

 φοΕ(η) + φ\£(π_1) H \-φη-\Ε' + φηΕ = 0;

 e di questa sarà Ε l'integrale generale. Ma lo stesso ragionamento dimostrerebbe
 che la E è l'integrale generale di un'equaz.[ione] a coefficienti monotropi in <22. di

 un'equaz.[ione] a coeff.[icienti] monotropi in «3, ecc., il che non puô essere che se

 φο, φι,...,φη

 sono monotropi in ai, «2. · · ·. <*p'i c.d.d.

 Io credo che questa dimostrazione cosî semplice di una proposizione cosî importante

 non sarà senza interesse. In ogni modo La lascio giudice di decidere se sia il caso di

 farne una comunicazione a qualche Accademia; a me basta che risulti una volta di più

 l'importanza di quella Sua bella Memoria.

 Mi conservi la Sua preziosa benevolenza, e mi creda, ch— Sig. Professore

 di Lei dev—

 S. Pincherle

 Hôtel Piora sopra Airolo (Svizzera)

 30 luglio 1885

 Letter 2: Casorati to Pincherle.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 203

 Caro Pincherle

 Ricevo adesso da Pavia la sua lettera del 21 e rispondo come posso.

 Sono assai distratto dagli studî e lontano dai libri, e non ebbi occasione di vedere

 la Mem.[oria] di Tannery contenente la proposizione enunciata nella Mem.[oria] del

 Goursat. Nondimeno convengo con Lei che tale proposizione non si possa dimostrare

 in maniera più semplice dell' indicata nella sua lettera. Naturalmente, a me fa piacere di

 veder presente in Lei lamia Mem.[oria] "II calc.[olo] delle differ.[enze] ecc." e farebbe
 pur piacere di vederla per di Lei mezzo ricordata agli studiosi che credo potreb
 bero fame facilmente moite applicazioni. Ma sembrerebbemi conveniente ch'Ella
 desse un'occhiata a quella Mem.foria] Se fossi a Pavia, gliela manderei; ma cosi

 bisognerebbe ch'Ella dimandasse il vol.[ume] degli Annali de l'Ecole [sic!] normale

 a qualche collega di Milano, che potrebbe ritirarlo da quel collegio degli Ingegneri.

 Taie occhiata potrebbe suggerirle anche altre applicazioni délia stessa mia Mem. [oria]

 da presentarsi insieme con la già scrittami ai Lincei ο ad altra Accad.[emia]

 Quando avr5 il piacere di vederLa, Le dirô dei non pochi progetti che feci anch'io

 di correggere, semplificare, ricordare cose nostre [ai] matem.[atici] francesi in questi
 ultimi anni.

 Ma Ella, ch'è giovane, fa bene a non contentarsi del semplice fare progetti.

 Se non potrà avere il Tannery da Milano, me lo scriva, che glielo mandero poi io

 da Pavia.

 Continui ad amar

 Letter 3: Pincherle to Casorati.

 l'aff.[ezionatissimo] suo F.C.

 Bologna, li 3 Ottobre 1885

 Ch— Sig. Professore

 Secondo il suo Consiglio, ho aspettato a redigere la Nota sulle equazioni differen

 ziali, per cercare prima la Memoria del Tannery: ma non mi è stato possibile avere

 quel volume degli Annales de l'Ec., e non ho voluto disturbarla per questo finché Ella

 si trovava presumibilmente in campagna.

 Ora ella sarà forse tornato a Pavia: in questo caso Le sarei gratissimo se mi potesse

 far avere quel volume (Serie 2, Tomo 4) degli Annali; e dopo letta la memoria del

 Tannery, redigerô (se sarà ancora del caso) e Le spedirô la noticina, rimettendo a Lei

 di decidere se convenga ο no presentarla a qualche Accademia.

 In queste vacanze ho lavorato ad una Memoria sugl'integrali definiti atti a rappre

 sentare funzioni analitiche, nella quale spero di dare alcuni risultati nuovi: ma ci vorrà

 forse del tempo perché sia in ordine per la stampa, e l'argomento mi si fa sempre più

 vasto. Mi consiglia Ella a sospendere per qualche tempo ogni pubblicazione, lavorando

 intanto per il Premio dei Lincei dell'89, ο è troppa presunzione la mia?44

 Sarei ben lieto che si présentasse quell'occasione, che Ella accenna nella sua lettera,

 di poterla vedere qui; è un desiderio che nutro da molti anni, perché da molti anni non

 44 Pincherle shared this prize with Luigi Bianchi.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204

 R. Rosso

 ho potuto discorrere dei miei studî con persona compétente e perché voglio ringraziarla

 a voce délia benevolenza di cui Ella mi è stato prodigo in questo periodo di tempo.

 Ε con questa speranza, La prego di credere all'affetto ed alia devozione del suo

 Letter 4: Casorati to Pincherle.

 Salvatore Pincherle

 Pavia, 17 ott. 1885

 Caro Pincherle

 Circa il premio linceo io non trovo niente affatto presuntuoso il progetto suo di con

 corrervi. Di più non vorrei dire; se non altro, perché impedito dalla lontananza di seco
 conversare distesamente.

 Rileggendo la Sua lettera del 21 luglio, vedo che la proposizione ivi considerata appar

 tiene all'antica (1874) [sic!] Memoria del Tannery sulle equaz.[ioni] diff.ferenziali]

 lineari; Memoria che a suo tempo lessi con attenzione. Ε perô, pur seguitando a credere

 che la di Lei dimostrazione sia délia massima semplicità non oserei consigliarle il sacri

 ficio del tempo occorrente alia redazione di una Nota per la stampa, se nella Nota non
 dovesse entrare che la pura dimostrazione suddetta. Faccia dunque Ella ciô che le

 pare conveniente; è certo ch'io ne resterô in ogni modo soddisfatto. Quanto al volume

 contenente la Mem.[oria] del Tannery, glielo spediro appena sarà arrivata una delle tre

 persone che tengono le chiavi délia libreria délia Scuola Normale di questa Université.
 Le vacanze hanno ristorato assai le mie forze fisiche; ma sono tuttora sbalordito

 dall'inaspettata perdita di mio fratello45. Era il solo superstite della mia famiglia
 paterna, aveva per me indicibile affetto ed io per lui tenerezza e venerazione ad un

 tempo.

 Mi ricordi ai colleghi e mi voglia sempre bene.

 Letter 5: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Chiarissimo Sig. Professore

 Suo F. Casorati

 Bologna, li 19/10/85

 Con vivo rincrescimento rilevo dalla Sua lettera la notizia della perdita del di Lei

 fratello: io non ho avuto l'onore di conoscerlo, ma ne ho spesso sentito parlare con

 deferenza e stima. Le auguro che il tempo e l'affetto dei suoi possano lenire il Suo
 dolore, cui mi associo.

 In questa circostanza non voglio più tediarLa con cose mie, che non possono avere

 per Lei che un meschino interesse, e ringraziandoLa dell'offerta di spedirmi il vo

 lume degli Annales, credo che Ella possa risparmiarsi questo disturbo se non vede

 Γ opportunité di pubblicare quella dimostrazione. Certamente quella Memoria, essendo

 45 Luigi Casorati was a jurist. He was born in Pavia on January 26th, 1834 and died in Rome on August
 4th, 1885.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 205

 del 1874 (cosa che non sapevo) non puô contenere risultati che non siano noti dopo i

 più recenti lavori sulle equazioni differenziali.

 Come già Le dissi, ho trovato quel Teorema citato dal Goursat, in una Memoria

 che studiavo per i miei lavori sugl'integrali; e mi venne subito alla mente l'idea che

 la dimostrazione di quella proposizione si dovesse ottenere nel modo più semplice
 applicando il Suo metodo (l'operazione che Ella chiama Θ.) D'altronde questa osser

 vazione non ha attinenza diretta coH'argomento che ora sto studiando, e di cui Ella

 vedrà ira poco un primo saggio in una "Note sur une intégrale définie" che uscirà in

 uno dei prossimi fascicoli degli Acta Mathematica.

 Mi auguro che questo lavoro sia per incontrare la Sua approvazione, alla quale

 tengo sopra tutto; e pregandola di riverire per me i Sig. Professori Beltrami, Bertini e

 Maggi46, La prego, ch— signor Professore, di tenermi sempre per

 Suo dev— e afP22·

 S. Pincherle

 24 die. 85

 Letter 6: Casorati to Pincherle.

 Mio caro Pincherle

 Voglia aggrad.[ire] coi miei aug.[uri] l'artic.[olo] che le invio.

 Avrei voluto scriverle assai prima per dirle che ha dato repentinamente troppo

 peso alla mia opin.[ione] circa quella tale dimostr.[azione] Del resto, io non potevo

 vederne che con piacere la pubbl.[icazione], che Ella ad ogni modo avrebbe potuto

 fare dicendo che proponevasi ricordare agli studiosi una Memoria forse meritevole di

 qualche attenzione (e non di essere negletta, come si fa dai Francesi, non ostante la

 lunga recensione fattane da non so chi nel Bulletin di Darboux47).

 Letter 7: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Chiarissimo Sig. Professore.

 Ami sempre il suo aff. F.C.

 Bologna, li 29 Xbre 85

 Prima di tutto la Prego di accogliere i miei più sinceri auguri di felicità per il

 prossimo anno: ed i miei ringraziamenti per la Memoria che Ella mi ha favorito.48

 Questa Memoria è destinata certamente ad avere una grande importanza, e tocca
 uno degli argomenti pul vitali délia Analisi. Anche a me—per quanto poco possa

 46 Eugenio Bertini was a distinguished algebraic geometer who taught in Pavia in the period 1880-1892.

 Bertini theorems are still of use in current research in algebraic geometry. Gian-Antonio Maggi was Caso

 rati's son in law and taught Rational mechanics and Mathematical physics in Modena, Messina, and Milan.

 A set of equations to study non-holonomic systems is named after him.

 47 The review appeared in 1882 (Darboux et al. 1882).

 48 Pincherle presumably refers here to the preliminary version of Casorati (1886a,b) that was printed in
 Milan in 1885.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 206

 R. Rosso

 valere la mia opinione,—era sempre sembrato naturale che si dovesse poter trovare

 proprietà della /0Z -^== ο della sua inversa anche se R(z) è di grado superiore al 4—;
 e credo che se ciô non è stato fatto si deve attribuire in parte alla grande fecondità

 delle idee di Abel e Jacobi, di considerare le inverse come funzioni di più variabili,
 che non ha fatto cercare una estensione della Teoria delle f.[unzioni] Ellittiche nel

 campo di una variabile sola. Sono persuaso che in questo ordine d'idee Ella giungerà

 a dei risultati di somma importanza. Ε cosî, la Teoria delle f.[unzioni] Ellittiche verra

 anch'essa ad acquistare maggiore importanza, trovandosi per cosl dire ail'intersezione

 delle trascendenti Abeliane da una parte, delle Sue nuove trascendenti dall'altra.

 Io avevo rinunziato all'idea di pubblicare quella Nota sulla Mem.[oria] di Tan
 nery, più di tutto per non darLe il disturbo di spedirmi il volume degli Annales de

 l'Ec.fole] Normale. Se Ella perô ha la compiacenza di farmelo avere, vedrô di sten
 dere quella Nota, cercando anche d'applicare il Suo metodo ad altri Teoremi se è

 possibile, e quando la Nota sia redatta, gliela spedirô ed Ella giudicherà se sia ο no da

 pubblicare.

 Desidererei pure dalla Sua Cortesia un'altro [sic!] favore, che spero Ella non mi

 vorrà negare; e sarebbe (con tutto suo comodo) l'indicazione del tomo del American

 Journal nel quale trovansi le memorie d'un certo Daniell sulla Teoria delle f.[unzioni]

 Ellittiche secondo il Weierstrass.49 Se potessi avere quella indicazione, farei venire

 quel volume per la via di questa Biblioteca, dalla Biblioteca Universitaria di Pavia,

 dove si trova a quanto credo, l'American Journal.

 Ho avuto il piacere di vedere poco fa il prof. Maggi, che mi ha dato le di Lei notizie

 e mi ha fatto sperare una Sua gita a Modena e a Bologna. Sarei lietissimo di questa

 circostanza, che mi auguro già da 5 anni.

 Pregandola d'accogliere di nuovo i miei auguri ed i miei ringraziamenti, e di riverire

 per me il Prof. Beltrami colla Sua Signora, ed i di Lei colleghi di costï

 mi creda, Ch— Signor
 Professore, di Lei dev—

 S. Pincherle

 Letter 8: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Bologna, li 9 Gennajo 1886

 Ch— Signor Professore

 Le accludo la nota relativa al teorema di Tannery, lasciandola giudice

 dell'opportunité di presentarla all'Istituto Lombardo. L'enunciato che ho dato è un

 po' più generale di quello di Tannery, ed i coefficienti dell'equaz.[ione] differenziale
 possono anche essere f.[unzioni] polidrome di specie determinata (f.[unzione] uni
 forme d'un punto analitico) riguardando il campo Τ come una superficie di Riemann

 ridotta, con tagli; semplicemente connessa.

 Le spedisco pure, raccomandato, il volume degli Annali: la Memoria di Tannery, che

 ho letto in questa occasione, non mi è sembrata nulla di straordinario, una compilazione

 49 The author's name is misprinted: the notes on Weierstrass theory of elliptic functions were written by
 Daniels (1883a, b, 1884).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 207

 dei lavori di Fuchs fatta discretamente e nulla più. Non vi è di notevole che il Teorema

 che mi ha ispirato questa Nota.

 prego di credermi sempre

 La ringrazio nuovamente per il disturbo che Ella s'è preso di spedirmi il libro, e La

 il Suo dev.— ed obblig—

 S. Pincherle

 Analisi: Sopra un teorema del Sig. Tannery

 Scopo di questa breve Nota è di mostrare con una nuova applicazione, i vantaggi

 che puô arrecare nello studio delle funzioni analitiche e del loro modo di compor

 tarsi nell'intorno di punti determinati, il metodo ideato dal prof. Casorati ed esposto

 nella Sua Memoria: "II calcolo delle differenze finite interpretato50 ecc., Annali di

 Matematica, S.II, T. X." Ne faccio qui l'applicazione alla dimostrazione di un teorema

 enunciato dal Sig. Tannery nella Memoria "Propriétés des intégrales des équations dif

 férentielles linéaires, Annales ce l'Ec. Normale, S. II, T. IV, p. 130;" teorema notevole

 per sé, e per una applicazione importante che ne ha fatto il Sig. Goursat.51

 Il teorema è il seguente, sotto un enunciato un po' modificato: "Siano η funzioni

 analitiche E\, E2,..., E„ a carattere regolare nell'intorno di ogni punto di un campo

 Τ semplicemente connesso, eccettuati i punti a\, 02 ap in numéro finito e fra le
 quali non passa alcuna relazione lineare a coefficienti costanti; se quando la variabile

 gira senza uscire dal campo Τ intorno ad uno qualunque dei punti a\, d2,..ap, i nuovi
 valori delle funzioni sono legati ai primitivi da relazioni lineari a coefficienti costanti,

 queste funzioni sono gl'integrali di un'equazione differenziale lineare a coefficienti
 monodromi in T."

 Infatti, formiamo la funzione E i cui coefficienti c siano costanti arbitrarie

 E = ci Ει + C2E2 H h cnEn;

 (1)

 eseguendo colla variabile un giro intorno ad ai, ed essendo θ l'operazione di Casorati,
 viene

 ΘΕ = ciOEi + C2QE2 + l· οηΘΕη

 e per l'ipotesi fatta

 ΘΕ = kuEi +*1,2*2 H h ki,nEn',

 (2)

 50 V. un estratto particolareggiato di questa Memoria nel "Bulletin de Darboux, S. II, T. VI, 1882".

 51 Nella Memoria "Sur une classe des fonctions représentés per des intégrales définies. Acta Mathematica,
 T.II".

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 R. Rosso

 (3)

 208

 analogamente

 Θ2Ε = jfc2li£i + &2,2^2 + ■ · · + k2,nEn,

 0"£ = kn<iEi + kn,2E2 + -- + kn,nEn·,

 eliminando 1, £i, £2. · · ■. En fra le (1), (2) e (3), viene una equazione

 ΚηθηΕ + Κη-\θη~χΕ Η KqE = 0;

 ma questa (Casorati, loc. cit. §10) indica appunto che la Ε soddisfa ad un'equazione
 differenziale lineare a coefficienti monodromi nell'intorno di a\

 φοΕΜ + φιΕ{η-χ) + ··· + ψηΕ =0,

 di cui Ε è l'integrale generale. La stessa dimostrazione farà conoscere che
 φο,φ\,... ,<Pn sono monodromi nell'intorno di 02,03,..., ap; onde il teorema è
 dimostrato.

 Se il campo Τ ricopre tutta la sfera una sol [sic!] volta, le funzioni φο, φ\,..., φη

 sono uniformi. Non è escluso che il campo Τ possa essere una superficie di Riemann

 ridotta semplicemente connessa coi tagli opportuni; nel quai caso le φ$, ψ\,..., φη

 sarebbero funzioni uniforme [sic!] d'un punto analitico.

 S. Pincherle

 Letter 9: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Chiarissimo Signor Professore

 Bologna, li 27/2/86

 Mi permetto di manifestarle di nuovo il mio compiacimento per aver potuto passare

 qualche ora nella Sua compagnia: e sono ben grato al prof. Maggi di avermi procurato

 col suo gentile invito l'occasione di quella visita che ho forse prolungata oltre i limiti

 délia discretezza, ma che a me è sembrata troppo breve. Spero che nell'entrante Marzo

 Ella farà, come ci ha fatto sperare, la sua gita a Roma passando per Bologna e mi

 procurerà cosî il piacere di rivederLa.

 Ho letto attentamente il paragrafo délia Memoria di Tannery che Ella mi ha indicato,

 ma non ho potuto trovarvi una inesattezza. La dimostrazione è perô redatta poco bene,

 e vi è un errore (di stampa probabilmente) alla linea 10 (p. 133) dove va letto m invece
 di m — 1,

 Le rimando il volume degli Annales; ho copiato il paragrafo in discorso per cui,

 anche senza tenere più a lungo il volume presso di me, potro ripensare meglio a quella

 dimostrazione: la quale si puo forse redigere come ho tentato nel poscritto seguente.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 e sia ξ una funzione razionale di χ ed y, la quale come è noto, si pub scrivere:

 f = «ο,ο + «ο,îy + OQ,2y2 Η 1- «ο,/ι-ΐ/1-1 (2)

 dove le ah,k sono funzioni razionali di λ:. Si ha dalla (1)

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 209

 I professori Boschi52, Villari53 ed Arzelà mi hanno incaricato di contraccambiare

 i Suoi saluti; insieme a questi, accolga ch— Professore, i saluti ed i sensi di affetto

 del Suo dev—

 S. Pincherle

 La prego di riverire per me il prof. Beltrami

 Tentativo di dimostrazione del teorema che ogni fiinzione algebrica soddisfa ad un

 [sic!] equaz.[ione] differenziale lineare.

 Sial'equaz[ione].

 f(x,y) = 0 (1)

 V f t f\
 — + —y = 0,
 dx dy'

 onde y1 è una funzione della forma (2). Ora derivando la (2), viene ponendo per y il
 suo valore dalla (3):

 = <3i,o + a\,iy + t-ai,n—ι/1 1

 = «2,0 + «2,iy H 1- «2,n-l>'"~1

 (4)

 gjB = ««,0 + an,iy + a„t„-iyn 1

 e moltiplicando le (2) e (4) per i reciproci della prima colonna del déterminante

 1 «0,0 «0,1 ··· «0,71-1
 1 αι,ο αο,ΐ ··· «1,„_1

 1 «η, 0 «η, 1 ··■ «η,η-1

 52 Pietro Boschi (Rome, 7/6/1833-Bologna, 4/11/1887) taught projective and descriptive geometry in
 Bologna.

 53 Emilio Villari (Naples, 25/9/1836-20/8/1904) was a chemist and a physicist who taught experimental

 physics in Bologna from 1871 to 1889, when he moved to Naples. He discovered the variation in magnetic
 susceptibility of a sample subject to mechanic tension (the Villari effect).

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 210

 R. Rosso

 supposto diverso da zero, viene un'eq.[uazione] della forma

 dÉ dnÈ

 A0Ç + Aif-...A„-4=0.

 dx dx"

 Nel caso speciale che la ξ sia la stessa y, viene l'equaz.[ione] di Tannery.54

 Letter 10: Casorati to Pincherle.

 Caro Pincherle

 Pavia, 10 marzo 1886

 Di matematica non dovrei scrivere nulla, perché non ho la testa a posto. Nondimeno

 osserverô, rispetto alia dimostrazione del Tannery che l'errore di stampa (m -1 invece

 di m) della linea 10 di p. 133 (dove parmi eziandio doversi leggere y° insieme con

 y2, y3,..., ym ~1 ) non costituisca il difetto a cui io alludevo. Questo difetto si riferisce,

 se la memoria non m'inganna, aile linee 12 e 13.

 Prendiamo il caso di m = 2.

 /(χ, y) = ay2 + by + c,

 φ(χ) = ac — b2 = (ay2 + 2by + c) χ a + (2ay + 2b)

 (-i'-i)

 dy ay + β d2y yy + S
 dx αφ{χ) ' dx2 α^-φ1

 dove α, β, γ, δ sono funzioni intere di a,b,c e loro derivate Ie e 2e. L'eliminazione

 di y0 fra queste espressioni dà

 d2y δ dy aS - βγ
 dxz αφ dx αζφζ

 β~Γ~~2 λ ^ 2 2 y = '

 54 If Ai j is the η χ η minor associated with the (i j) element of the matrix (déterminante) A written above,
 Pincherle actually considers

 ΑΐΛξ + Α2Λ- + ··· + Αη+ΙΛ —

 d£ άηξ

 and, due to the identity (see, e.g. Pincherle 1909, p. 61)

 n+\

 ~^ajrAj,s = 0
 j=1

 that holds whenever r φ s if ajr is an element of Λ, he concludes that

 d£ d"£

 Ao? + A15i...A„ j^Uo:

 by setting ξ = y, Pincherle thinks that Tannery's equation (5.3) is recovered.

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle

 211

 ma non è cosî visibile, come dice Tannery, che pure supponendo a costante si possa

 ritenere costante il coeff[iciente], di , che Tannery riduce ad l.55

 Letter 11: Pincherle to Casorati.

 Chiarissimo Sig. Professore

 Sono il suo aff.— F.C.

 Bologna, 15/5/86

 Eccomi ancora una volta a ricorrere alia di Lei gentilezza. Nel continuare le mie

 ricerche sulle operazioni funzionali rappresentabili da integrali definiti, ricerche di

 cui la prima parte è in corso di stampa, mi si è presentata una famiglia di trasfor

 mazioni, che credo nuova e che permette di passare da qualunque equazione lineare

 differenziale a coefficienti razionali, in una equazione di forma simile aile differenze

 finite. Prendo la liberté di unirle una breve nota56 in proposito e Le sarei gratissimo

 se Ella volesse gettarvi un'occhiata. Nel caso poi che questo risultato Le sembrasse

 nuovo e degno d'intéressé, ed ove ciô non dovesse recarle disturbo, sarei ben lieto se

 Ella si compiacesse di presentarla sia all'Istituto Lombardo, sia ai Lincei.

 [.··]

 Nella speranza che ella vorrà perdonare il nuovo disturbo che le reco, e pregandola

 di salutare per me i Sig. professori Beltrami e Bertini, La prego, ch— sig. professore,

 di credere ai sensi di profondo rispetto e di vivo affetto del Suo dev®

 Possiamo sperare di vedere fra poco un ampliamento ed un seguito delle Sue

 ricerche sulle funzioni a più di due periodi?

 Letter 12: Pincherle to Casorati.

 S. Pincherle

 Bologna, 14/6/86.

 Chiarissimo Signor Professore.

 La ringrazio vivamente per la premura che Ella si è data circa alla mia nota sulle
 equazioni differenziali, e sono lieto che Le sia sembrata intéressante. Ciô che mi ha

 55 On the back of this minute, Casorati wrote: "Noto qui, per future notizie che potrô dare a Pincherle,

 che, sulla formaz.[ione] delleequaz.[ioni] diff.[erenziali] soddisfatte dalle radici di equaz.[ioni] algebriche,
 havvi da leggere in:

 Besso Sull'eq.[uazione] del 5° grado V.[ol] XIX dele Mem.[orie] lincee (Anno 1883-1884), e i successivi

 lavori da lui presentati con questo al premio minist.[eriale] scaduto il 30 aprile 1885.

 Heymann Ueber die Integration der Diff[erential]gl.[eichungen] + Am + Am_i +

 1- + Aoy = 0. Math. Annalen XXVI B[and], 4. H[eft]. Anno 1886."

 56 Casorati inserted in a footnote the title of the note, by writing: dal titolo "Sopra una trasformazione

 delle eq.[uazioni] diff.[erenziali] lin.[eari] in equaz.[ioni] lin.[eari] aile differenze, e viceversa" F.C.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 212

 R. Rosso

 spin to a redigerla è stato il vedere che il Sig. Mellin, nell' ultimo fascicolo degli Acta

 pubblico un teorema che è un caso molto, ma molto particolare della trasformazione
 che ho indicata.

 Suo S. Pincherle

 References

 Amaldi, U. 1937. Delia vita e delle opere di Salvatore Pincherle. In [Pincherle, 1954], 3-16.

 Appell, P. 1882a. Sur les fonctions uniformes d'un point analytique (je, y). Acta Mathematica 1:109-131.
 Appell, P. 1882b. Sur les fonctions uniformes d'un point analytique (x, y). (Seconde mémoire). Acta

 Mathematica 1:132-144.

 Boole, G. 1859. A treatise on differential equations. Cambridge, UK: Me Millan.

 Boole, G. 1880. Calculus of finite differences, Fourth Edition, edited by J.F. Moulton. New York: Chelsea

 Bortolotti, E. 1895. Un contribute alia teoria delle forme lineari aile differenze. Annali di Matematicapura

 Bortolotti, E. 1937. Salvatore Pincherle. Annuario délia Regia Università di Bologna 1936-37,151-156.
 Bottazzini, U. 1994. Va' Pensiero. Immagini della Matematica nell'Italia dell'Ottocento. Bologna: II

 Bottazzini, U„ and J. Gray. 2013. Hidden harmony-geometric fantasies. The rise of complex function theory.

 Butzer, P.L. 1981. An outline of the life and work of Ε. B. Christoffel (1829-1900). Historia Mathematica

 Publishing Company.

 ed applicata 23(S. II): 309-344.

 Mulino.

 New York: Springer.

 8: 243-276.

 Casorati, Ε 1868. Teorica delle funzioni di variabili complesse. Volume I. Tip. F.Ui Fusi, Pavia.

 Casorati, F. 1875. Sulla teoria delle soluzioni singolari delle equazioni differenziali. Rendiconti del Reale

 Istituto Lombarde di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti 8(S. 2): 962-966. In [Casorati, 1952], 9-14.

 Casorati, F. 1876. Nuova teoria delle soluzioni singolari delle equazioni differenziali di primo ordine e

 secondo grado tra due variabili. Atti della Reale Accademia dei Lincei 3(S. II): 160-167. In [Casorati,
 1952], 15-24.

 Casorati, F. 1878a. Analisi superiore nello [Anno] scolastico 1878-79. Pavia: Unpublished material in the

 Casorati, F. 1878b. Sulla integrazione delle equazioni algebrico-differenziali di primo ordine e di primo
 grado per mezzo di funzioni lineari. Rendiconti del Reale Istituto Lombarde di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti
 11(S. II): 804-808. In [Casorati, 1952], 96-101.

 Casorati, F. 1879. Analisi superiore nello [Anno] scolastico 1879-80. Pavia: Unpublished material in the

 Casorati Nachlass.

 Casorati Nachlass.

 Casorati, F. 1880a. Sull'equazione fondamentale nella teoria delle equazioni differenziali lineari. Rendiconti

 del Reale Istituto Lombarde di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti 13(S. II): 176-182. In [Casorati, 1952], 102-108.

 Casorati, F. 1880b. II calcolo delle differenze finite interpretato ed accresciuto di nuovi teoremi a sussidio

 principalmente delle odierne ricerche basate sulla variabilité complessa. Annali di Matematica pura ed
 applicata 10(S. II): 10-45. In [Casorati, 1951], 317-356.

 Casorati, F. 1880c. Sopra un recentissimo scritto del sig. L. Stickelberger. Annali di Matematica pura ed

 applicata 10(S. II): 154-157. In [Casorati, 1951], 357-361.

 Casorati, F. 1881a. Sur la distinction des intégrales des équations différentielles linéaires en sous-groupes.
 Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des séances de l'Académie des Sciences 92: 175-178; 238-241. In
 [Casorati, 1952], 109-115.

 Casorati, F. 1881b. Sur un écrit très-récent de M. Stickelberger. Pavia: Tip. F.Ui Fusi.
 Casorati, F. 1886a. Les fonctions d'une seule variable à un nombre quelconque de périodes. Acta Mathe

 matica 8: 345-359. In [Casorati, 1951], 223-238.

 Casorati, F. 1886b. Les lieux fondamentaux des fonctions inverses des intégrales abéliennes et en particulier

 des fonctions inverses des intégrales elliptiques de 2me et 3me espèce. Acta Mathematica 8: 360-386.

 In [Casorati, 1951], 239-265.

 Casorati, F. 1951. Opere, vol. I. Roma: Cremonese.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle 213

 Casorati, F. 1952. Opere, vol. II. Roma: Cremonese.
 Cauchy, A.-L. 1827. Sur l'analogie des puissances et des différences. In Exercices de Mathématique II

 année. In Œuvres Complètes d'Augustin Cauchy 7(S. II): 198-235 (1889).

 Cazzaniga, P. 1882. Il calcolo dei simboli d'operazione elementarmente esposto. Giornale di Matematiche

 20:48-78; 194-230.

 Christoffel, E.B. 1858. Ueberdie lineare Abhângigkeitvon Functioneneinereinzigen Verândlichen. Journal

 fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 55: 281-299.

 Christoffel, E.B. 1910. Zusatz zu der vorstehenden Abhandlung ûber die lineare Abhàngigkeit von Funk

 tionen einer einzigen Veranderlichen. In Gesammelte mathematische Abhandlungen, unter Mitwirkung
 von A. Krazer und G. Faber; herausgegeben von L. Maurer. I Band, 106-109. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Cremona, L. 1862. Introduzione ad una teoria geometrica delle curve piane. Bologna: Tip. Gamberini e

 Daniels, A.L. 1883a. Note on Weierstrass' methods in the theory of elliptic functions. American Journal of

 Daniels, A.L. 1883b. Second note on Weierstrass' theory of elliptic functions. American Journal of Math

 Parmeggiani.

 Mathematics 6: 177-182.

 ematics 6: 253-269.

 7: 82-99.

 Daniels, A.L. 1884. Third note on Weierstrass' theory of elliptic functions. American Journal of Mathematics

 Darboux, G., Houël, J., and Tannery, J. 1882. Revue des publications académiques et périodiques. Bulletin

 des Sciences Mathématiques et Astronomiques 62(S. II): 106-110.

 Dedekind, R., and H. Weber. 1882. Theorie der algebraischen Functionen einer Verândlichen. Journal flr

 die reine und angewandte Mathematik 92: 181-290.

 Dugac, P. 1989. Henri Poincaré. La correspondance avec des mathématiciens de J à Z. Cahiers du Séminaire

 Floquet, G. 1883. Sur les équations différentielles linéaires à coefficents périodiques. Annales scientifiques

 d'Histoire des Mathématiques 10: 83-229.

 de l'École Normale Supérieure 12(S. II): 47-88.

 Hoquet, G. 1884. Sur les équations différentielles linéaires à coefficents doublement périodiques. Annales

 scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure 1(S. III): 181-238.

 Fuchs, J.L. 1866. Zur Theorie der linearen Differentialgleichungen mit verhândlicher Coefficienten. Journal

 fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 66: 121-160.

 Goursat, E. 1883. Sur une classe des fonctions représentées per des intégrales définies. Acta Mathematica

 2:1-71.

 11(S. III): 249-323.

 Teubner.

 Gray, J. 1986. Linear differential equations and group theoryfrom Riemann to Poincaré. Boston: Birkhâuser.

 Gray, J. 2013. Henri Poincaré: A scientific biography. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 Grévy, A. 1894. Étude sur les équations fonctionnelles. Annales scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure

 Guldberg, Α., and G. Wallenberg. 1911. Theorie der Linearen Differenzengleichungen. Leipzig und Berlin:

 Halphen, G.-H. 1884. Sur la réduction des équations différentielles linéaires aux formes intégrables.
 Mémoires présentés par divers savants à l'Académie des Sciences 28(S. Π): 1884,1-301. In Œuvres de
 G.-H. Halphen vol. III, 1-260. Paris: Gauthier-Villars (1921).

 Hamburger, H.L. 1873. Bemerkung iiber die Form der Integrate der linearen Differentialgleichungen mit

 verândlichen Coefficienten. Journal fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 76: 113-125.

 Hermite, C. 1849. Sur une question relative à la théorie des nombres. Journal de Mathématiques pures et

 Hermite, C. 1881. Sur quelques points de la théorie des fonctions. Journal fur die reine und angewandte

 appliquées 14(S. 1): 21-30.

 Mathematik 91: 54-78.

 Kronecker, L. 1882. Grundziige einer arithmetische Theorie der algebraischen Grôssen. Journal fir die

 reine und angewandte Mathematik 92: 1-122.

 Mellin, H. 1886. Zur Theorie der Gammafunctionen. Acta Mathematica 8: 37-80.

 Muir, T. 1911. The theory of determinants in the historical order of development. Vol. II: The period

 1841-1860. London: MacMillan.

 1880-1900. London: MacMillan.

 Exact Sciences 19: 1-89.

 Muir, T. 1923. The theory of determinants in the historical order of development. Vol. IV: The period

 Neuenschwander, E. 1978. Der Nachlass von Casorati (1835-1890) in Pavia. Archive for the History of

 Nôrlund, N.E. 1924. Vorlesungen iiber Differenzenrechnung. Berlin: Springer.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 214

 R. Rosso

 Pascal, Β. 1835. Les Pensées. Rétablies suivant le plan de l'auteur. Dijon: Lagier.
 Pascal, Ε. 1897a. Calcolo delle variazioni e calcolo delle differenze finite. (Ill parte del Calcolo infinitesi

 male). Milan: Hoepli.

 Pascal, E. 1897b. 1 determinanti. Teoria ed applicazioni con tutte le più recenti ricerche. Milan: Hoepli.

 Picard, É. 1879. Sur une généralisation des fonctions périodiques et sur certaines équations différentielles

 linéaires. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des séances de l'Académie des Sciences 89: 140-144.
 Picard, E. 1881. Sur les équations différentielles linéaires à coefficients doublement périodiques. Journal

 for die reine und angewandte Mathematik 90: 281-303.

 Pincherle, S. 1874. Sulle superficie di capillarità. Il Nuovo Cimento 12(S. II): 19-64.
 Pincherle, S. 1875. Sulle costanti di capillarità. Il Nuovo Cimento 14(S. II): 17-25.
 Pincherle, S. 1876a. Sopra alcuni problemi relativi aile superficie d'area minima. Rendiconti del Reale

 Istituto Lombardo di Lettere, Scienze edArti 9(S. 2): 444-456.

 Pincherle, S. 1876b. Sulle superficie d'area minima. Programma del R. Istituto Foscolo di Pavia. Pavia:

 Succ. Bizzoni.

 Pincherle, S. 1876c. Nota sulle superficie d'area minima. Giornale di Matematiche 14: 75-82.

 Pincherle, S. 1877. Sulle equazioni algebrico-differenziali di primo ordine e di primo grado a primitiva
 generate algebrica. Rendiconti del Reale Istituto Lombardo di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti 10(S. II): 143—
 151.

 Pincherle, S. 1880. Saggio di una introduzione alla teoria delle funzioni analitiche secondo i principii del

 Prof. C. Weierstrass. Giornale di Matematiche 18: 178-254; 317-357.

 Pincherle, S. 1884a. Sui sistemi di funzioni analitiche e gli sviluppi in serie formati coi medesimi. Annali

 di Matematica pura ed applicata 12(S. II): 11-41; 107-133.

 Pincherle, S. 1884b. Sui gruppi lineari di funzioni di una variabile. Memorie délia Reale Accademia delle

 Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna 6(S. IV): 101-118.

 Pincherle, S. 1885a. Alcune osservazioni generali sui gruppi di funzioni. Memorie délia Reale Accademia

 delle Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna 6(S. IV): 205-214.

 Pincherle, S. 1885b. Note sur une intégrale définie. Acta Mathematica 7: 381-386.

 Pincherle, S. 1886a. Sopra una trasformazione delle equazioni differenziali lineari in equazioni lineari aile

 differenze, e viceversa. Rendiconti del Reale Istituto Lombardo di Lettere, Scienze ed Arti 19(S. II):
 559-562.

 Pincherle, S. 1886b. Studi sopra alcune operazioni funzionali. Memorie délia Reale Accademia delle Scienze

 dell'Istituto di Bologna 7(S. IV): 391^142. In [Pincherle, 1954], 92-141.

 Pincherle, S. 1887. Delia trasformazione di Laplace e di alcune sue applicazioni. Memorie delta Reale

 Accademia delle Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna 8(S. IV): 125-143. In [Pincherle, 1954], 173-192.

 Pincherle, S. 1890. Saggio di una generalizzazione delle frazioni continue algebriche. Memorie délia Reale

 Accademia delle Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna 10(S. IV): 513-538.

 Pincherle, S. 1892. Sur la génération de systèmes récurrents au moyen d'une équation linéaire différentielle.

 Acta Mathematica 16: 341-363.

 Pincherle, S. 1894. Delle funzioni ipergeometriche e di varie questioni ad esse attinenti. Giornale di

 Matematiche 32: 209-291. In [Pincherle, 1954], 273-357.

 Pincherle, S. 1895a. Lalgebra delle forme lineari aile differenze. Memorie délia Reale Accademia delle

 Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna 5(S. V): 87-126.

 Pincherle, S. 1895b. Sulle operazioni funzionali distributive. Rendiconti délia Reale Accademia dei Lincei

 Pincherle, S. 1895c. Sopra alcune equazioni simboliche. Memorie délia Reale Accademia delle Scienze

 dell'Istituto di Bologna 5(S. V): 663-675.

 Pincherle, S., and U. Amaldi. 1901. Le operazioni distributive e le loro applicazioni all'analisi. Bologna:

 4j: 142-149.

 Zanichelli.

 Pincherle, S. 1909. Lezioni di Algebra Complementare. II: Teoria delle equazioni. Bologna: Zanichelli.
 Pincherle, S. 1926. Il calcolo delle differenze finite. Bollettino deU'Unione Matematica Italiana 5:233-242.

 Pincherle, S. 1954. Opere scelte, vol. I. Roma: Cremonese.

 Poincaré, H. 1885. Sur les équations linéaires aux différentielles ordinaires et aux différences finies. Amer

 ican Journal of Mathematics 7: 203-258.

 Poincaré, H. 1923. Extrait d'une Mémoire inédit de Henri Poincaré sur les fonctions Fuchsiennes. Acta

 Puiseux, V. 1850. Recherches sur les fonctions algébriques. Journal de Mathématiques pures et appliquées

 Mathematica 39: 58-93.

 15(S. 1): 365-480.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Felice Casorati's influence on Salvatore Pincherle 215

 Riemann, Β. 1857. Beitràge zur Theorie der Gauss'schen Reihe F (a, β, γ, χ) darstellbaren Functionen.

 Abhandlungen der Koniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaflen zu Gottingen, vol. 7. In Bernhard Rie

 mann's Gesammelte mathematische Werke und wissenschaflicher Nachlass, 62-78. Leipzig: Teubner
 (1902).

 Rosanes, J. 1871. Ueber algebraische Differentialgleichungen erster Ordnung. Mathematische Annalen 3:

 Stickelberger, L. 1881. Zur Theorie der linearen Differentialgleichungen. Leipzig: Teubner.
 Tannery, J. 1875. Propriétés des intégrales des équations différentielles linéaires à coefficients variables.

 Annales Scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure 4(S. II): 113-182.

 Tonelli, L. 1937. Salvatore Pincherle. Annali délia Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa 6(S. II): 1-10.
 Vivanti, G. 1887. Ricerche sulle funzioni uniformi d'un punto analitico. Giornale di Matematiche 25:54-72;

 535-546.

 232-256.

 Volterra, V. 1902. Betti, Brioschi, Casorati, trois analystes italiens et trois manières d'envisager les questions

 d'analyse. In Compte rendu du II Congrès international des mathématiciens, Paris 1900,43-57. In Opere
 Matematiche. Memorie e Note, ed. V. Volterra, vol. III (1900-1913), 1-11. Roma: Accademia Nazionale
 dei Lincei (1957).

 Weierstrass, Κ. 1876. Zur Theorie der eindeutigen analytischen Functionen. Abhandlungen der Koniglichen
 Akademie der Wissenschaflen zu Berlin, 11-66. In Mathematische Werke von Karl Weierstrass, Band II,
 77-124. Berlin: Mayer and Millier (1895).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

