 

 

 

 

Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology: The roots of 'topological space' in

geometry
Author(s): Laura Rodríguez
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 1 (January 2015), pp. 55-102
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569650
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:53 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569650?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:55-102
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-014-0144-6

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology

 The roots of ‘topological space’ in geometry

 Laura Rodriguez

 Received:17 August 2013 / Published online:1 October 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract In 1906, Frigyes Riesz introduced a preliminary version of the notion of

 a topological space. He called it a mathematical continuum. This development can

 be traced back to the end of 1904 when, genuinely interested in taking up Hilbert's

 foundations of geometry from 1902, Riesz aimed to extend Hilbert's notion of a

 two-dimensional manifold to the three-dimensional case. Starting with the plane as

 an abstract point-set, Hilbert had postulated the existence of a system of neighbour

 hoods, thereby introducing the notion of an accumulation point for the point-sets of

 the plane. Inspired by Hilbert's technical approach, as well as by recent developments

 in analysis and point-set topology in France, Riesz defined the concept of a mathe

 matical continuum as an abstract set provided with a notion of an accumulation point.

 In addition, he developed further elementary concepts in abstract point-set topology.

 Taking an abstract topological approach, he formulated â concept of three-dimensional
 continuous space that resembles the modern concept of a three-dimensional topolog

 ical manifold. In 1908, Riesz presented his concept of mathematical continuum at the

 International Congress of Mathematicians in Rome. His lecture immediately won the

 attention of people interested in carrying on his research. They promoted his ideas,

 thus assuring their gradual reception by several future founders of general topology.

 In this way, Riesz's work contributed significantly to the emergence of this discipline.

 1 Introduction

 The problem of characterising the continuity of space is rooted in the study of the foun

 dations of geometry. Although in the history of geometry space has been commonly

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 L. Rodriguez (区）

 University of Applied Sciences Fulda, Marquardstr. 35, 36039 Fulda, Germany
 e-mail: Laura.Rodriguez@verw.hs-fulda.de

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 必 Springer

 56 し Rodriguez

 assumed to De continuous, continuity has been understood over the centuries in dif

 ferent ways, depending on the methods at hand.

 In the second half of the nineteenth century, the study of the foundations of geom

 etry was challenged by the emergence of new geometries. An extensive discussion

 arose that went hand in hand with a philosophical reflection on the relation between

 the axioms of geometry and physical space. The discussion was motivated, in partic

 ular, by Bernhard Riemann's notion of an «-dimensional manifold because it opened

 diverse possibilities for a mathematical description of physical space. In the last decade

 of the nineteenth century, the discussion reached a climax with the so-called Riemann

 Helmholtz-Lie space problem, a problem that had implications for the postulates of

 geometry and for the treatment of the continuity of space. Continuous space was

 understood by Riemann and Hermann von Helmholtz as a differentiable manifold, by

 Sophus Lie simply as a number manifold (Zahlenmannifaltigkeit), i.e. Rn or Cn. To

 reduce continuous space to Riemann's notion of an n-dimensional manifold brought

 into view another aspect of space: continuity as a local property. This aspect was

 highlighted by Lie's treatment of the concept of motion as an infinitesimal continuous

 transformation. The characterisations of the local continuity of space given by Rie

 mann, Helmholtz and Lie all rested on analytical methods, which were the common
 ones at that time.

 Around 1900, new mathematical techniques were available that seemed likely to be

 helpful in grasping the notion of the continuity of space. They arose from the devel

 opment of analysis situs and from recent contributions to the foundations of analysis

 that were closely related to the establishment of Georg Cantor's point-set topology.1
 Hence, when Hilbert (1902b, 1903) reconsidered Lie's treatment of the foundations of

 geometry, he used a point-set topological approach and resorted to concepts of analy
 sis situs for the characterisation of continuity as a local property. Hilbert succeeded

 in providing an axiomatic foundation for two-dimensional geometry that started with

 only continuity assumptions. Part of his success was due to his definition of the plane

 as a two-dimensional manifold because it allowed him to use the point-set topology

 of R2. But Hilbert's achievements still left unanswered the question of how to char

 acterise three-dimensional continuous space in a study of geometry that starts with

 continuity assumptions only. It is precisely this question, the challenge of extending

 Hilbert's concept of the plane to a three-dimensional manifold, that I will refer to as

 Hilbert's continuity of space problem.

 This challenge was taken up in 1904 by Frigyes Riesz, a young Hungarian mathe

 matician, who later became best known for his work on functional analysis. First as a

 student and then in the early years of his career, Riesz investigated questions related

 to Hilbert's work on geometry. In fact, Riesz's early mathematical work (1904-1908)

 was marked as much by nis involvement with Hilbert's work on geometry and analy

 sis as by his interest in the developments of analysis in France. He was particularly

 1 I will use the name ‘(abstract) point-set topology' to designate the historical research area concerned

 with the study of topological properties of sets of points such as closed, open, dense. In this way, I attempt

 to present a compromise between the historical name ‘(abstract) point-set theory' and the modern name

 'general topology'. Thus, the terms ‘topology，and 'topological' will refer here to a research area rather

 than to a system of neighbourhoods.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 57

 interested in the work carried out by Emile Borel, Henri Lebesgue, René Baire and

 Maurice Fréchet. The fact that point-set topological methods had assumed a central

 role in both Hilbert's work on geometry from 1902 and contemporary French analy

 sis was the core of Riesz's motivation in approaching Hilbert's continuity of space

 problem. Hilbert's technical approach motivated Riesz to search for a point-set topo

 logical characterisation of continuous space that might be useful for both geometry
 and (functional-) analysis.

 The present essay traces back Riesz's early work on set theory and abstract point-set

 topology to Hilbert's continuity of space problem through the following sequence of

 events: in November 1904, Riesz wrote to Hilbert about his research on set theory

 and its application to the concept of continuous space. In January 1905, he submitted

 an article on the pure set-theoretical part of his investigations to the Mathematischen

 Annalen, ajournai which was at that time co-edited by Hilbert. The paper appeared that

 same year (1905c). In July 1905, he attended a meeting of the Gôttingen Mathematical

 Society and presented the research he had communicated to Hilbert in his November

 letter.2 However, his results concerning the space problem were never published in

 Gottingen. They appeared instead in Hungary in 1906. Thus, it would seem that Riesz

 failed to gain Hilbert's support for this aspect of his work. The original Hungarian

 version of his article was entitled ‘The origin of the notion of space’ (Riesz 1907a).

 Fortunately, its German version 'Die Genesis des Raumbegriffs' (the Genesis, for

 short) appeared soon in an Hungarian international journal (Riesz 1906b). It is thanks

 to the German version that I was able to understand that Riesz intended to approach

 Hilbert's continuity of space problem. In order to do so, he had started to develop an

 abstract point-set theory, a theory that today is known as general topology.

 It is not a new discovery that the Genesis contains a pioneer contribution to the

 development of an abstract point-set topology. Prior to this essay, other historians
 have referred to the Genesis in this way.3 The first relevant reference to the Gen

 esis was made by Taylor (1982) in a paper dedicated to Frechét's early work on
 point-set theory.4 There Taylor not only summarises Riesz's rudimentary theory of
 mathematical continua but also rightly points out that Riesz did not use the word

 ’topology’，a term which together with today's notion of topological space was first

 introduced by Felix Hausdorff (1914). Referring to the Genesis Taylor (1982, p. 268)
 remarks:

 This paper is not, in the main, about general point-set topology, either concrete

 or abstract. It is a quasi-philosophical paper in which Riesz attempts to construct

 a mathematical model for the geometry of space as needed or used in physics.

 In so doing he formulated a notion of what he called a mathematical continuum.

 This notion is, in fact, that of an abstract space with a rudimentary topology
 defined axiomatically.

 2 See the report of the 12th meeting from 25 July 1905 in Jahresbericht der DMV 14(1905).

 3 E.g. Manheim (1964), Johnson (1981)，Taylor (1982)，Thron (1997) and more recently Purkert et al.
 (2002).

 4 Manheim (1964) discusses the Genesis very shortly.

 自 Spring* :er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Taylor's emphasis on the ‘quasi-philosophical’ character of Riesz's paper indicates
 that he, and with him all other historians of mathematics who have discussed the

 Genesis after him, overlooked Riesz's genuine interest in geometry. Because of its

 complexity many sections of the Genesis were never read. Only its introduction and

 two of 14 sections found attention. Historians have approached the Genesis only

 from the viewpoint of history of general topology. Therefore, they have focused on

 Riesz、rudimentary theory of mathematical continua, recognising it rightly (as well as

 Fréchet's works from 1904 to 1906) as a pioneer's contributions to abstract point-set

 58 L. Rodriguez

 topology.

 Thus, it has been ignored until now that Riesz's contribution emerged in a broad

 scientific context that included not only current philosophical and scientific discussions

 about space but also research on the foundations of geometry at that time.5 In order

 to understand Riesz's aims in the Genesis, it is worth going through the other twelve

 sections, which are indeed difficult to read, and whose contents will appear weird to

 the modern reader. In fact, Riesz's project is as brilliant and fascinating as Kepler's

 ‘Mysterium cosmographicum’，but, just as the latter, it does not work. It is the project

 of a mathematician attempting to find a mathematical model for the space of our
 sensations.6

 Unfortunately, most of the fascinating passages of the Genesis will be discussed

 only superficially, if at all, because they fall beyond the scope of this essay. Here, I

 investigate how Riesz's concept of a ‘mathematical continuum’ evolved from Hilbert's

 work on the foundations of geometry, and especially from Hilbert's continuity of space

 problem.7

 We start in Sect. 2 with Hilbert's work on the foundations of geometry and its

 relation to his fifth Paris mathematical problem. Then, I present Hilbert's notion of
 a two-dimensional continuous space and the problem of generalising it to higher
 dimensions (Hilbert's continuity of space problem). I then analyse Hilbert's use of

 topological methods on an abstract set, which he presented at a time when the concept

 of topology did not yet exist.8 This analysis plays a key role in my attempt to show

 the relation of Riesz's concept of mathematical continuum with Hilbert's continuity

 of space problem from a technical mathematical viewpoint.

 In Sect. 3,1 summarise Riesz's early contributions to analysis situs, point-set topol

 ogy and theory of multiple order types pointing to two important aspects of Riesz's

 research:(1)his interest in applications of Cantor's point-set theory to the development

 5 The exceptions are Johnson (1981) who gives a brief but accurate summary of the Genesis, and a few

 remarks in Gray's (2008) Plato's Ghost where the doctoral thesis of Rodriguez (2006) is acknowledged.

 6 For an extensive description of the Genesis, see my thesis (Rodriguez 2006, chap. 5-8).

 7 The present article extends certain results that I presented in my thesis (Rodriguez 2006). Besides, it
 offers a focused discussion on both the relation of Riesz's early work to Hilbert's work on the foundations

 of geometry and Riesz's treatment of Hilbert's continuity of space problem in the Genesis.

 8 Hilbert's concept of two-dimensional continuous space has repeatedly been object of study in the history
 of mathematics, principally by Scholz (1999). In Purkert et al. (2002), Hilbert's concept is discussed in

 connection with the history of the concept of manifold and the history of Hausdorff's concept of topological

 space. However, as far as I know, such a technical analysis of Hilbert's way of doing point-set topology on

 the plane has not yet been presented in published form.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 59

 of analysis in France and (2) his interest in problems related to Hilbert's foundations

 of geometry.

 Following the chronological flow of events, Sect. 3.4 provides an insight into two

 letters addressed to Hilbert in which Riesz communicated his recent research. Finally,

 in Sect. 41 discuss Riesz、concept of a ‘mathematical continuum’ and the rudimentary

 abstract point-set topology he developed from it. There I explain how Riesz intended

 to apply that framework to Hilbert's continuity of space problem. In Sect. 5, the

 methods and concepts used by Hilbert and Riesz in their own attempts to characterise

 continuous space are compared, as well as their notions of continuous space.

 Section 6 is dedicated to the reception of Riesz's ideas in the context of general

 topology. In preparation, I briefly discuss the lecture Riesz gave at the International
 Congress of Mathematicians in Rome in 1908. This lecture was published in the

 congress proceedings (Riesz 1909). That was the only occasion in which Riesz pre

 sented the work he started in the Genesis. From now on, I will refer to this paper as
 Riesz's Rome lecture.

 2 Hilbert's continuity of space problem

 In 1900, David Hilbert emerged as a leading mathematician in Germany. At the sec

 ond International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris, where he was invited to give

 a plenary lecture, he presented his famous list of 23 mathematical problems. The

 fifth focused on the foundations of geometry and specifically, the continuity of space

 problem.

 In response to this problem, Hilbert produced two papers (1902b; 1903). They
 contain an approach to the foundations of geometry that was entirely different from

 the one in his celebrated book ‘Grundlagen der Geometrie’ of 1899 (Hilbert 1956).

 Both papers are called ‘On the Foundations of Geometry, (‘Ueber die Grundlagen der

 Geometrie’). The first appeared in the GottingerNachrichten and consisted essentially
 of a sketch of his second paper which was published in the Mathematischen Annalen.
 I will refer to the former as memoir，to the latter as his Annalennote, and to his book

 as Festschrift.9

 2.1 Hilbert's fifth mathematical Paris problem

 Hilbert's fifth Paris problem was based on the so-called Riemann-Helmhohz-Lie

 space problem. From the perspective of mechanics, Hermann von Helmholtz had

 investigated the question of which of all the possible spaces opened to exploration by

 Riemann's notion of three-dimensional manifold could best describe physical space.10

 He was of the opinion that in those optimal spaces, measurement has to be possible, and

 that only these spaces deserved the name of geometry. Helmholtz postulated that the

 possibility of measurement rests upon the existence of rigid bodies that can be trans

 9 Hilbert let his Annalennote appear in the appendix of his Festschrift from its third edition (1903) on (e.g.
 Hilbert 1956, pp. 178-230).

 10 It was Lie who called the task set forth by Helmholtz 'Riemann-Helmholtz space problem'.

 公 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 60 L. Rodriguez

 ported everywhere without suffering any deformations. This is known as Helmholtz's

 postulate of the free mobility of rigid bodies. Starting from this postulate, Helmholtz

 succeeded in limiting the class of geometries to the now so-called simply connected

 three-dimensional manifolds with constant curvature, namely the Euclidean, the non

 Euclidean Bolyai-Lobachevsky，the spherical and the elliptical geometries. Although

 his ideas were essentially valid, his mathematics was rather deficient.11 Around 1890,

 Sophus Lie managed to correct Helmholtz's ideas by formalising the notion of motion

 using his concept of an infinitesimal transformation group that he had used in his

 general theory of continuous groups. However, Lie's approach depended on certain

 differentiability assumptions concerning the functions that defined the group. Hilbert

 found these assumptions unsatisfactory.

 In Paris, Hilbert discussed his fifth problem as follows:

 It is well known that Lie, with the aid of the concept of continuous groups

 of transformations, has set up a system of geometrical axioms and, from the

 standpoint of his theory of groups, has proven that this system of axioms suffices

 for geometry. But since Lie assumes, in the very foundation of his theory, that the

 functions defining his group can be differentiated, it remains undecided in Lie's

 development, whether the assumption of the differentiability in connection with

 the question as to the axioms of geometry is actually unavoidable, or whether

 it may not appear rather as a consequence of the group concept and the other

 geometrical axioms.12

 Thus, Hilbert was wondering whether the differentiability assumptions imposed by

 Lie had to be included. He suspected that it was possible to find both a more suitable

 system of axioms for geometry and a more appropriate characterisation of the con

 tinuity of the group of transformations so that the differentiability properties would
 follow as a necessary consequence and would not need to be included among the
 assumptions. Hence, from the perspective of Hilbert's famous axiomatic approach in

 his Festschrift of 1899, the task Hilbert was setting forth concerned the mutual inde

 pendence of the elementary assumptions. This issue, typical in Hilbert's foundations

 of geometry, can be summarised in the following question: how far can geometry be

 established using a group-theoretical approach and starting merely from continuity

 assumptions?

 It is precisely in these terms that Hilbert explained his new approach to the foun

 dations of geometry in his Annalennote:

 There [in his Festschrift, LR] the axioms were arranged in such a way that

 continuity is assumed after all the rest of the axioms as the last one, so that

 naturally the question arises as to what extent are the known theorems and results

 of elementary geometry dependent on any continuity assumptions. In the present

 11 This summary of Riemann-Helmholtz-Lie problem up to Lie's contribution is based on the one given

 by Torretti (1978, pp. 155-178). In the discussion ofHilbert's contribution, I distance myself from Torretti's

 following my own interpretation.

 12 Translated for the Bulletin of the AMS, with the author's permission, by Dr. Mary Winston Newson’，

 Hilbert (1902a, p. 451); original German version in Hilbert (1900, p. 269).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 61

 paper, continuity is assumed on the contrary before any other axiom, from the

 very beginning, via the definitions of plane and motion, so that the main task

 consists of finding out the least possible number of assumptions from which

 (and making extensive use of the continuity property) the elementary objects of

 geometry (circle and line) can be obtained as well as those properties that are

 necessary to establish geometry.13

 Thus, in this new approach ‘continuity，is a fundamental concept and as such, Hilbert

 intended to make extensive use of it as a property of both the plane and motion in a

 plane, so as to find out the least possible number of further assumptions necessary to

 establish geometry.

 From a technical point of view, two questions need to be addressed: how is the

 concept of a continuous space to be defined? and how is the concept of a continuous

 group to be defined? This last question is not of further interest to us here. It is sufficient
 to mention that its solution is known as the solution of Hilbert、fifth mathematical

 problem. Its importance is associated with the emergence of a whole new branch of

 mathematics: the theory of topological groups.14 The question I will deal with is: how

 to define the notion of a continuous space?

 2.2 Hilbert's concept of continuous space

 As a first approach to the concept of a continuous space, Hilbert chose Riemann's

 notion of an n-dimensional manifold. Until the end of the nineteenth century, this

 notion had not been clearly defined but was commonly understood as a ‘number
 manifold', i.e. a subset of Rn or Cn. Hilbert did not resort to Lie's and Helmholtz's

 concept of an «-dimensional differentiable manifold. Instead he formulated his own

 definition of a two-dimensional manifold. His notion corresponds to today's concept

 of a topological two-dimensional manifold.

 Hilbert methodically explored a new approach to continuity by incorporating recent

 point-set topological practices in analysis. As a result, Hilbert succeeded in formulating

 the most accurate definition of the concept of two-dimensional manifold at the time.15

 From Cantor's point-set theory, he took elementary concepts such as open, closed,

 dense and perfect sets. Most importantly, he resorted to the characterisation of contin

 uous functions by means of the notions of convergence of a sequence, limit point and

 accumulation point. From analysis situs，Hilbert used the concept of a closed Jordan

 curve, the Jordan curve theorem and a converse of the Jordan curve theorem (a charac

 terisation of a closed Jordan curve using methods of both point-set topology and analy

 sis situs). Analysis situs was a research area that primarily concerned with the study of

 qualitative relations of space that are independent of any metric relation characteristic

 of geometry, e.g. connectedness and the reciprocal position of bodies in space.

 13 Hilbert (1903)，422; reprint in Hilbert (1956), 230, my translation.

 14 For an overview, see Browder (1974), Aleksandrov (1998), Rowe (1995). On the history of topological
 groups in conjunction with Hilbert's fifth problem, see Hawkins (1999).

 15 On the history of the concept of manifold, see Scholz (1999).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 62 L. Rodriguez

 2.3 Neighbourhoods and Jordan domains

 The fundamental concept in Hilbert's characterisation of continuous space was the

 notion of a neighbourhood. He defined it in terms of Jordan domains in R2 and of

 what today are called coordinate functions.

 By a Jordan domain, Hilbert understood the interior of a closed Jordan curve in

 R2, i.e. the interior of a plane, continuous curve without multiple points.16 Then, he

 defined a system of neighbourhoods in the plane by means of a system of bijective

 images of Jordan domains (under the coordinate functions) that satisfy certain axioms.

 Clearly, Hilbert was relying on the Jordan curve theorem that asserts that every

 closed Jordan curve separates the plane into two domains: the interior, a bounded

 simply connected domain in Riemann's sense, and the exterior.17

 2.4 Axiomatising the system of neighbourhoods

 In his memoir, Hilbert presented two definitions of the plane. The first one is rather

 more general than the second, which is the only one that he actually used in his Annalen

 note. According to Hilbert's memoir，the definition of the plane as two-dimensional
 manifold reads in modern notation as follows:

 The plane £ is a point-set in which to each point p there corresponds a family

 of so-called neighbourhoods formed by sets U ç. E containing p. The system of
 neighbourhoods fulfils six axioms.

 1• For every neighbourhood, there exists a one-to-one mapping onto a Jordan domain

 [In line with modern terminology I call these mappings coordinate functions.].

 2. Let V be a Jordan domain such that ノー1(y) is a neighbourhood of p and let ひ ç V

 be any other Jordan domain with j(p) e U, then the converse image j-1(U) is
 also a neighbourhood of p.

 3. If a neighbourhood has two different images, then the corresponding coordinate

 change is a continuous mapping，i.e. let (p : U V and 妒：ひ—W be two
 coordinate functions of the same neighbourhood U onto the Jordan domains V
 and W, then the coordinate change cp . 0"1:V W is a bijective continuous
 mapping from V C H2 onto W C E2.

 16 Hilbert (1902b, p. 234). Toiretti (1978, p. 186) has rightly pointed out that Hilbert understood a closed
 Jordan curve to be a continuous function f : [a, b] c R — R2, such that / is injective on (a, b) and
 / ⑷=f(b).

 17 The Jordan curve theorem was established by Camille Jordan in his 'Cours d'analyse’ in 1893. Although

 the theorem seems trivially true, the proof Jordan provided was not simple. Already at the beginning of the

 twentieth century, there were several mathematicians who found Jordan's proof unsatisfactory and offered

 their own proofs, Veblen (1905) and Brouwer (1910) among others. Following Hales (2007), however, who

 recently verified Jordan's original proof, the credit for the first correct proof can go to Jordan. I thank Jeremy

 Gray for pointing me to this paper of Hales. See Guggenheimer (1977) for a recount of further attempts to

 prove the Jordan curve theorem prior to Brouwer's proof from 1910. Guggenheimer (1977) also reported

 on a manuscript found in Max Dehn's Archives containing a proof of the Jordan curve theorem that Dehn

 worked out around 1900. In that year, Dehn, who was a student ofHilbert's, finished his thesis on foundations

 of geometry. Dehn never published his results. Guggenheimer seemed unaware of the importance of Dehn's

 proof for Hilbert's memoir. Thus, their connection remains to be investigated.

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 63

 <t>~1

 U
 u

 、© „©

 Fig.1 Axiom 3 states that the coordinate change (p ‘ 0~l : V — W is a bijective continuous mapping
 from V c R2 onto W c R2

 4. A neighbourhood U of p containing the point q is also a neighbourhood of q.

 5. For every two neighbourhoods U and V of p, there exists a neighbourhood W of

 p such that W c U DV.

 6. For any two points p，q of the plane, there exists a common neighbourhood.18

 Clearly, these axioms do not include any differentiability assumptions. Besides,

 as Scholz (1999) rightly pointed out, given that the system of Jordan domains deter

 mines what today is called a neighbourhood basis for the standard topology of E2,

 this system of axioms provides a sufficiently rich system of neighbourhoods so that, in

 modern terms, the plane is topologised as a C°-manifold, i.e. the system of neigh

 bourhoods defines a topology with respect to which all coordinate functions are
 continuous.19

 Hilbert's general concept of the plane comprises several aspects of the concept of

 continuity. The first axiom states that locally (i.e. inside every neighbourhood) the

 plane has as many points as any Jordan domain in E2. Hence, Hilbert regards car

 dinality as one criterion for continuity. From today's perspective, it can be said that
 axiom (2) together with axioms (4)-(6) stand for the characterisation of the local

 topology, since they guarantee that each neighbourhood is provided with a sufficiently
 rich system of neighbourhoods via the coordinate functions and the standard topol
 ogy of E2. Axiom (3) combines the topological with the analytical aspect of con
 tinuity, i.e. it combines the structure determined by the system of neighbourhoods

 with the analytical notion of continuous function. This is expressed by the simple
 fact that two images of a neighbourhood are topologically related to each other in
 such a way that the coordinate change is â continuous function from R2 to R2 (see
 Fig.1). ン

 In his Annalennote, Hilbert's ‘less general' definition of the plane, as he called it,

 does not include axiom (3) but assumes instead the existence of a global coordinate

 function k : E — B c R2 (see Fig. 2) that maps the whole plane E onto a bounded

 18 Hilbert (1902b), 234-235. The condition (2) is stated following Scholz (1999) who rightly translated
 Hilbert's unclear formulation.

 19 According to Scholz (1999), Hilbert's definition of the plane was the first attempt at an axiomatic

 definition of the concept of manifold. In Purkert et al. (2002), Scholz discusses Hilbert's memoir focusing

 on the historical relation between Hilbert's system of neighbourhoods and the concept of topological space. I

 take a different approach and focus on Hilbert's notion of accumulation point for the plane and consequently
 on the role played by his neighbourhoods axioms.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 â Springer

 64 し Rodriguez

 R2

 Fig. 2 In his Annalennote, Hilbert assumes the existence of a global coordinate function k that maps the
 whole plane E onto a bounded open domain B cB?

 E '

 E'

 Fig. 3 In Hilbert's Annalennote, a neighbourhood of a point p € £ is no longer a set in E but a Jordan
 domain J c B containing the image under k of pin E2

 open domain B c R2. This implies a restriction of the possible spaces on which he

 intended to establish geometry. It excludes the possibility of elliptic geometry.

 Furthermore, the Annalennote contains another very interesting redefinition of the

 concept of neighbourhood that not only shows a change in Hilbert's epistemic concep

 tion of this notion but is also an important clue for understanding of Hilbert's technical
 approach. While in his memoir, a neighbourhood of is a set U C E containing p
 that can be mapped one-to-one onto a Jordan domain in E2, in his Annalennote it is

 any Jordan domain 7 in B C R2 containing the image under k of p (see Fig. 3 and

 Hilbert (1903, p. 383)). That means that a neighbourhood of a point p € £ is no longer
 a subset of E but of R2.

 This identification of the system of neighbourhoods in the plane E with the system

 of Jordan domains in R2 went hand in hand with the restriction to hyperbolic and

 Euclidean geometry mentioned above. Technically, k is legitimated by the assumption

 of a global chart in conjunction with the other axioms. With this identification, Hilbert

 wanted to achieve a way of working only on B，the image under k of the plane E in

 R2. Why? Because Cantor's point-set topology ofE2 works in B and so does classical

 analysis.

 2.5 Motion and continuity

 â Springer

 That Hilbert wanted to reduce the analysis and the point-set topology of E to the

 analysis and the point-set topology of R2 seems evident in his definition of motion as
 a continuous function.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 65

 E2

 B

 B

 k.g.k-1

 ^ R2

 Fig. 4 Hilbert defined motion as a bijective mapping g : E — E such that the corresponding mapping

 k g'k"x :B B isa continuous mapping from B onto B, where B, the image under the global chart k，
 is a Jordan domain in R2. The continuity of a plane transformation is to be checked in E2

 A motion is a bijective continuous mapping from E onto itself preserving the

 orientation of any Jordan curve.20 The challenge consisted of defining the notion of

 'continuous mapping，from E onto E，because there was no theoretical framework

 available at that time that would enable one to define a 'continuous mapping’ on the

 abstract set E; theories about abstract topological and metrical spaces did not yet

 exist. Hilbert mastered this challenge by focusing on the combination of coordinate

 functions as mappings from E2 onto R2.

 In his memoir，a motion is as a bijective function from E onto E that maps neigh

 bourhoods ‘continuously’，meaning that the corresponding mapping via the coordinate

 functions is a continuous mapping from a Jordan domain onto another Jordan domain

 in E2 (Hilbert 1902b, p. 236). In his Annalennote, once the existence of a global coor

 dinate function k has been assumed, the concept of motion is defined as a bijective

 mapping g : E — E such that the corresponding mapping k-g-k"1 : B — B，B C R2,
 is a continuous mapping preserving the orientation of any Jordan curve (see Fig. 4

 and Hilbert (1903, p. 383). This means, the continuity of a transformation is then to

 be checked in E2~just as the continuity of the coordinate change (Fig.1).

 Hilbert added then the following three axioms characterising the set of motions.

 Axiom I The set of motions constitutes a group.
 Axiom II A ‘true circle' through the point y centred at the point x is the set of all

 rotations of y around x. A true circle is an infinite set. A rotation around

 ^ is a motion g such that g(x) = jc.

 Axiom HI The set of motions constitutes a closed system.

 Incidentally, axiom III is one of the most important and original of Hilbert、con

 tributions to the Riemann-Helmholtz-Lie space problem because this condition char

 acterises the continuity of the group of motions. However, my concern is how Hilbert

 handled this condition technically: he resorted to Cantor's point-set topological meth
 ods on E2.

 20 Hilbert's general concept of motion appeared in both his memoir and his Annalennote. See Hilbert
 (1902b, p. 236) and Hilbert (1903, p. 383).

 姿 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 66 L. Rodriguez

 2.6 Cantor's point-set topology on the plane

 By taking full advantage of the coordinate functions, and more specifically of the

 global chart k, Hilbert introduced point-set topological methods in the plane E. The

 general idea is that a sequence is said to converge on E if its image under k converges

 in R2 and a point p in £ is an accumulation point of F C £ if its image under k is an

 accumulation point of the image under k of F in E2.

 The central notion is again that of a Jordan domain in E2 because these domains

 are the images under k of the neighbourhoods in E and because the metric topology

 of R2 allows a notion of closeness as follows: let a be a point in E and let k{JJ) be

 an arbitrarily small Jordan domain enclosing k{a), then all those points p such that

 k(p) e k(U) are said to be arbitrarily close to a. This kind of topological identification

 of E with E2 is emphasised by the fact that Hilbert opted for assigning the same

 letter to both, the points and subsets of E and their respective images under k in E2

 (Hilbert 1903, p. 384).

 Using this idea of closeness, Hilbert explained axiom III as follows: Let

 A, B, C, A\ B\ C be points of the plane. If there exist any motions that map
 points arbitrarily close to A，B，C to points arbitrarily close to A’，fi’，C’，then
 there exists a motion that maps the points A, B，C to A\ B\ C'. That means:21
 If Vど > 0，there exists 5 > 0 and a motion ge such that V jc, y, z with
 \ x — A\< S, \ y — B \< S and \ z — B \< S their images satisfy | gs(x) 一 A' \< s,
 I g£(y) — Bf |< s and | ge(z) 一 C’ |< s, then there exists a motion g such that
 g(A) = A\ g(B) = Bf andg(B) = B\

 Once he had established this idea of closeness, he then easily introduced further

 point-set topological concepts in E. His notation, however, makes it difficult for the

 reader to perceive whether he is referring to point-sets of E or oi R2. Nowhere did

 he explicitly define either the notion of convergence of a sequence of points in E or

 the concept of accumulation point of a subset A c E. However, in his demonstrations

 he assumed that a sequence of points in E is convergent if its image under k in R2 is

 convergent. He regarded p as an accumulation point of a subset A C E, if k(p) is an

 accumulation point of A:(A) C k(E) in E2, i.e. if every arbitrarily small neighbourhood

 of p contains an infinity of points of A in the sense explained above.

 He reduced the continuity of a mapping from £ to £ or from E to Rム to the

 continuity of the corresponding mapping from E2 to This is already evident in the

 introduction of his Annalennote. There he announced some of the main results, e.g.

 (1)the true circle is a closed set that is dense in itself, i.e. a perfect set; (2) in order

 to prove that the true circle is a Jordan curve, he shows the existence of a continuous

 bijective mapping from the true circle to a standard circle and (3) he uses the notion

 of accumulation point in his definition of the 'true straight line'.22

 This implidt notion of an accumulation point in E implies that all topological
 properties (open, close, dense) of subsets of E depend on the point-set topology of

 21 Following Hilbert, I formulate axiom III for motions as transformations from R2 to E2. The given
 formulation in modern terms is my own and is equivalent to both the one given by Scholz (Purkert et al.

 2002, p. 709) and the one by Toretti (1978, p. 187).

 22 See (Hilbert, 1903, pp. 386-387).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 67

 R2. Hilbert's concept of an accumulation point works because he made sure that

 the system of neighbourhoods is sufficiently rich.23 His system of neighbourhoods

 generates what today is called a basis for the weak topology induced by the coordinate

 functions. Convergence of a sequence, as understood by Hilbert, is nothing other than

 the weak convergence of the sequence with respect to the coordinate functions. Hence,

 the system of neighbourhoods and correspondingly the system of coordinate functions

 made it possible to define the concept of an accumulation point in terms of Jordan

 domains and, consequently, to ensure the applicability of Cantor's point-set topology

 of R2 for topological investigations on the plane E.

 And yet, the development of mathematics at that time allowed, as Riesz was to

 show, a different, truly point-set topological approach to the notion of continuity of

 space. Hilbert, however, was not interested in developing point-set theory. In fact, his

 Annalennote and his memoir are the only works in which Hilbert actually applied

 Cantor's point-set theory.

 3 Riesz's early works and point-set theory

 In his early research career, i.e. before he focused on functional analysis, Frigyes

 Riesz's worked on geometry, analysis situs, point-set topology and the theory of order

 types.

 In 1902, Riesz finished his doctorate in Budapest with a thesis on geometry after
 spending one year in Gôttingen as a student, sometime between 1899 and 1902, the

 precise date is unknown. During this period, Hilbert had been working on the foun

 dations of geometry: he had lectured on geometry in the winter term of 1898/1899,

 his Festschrift appeared in 1899, his memoir was submitted in November 1901, his

 Annalennote in Mai 1902, and in the summer term of 1902, he lectured again on geom

 etry. Judging by his early publications, Riesz probably attended one of these lectures.
 In any case, he knew Hilbert's work on the foundations of geometry very well. If he

 missed the lectures, he still had the chance to study them from notes that were freely

 accessible to students in the library of the mathematical institute.24 Riesz came back

 as a young researcher and a guest of the Gôttingen Mathematical Society in the winter
 term of 1903.

 At the end of 1904, Riesz was in scientific correspondence with Hilbert. In the
 meantime, he published a paper on the converse of the Jordan curve theorem (1904c).

 This was followed by a long paper on multiple order types (1905c) and two short

 notes on topological questions, one concerning the theorem now known as the 'Heine

 Borel，or ‘Borel -Lebesgue’ theorem (1905b) and the other on the concept of dimension

 23 Technically, if X and y are first countable spaces, then it is valid to reduce continuity to sequential
 continuity as follows: f : X ^ Y is continuous iff whenever xn x in X，then f(xn) -> f(x) in Y
 (Willard 1970, p. 71).

 24 The production of such lecture notes was one of those peculiarities ofHilbert's that was highly appreciated

 by students. Hallett and Majer (2004) edited Hilbert's lectures and notes on foundations of geometry,
 including the lecture of 1902. In the introduction, the editors explain how these Ausarbeitungen came about
 under Hilbert's close supervision.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 68 L. Rodriguez

 (1905a). At a meeting of the Gôttingen Mathematical Society in July 1905, he reported

 on ‘his set-theoretical research and its connection to the space problem’.25

 Most of what he covered in these four papers was building up to a long article

 published in 1906 entitled 'The Origin of the Concept of Space’. Its German version,
 ‘Die Genesis des Raumbegriffs’ (1906b), was supposed to appear that same year
 but the corresponding volume of the journal was actually printed in 1909. In the

 Genesis, Riesz attempted to contribute to Hilbert's continuity of space problem by

 extending Hilbert's concept of two-dimensional manifold to higher dimensions. Not

 only did Riesz himself point to the connection between the Genesis and Hilbert's

 foundation of geometry but he also discussed this connection in his correspondence

 with Hilbert (see Sect. 3.4). This connection explains why, in the papers mentioned

 above, Riesz investigated concepts and results that Hilbert had applied or established:

 e.g. the concepts of neighbourhood, accumulation point, connectedness, the theorems

 concerning Jordan curves, the Heine-Borel and Bolzano-Weierstrass theorems.

 Riesz's early works show how intellectually close he was to both Hilbert、math

 ematics and the French developments in analysis which were exploring the field of

 point-set topology beyond Cantor's theory. Riesz's position allowed him to synthesise

 these mathematical cultures in his research. The best known of his synthesising ideas

 is undoubtedly his work, starting in 1906, on the space of functions L2, His first syn

 thesis, however, occurred in the Genesis and k concerns his theory of mathematical

 continua. This is the subject of the present article.

 3.1 On analysis situs

 The paper ‘On a theorem from analysis situs' (1904c) shows that Riesz had developed a

 deep insight into diverse aspects ofHilbert's work on the foundations of geometry. This

 is apparent not only because of the multiple references to Hilbert's Annalennote but

 also because Riesz approached the converse of the Jordan curve theorem by adapting

 a method presented by Hilbert.26

 In this paper, Riesz worked out an alternative proof for a theorem that had been

 formulated and proven by Arthur Schoenflies in 1902.27 Sharpening Schoenflies's

 theorem Riesz proved that if a perfect bounded subset P of the plane separates the

 points of the plane that are not contained in P into two domains: an inside set I and

 an outside set O such that (1)every arbitrary pair points of I resp. of O can be joined

 by a Jordan curve containing only points of I resp. of O, (2) every point p of P can

 be joined to every point of I resp. of O by a Jordan curve that apart from p contains

 only points of I resp. of O and (3) every Jordan curve joining a point of I with a point

 of O contains at least one point of P, then the set P can be mapped bijectively and

 continuously to the points of a circle.

 Riesz's proof is based on the method Hilbert used to prove that the ‘true circle’

 is a closed Jordan curve一an assertion that Schoenflies himself saw as a particular

 25 See protocol in Jahresbericht der DMV 14 (1905)，458.

 26 Riesz refers to Hilbert (1903) and to its reprint in the Appendix of Hilbert's Festschrift.

 27 See Crilly and Johnson (1999, p.11)and Schoenflies (1902).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 69

 case of the converse of the Jordan curve theorem for the 'true circle’.28 The method

 consisted first in arranging the points of the set P periodically, then in mapping

 the set P into the circle bijectively, and finally in showing that the mapping is
 continuous.

 Thus, already in 1904 Hilbert's work on foundations of geometry had become a

 source of subjects and methods for Riesz's own research.

 3.2 On point-set topology

 Riesz was not only very interested in potential applications of Cantor's point-set theory

 but he also explored this theory as a scientific research area. Consequently, he closely

 followed its further development, which was taking place primarily in France.

 In January 1905, Riesz submitted the article ‘On a theorem by Borel’ to the
 Comptes Rendus de la Académie de Sciences in Paris (1905b). In this short note,

 he sketched a generalisation of Borel's theorem, which is the theorem now com
 monly known as the ‘Heine-Borel’ or ‘Borel-Lebesgue’ theorem. Borel's version
 states that for every countable open cover of a bounded and closed interval [a, b] C E,

 there exists a finite subcover. Riesz rightly asserted that this also holds for uncount
 able covers and for arbitrary, bounded closed subsets of Rw. However, Riesz lost

 the priority of this generalisation to Lebesgue, who in 1904 had already proved
 the same result.29 Riesz's interest in the Heine-Borel theorem persisted and in

 the same year he succeeded in producing another generalisation to multiple order

 types.

 Later in October 1905, Riesz published a short note ‘On discontinuous sets’ (1905a).

 There he briefly discussed the dimension problem and suggested an axiomatic defini

 tion of dimension for subsets of Euclidean spaces. According to Johnson (1981), this

 note represents ‘a novel approach to dimension at an early date’，even if Riesz、axioms

 do not hold within the dimension theory initiated a few years later by Brouwer, Paul

 Uryshon and Karl Menger.30 In this note, Riesz also presented a theorem asserting that

 for every discontinuous set contained in an n-dimensional Euclidean space, n > 2,

 there exists a Jordan curve containing it. The assertion is true but Riesz's sketch-proof

 turned out to be wrong.

 Still, the note includes two other interesting contributions. First, he called a set

 discontinuous if it does not contain any connected subsets. Then, he proposed the

 following point-set theoretical definition of the concept of connected set: a point
 set A is said to be connected if it cannot be split into two subsets B and C such
 that (B U fi’）fl C’ = 0 and fi’ fl(C U C') = 0, where B' and C' are the sets

 of all accumulation points of B and C, respectively. Although Riesz did not say so

 explicitly, this definition was meant for non-empty point-sets of Rn. It presents some

 similarities to the definition introduced by Camille Jordan in his Course d'Analyse

 28 See Schoenflies (1904).

 29 A survey of the history of the concept of compactness is given by Pier (1980).

 30 Johnson (1981) discusses this note by Riesz within the realm of dimension theory.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 姿 Springer

 70 L. Rodriguez

 (1893) for perfect and bounded sets.31 However, what Riesz here called connected is

 not necessarily connected in today's sense of the term.32 Nevertheless, it is remarkable

 that Riesz did not resort to the notion of distance, as Cantor had done, but used only

 the concept of an accumulation point.33

 Later in 1904, Riesz formulated a more general concept of connectedness for mul

 tiple order types and two years later he offered an absolutely accurate definition of

 connectedness (absolute connected) for mathematical continua that corresponds to

 today's notion for topological spaces.

 3.3 On multiple order types

 Riesz's article ‘On multiple order types V (1905c) was an outstanding attempt to

 develop a point-set topology for multiple order types, i.e. for sets provided with more

 than one order relation. His aim was to transfer those concepts that are based on the

 notion of an accumulation point from Cantor's point-set theory for linear order types

 (e.g. R) to multiple ones (e.g. Rn). He was especially interested in perfect types and

 perfect and connected order types, whose study he regarded as an extension of the

 research area of analysis situs.

 Riesz called M an n-fold ordered set if M was provided with n different orders.

 The i-th order is denoted as <；, (/ =1,...,n). For instance, can be regarded as
 an n-fold ordered set if for any pair a = (ai,...,an)9 b =(ル，..•，ル）e En, the
 i-th order relation is defined as a <{ b whenever oti < Pi (i =1,...,n). Two sets
 are called similarly ordered if there exists a bijective mapping preserving the rank

 relations between the elements of the sets. An n-fold order type is the class of all
 n-fold order sets that are similarly ordered.

 He then introduced the concept of ‘neighbourhood’ of an element a of an n-fold

 order type M. A neighbourhood of a is a set {m € M | bi くi u </ c/} determined
 for n pairs of elements b\,c\, ...,bn9cn satisfying bi </ at <,• c, (/ =1,...,n). In
 the example mentioned above, the «-dimensional intervals are the neighbourhoods of
 elements of R".

 Following Cantor and Hilbert, Riesz defined ‘accumulation point' in terms of neigh

 bourhoods. However, Riesz's approach is more general because it uses only pure set
 theoretical notions: let M be an n-fold order then, for a e M and N c a is an

 accumulation point of N if every neighbourhood of a contains elements of N others

 than a. In contrast, Hilbert insisted on ‘arbitrarily small neighbourhoods’，giving away
 that he haa m mind the notions of distance and limit for R".

 31 Jordan's (but not Riesz's) concept is shortly discussed by Herrlich et al. (2002a). Johnson's observation

 that ‘Riesz implicitly assumes that the sets under discussion are bounded' applies for Riesz's quotation of

 Zoretti's theorem but not to his concept of a connected set, as wrongly assumed by Johnson (1981, p. 112).

 32 This was rightly pointed out by Taylor (1982, p. 269). Johnson (1981, p. 112) gives the following
 examples of sets being connected in Riesz's but not in today's sense: the set (0,1)U (1,2) and the set of

 rational points in the closed interval[0,1].

 33 Cantor considered the set T to be connected if for every two points of the set and for every ど > 0, there

 exists a finite subset of T of points t\，…，tn, such that the distances d(t\，，2)，ゴ(り，り），etc., are all smaller
 than e.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 71

 Riesz even succeeded in generalising Cantor's concept of fundamental sequence

 as a well-ordered sequence with arbitrary cardinality.34 He called a ‘Cantor funda

 mental sequence’ those fundamental sequences with ordinal number co of IN. For an
 element a that is an accumulation point of some subset, Riesz considered all well

 ordered sequences of nested neighbourhoods of a that happen to have a as the only
 common element. He called the smallest cardinality of such a sequence the 'accessi

 bility' (Zugànglichkeit) of a. If the accessibility of a is No, then a is said to be ‘simply
 accessible’ (einfach zugânglich).

 From Riesz's generalised notion of fundamental sequence, it is evident that in his

 mind, he had envisaged very large sets, sets with large cardinality, larger than ド1，the

 cardinality of E". However, admitting fundamental sequences with arbitrary cardi

 nality implies that the n-fold order type in question has at least the same cardinality.

 This degree of generality is an important prerequisite for the next section, because,

 according to Riesz, Hilbert restricted the cardinality of space. This is one of the things

 Riesz aimed to improve.

 Coming back to his paper, there T designates the ‘derived set’ of a subset
 71,i.e the set of all accumulation points of T. Extending some elementary prop
 erties of sets of an n-fold order type M, he defined:(1)T is dense in itself if
 T c T’，(2) T is perfect if T is closed and dense in itself, and (3) T is closed
 if C T and if every infinite subset of T has an accumulation point in T.
 Riesz's concept of closed subset is more restrictive than Cantor's since the sec
 ond condition in (3) is the Bolzano-Weierstrass property for closed bounded sub
 sets of R. Therefore, Riesz's concept of closed set is related to the concept of
 compactness.

 Besides, Riesz defined connected set’，as already mentioned, generalising the con

 cept presented in (1905a): T is connected if T is not the union U UV of two subsets
 U and V satisfying (U U ひ’）n (V U V) = 0.35

 For perfect and connected ‘simple order types', Riesz stated the Heine-Borel
 theorem.36 He sketched an inductive proof which is similar to the one he provided
 in (1905b). It is also based on the idea of Dedekind cuts. Furthermore, Riesz gen
 eralised the notion of interval to n-fold order types calling it ‘elemental domain'
 (Elementargebiet).

 His correspondence with Hilbert provides valuable insight into the purposes behind

 the research Riesz had accomplished in the articles discussed above.

 34 See Riesz (1905c, p. 410). Purkert (2002, pp. 688-689) has already pointed to the relevance of Riesz's
 concept of fundamental sequence.

 35 Although the formulation in Riesz (1905c) is not identical with the one given in Riesz (1905a), the

 contents are equivalent. Notice that neither here nor in Riesz (1905a) the subsets f/ and V are supposed

 to be disjoint. That the two definitions are equivalent follows easily from the fact that for T connected
 and T = UUVy if Uf)V #0，then at least one of the following inequalities holds true:ひ ’ fl V #0，
 unv' ^0.

 36 ‘Simple order type' is my translation of ‘einfacher Ordnungstypus', where ‘einfach’ means n = I, i.e.
 the set has only one order relation (see Riesz 1905c, p. 415).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ô Springe

 72 L. Rodriguez

 3.4 Letters from Hungary

 On 18 November 1904, Riesz sent Hilbert a report (1904a) on his latest research asking

 him to submit the enclosed note to the Gôttingen Mathematical Society in support of

 its publication.37 He wished to present his results in a short note first before publishing

 them in a longer and more detailed paper. The attached ‘short note' is not preserved

 in Hilbert's Archive but from Riesz's description it is clear that k was an early version

 of his article ‘On multiple order types F (1905c) containing some additional results

 which were not included in the final version of this article but appeared later in the
 Genesis (Riesz 1906b).

 What were the findings that he communicated to Hilbert? Riesz's starting point was

 Cantor's conviction that it is possible to generalise the so-called geometric properties

 of point-sets to order types by using the concept of fundamental sequences. Such

 investigations had been done for linear order types, but he, Riesz, now attempted to

 do so for multiple order types. The lack of a notion of metric or of distance represents

 a challenge, because the concept of a uniform continuous function cannot be defined

 in the old way. Fortunately, the metric approach to the concept of uniform continuity

 can be replaced by the Heine-Borel theorem. Riesz claimed to have generalised both

 the Heine-Borel and the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem to linear perfect and connected

 order types.

 As a generalisation of the geometric concept of ‘domain’ (Bereich), he consid

 ered perfect and connected twofold order types that, after removing their boundary

 elements, remain everywhere dense. He therefore focused on these order types, inves

 tigating their connectedness and separation properties. He referred to this work as
 investigations in the field of analysis situs. He was forced to give up the notion of

 straight line. He defined only particular line segments and polygons. Nevertheless, he

 managed to find a way to generalise certain results on Jordan curves to this specific

 kind of order types so that k was possible both to define the two orientations of a

 Jordan curve and to prove that a Jordan curve separates a domain into two regions.

 Most of the details discussed above appear in the introduction to ‘On multiple order

 types I’ except for the assertions concerning Jordan curves. In fact, in this article Riesz
 does not mention either the notion of a Jordan curve or the Jordan curve theorem at

 all.38 Bearing in mind the fundamental role that the notion of a Jordan curve played

 in Hilbert's Annalennote, the letter gives the impression that Riesz wanted Hilbert

 to know that he was also working on a generalisation of Hilbert's approach and that

 37 A transcription of this letter is included in Appendix A and (Rodriguez 2006).

 38 The generalisation of the Jordan curve theorem to dimension three was proven by James Alexander in

 1924 once the topology had been sufficiently developed. Two important properties of a closed Jordan curve

 are (1)the curve separates the plane in two regions, the interior and the exterior, such that any continuous

 curve joining the two regions intersects necessarily the Jordan curve; (2) the interior of a closed Jordan
 curve is topologically equivalent to an open disc while the exterior is topologically equivalent to an open

 disc from which the middle point has been removed. Similar properties of spheres in three-dimensional

 space were much more difficult to prove. The continuous image of a sphere that does not intersect itself

 happens indeed to separate the space into two regions, the interior and the exterior. But it is not true that

 the one region is topologically equivalent to an open ball while the other one is topologically equivalent to

 an open ball from which the middle point has been removed. Alexander showed that the horned sphere is
 a counter example (see Gray 2000, p.112).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 73

 he had began to extend one of the main tools used by Hilbert: the notion of Jordan

 domain. There are also other reasons to think that this was a likely scenario.

 Coming back to his letter, Riesz discusses the application of his investigations on

 multiple order types to the foundations of geometry and the space problem. He wrote:

 Now my investigations come very close to the foundations of geometry. More

 precisely, to those works that, regarding the continuity as the primary property of

 space, base the notion of the «-dimensional manifold on the concept of number.

 Thereby they put upper bounds to the power of space, bounds that actually appear
 to be artificial.39

 This passage bears some resemblance to the introduction of the Genesis. There, how

 ever, Riesz refers explicitly to Lie's and Hilbert's notions of an n-dimensional man

 ifold. In the Genesis, Riesz criticises that, by defining this concept in terms of the

 Cartesian space Rn, Lie and Hilbert made this notion dependent on the set of real

 numbers. Consequently, the power of an n-dimensional manifold cannot be bigger

 than the power of R".

 This remark is impressive because it indicates that Riesz was approaching the notion

 of continuity of space from a quite general point of view: his idea of continuous space

 was far beyond Rn. From the beginning, he did not want to exclude the possibility

 that a continuous space could be defined that has a greater power than Rn.

 What sets did Riesz definitely not want to exclude? For sure, multiple order types

 with greater power than Ew. He may already also have had sets of functions in mind.

 There are several reasons to think that this was likely: for one, Riesz was thoroughly

 familiar with sets of functions. As shown by his earlier publications, he had studied

 Baire's theory of real functions. There, the set of all real functions / : R -> R plays

 a central role. This set has greater power than R. Besides, Riesz referred explicitly

 to some sets of functions in the Genesis.^0 Furthermore, the research he started just

 after concluding the Genesis shows that he was ready to envisage function spaces;
 indeed, he was actually one of the first mathematicians to use the term ‘function
 space’. He did so in a letter to Fréchet from 1907.41 Besides, that same year Riesz

 (1907c) discussed the possibility of an analytic geometry on the function space L2,

 the set of square-integrable real functions in Lebesgue's sense.

 The rest of the letter contains remarks concerning multiple order types that appear

 in the Genesis but not in ‘On multiple order types F. Riesz continued his letter as
 follows:

 In my opinion the only essential features of R" are: it has an n-fold ordering, it is

 dense everywhere and it is continuous (i.e k is perfect and connected), as clearly

 39 My translation of Riesz (1904a). See the equivalent passage in Riesz (1906b, p. 310).

 40 The idea was not completely new. Already fifty years earlier in his habilitation lecture, Bernhard Riemann

 had mentioned the idea of a spatial manifold whose elements were functions (see Scholz 1999, p. 27).

 41 A transcription of this letter (Riesz 1907b) is included in Appendix B and (Rodrfguez 2006). On the

 development of function spaces, see Bernkopf (1966). Apparently, Bernkopf did not know of this letter

 from Riesz. Taylor (1982) quotes the letter but, in contrast to Bernkopf, he does not discuss the priority of
 the term ‘function spaces'.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 74 L. Rodriguez

 appears in your definition of the plane although with the mentioned limitation.

 According to this, R" can be regarded as a set of n-fold order type (Riesz 1904a).

 The ‘mentioned’ limitation consists in putting an upper bound to the cardinality of

 space by basing the notion of two-dimensional manifold on the concept of number.

 Thus, by regarding En as an «-fold order type Riesz was highlighting those prop

 erties he considered relevant for a precise concept of continuous space. Remarkably,

 he chose abstract point-set topological as well as order-theoretical properties. Follow

 ing Cantor, he suggested that a set should regarded as continuous if it is perfect and

 connected, but with these properties understood according to Riesz's own theory of

 multiple order types.

 Why was Riesz searching for such an abstract characterisation of Rn? Because, as

 he announced in ‘On multiple order types F, once the so-called geometric properties

 of sets can be expressed in terms of fundamental sequences for multiple order types,

 then k suffices to have the structure of a multiple order type on a set to be able to study

 its geometric properties—said more broadly: one can do topology on it.

 In his letter, Riesz was suggesting to replace R2 with an abstract twofold order

 type that is dense everywhere, perfect and connected. Thus, Riesz aimed at defining

 a topology on the n-dimensional manifold using the topology of the «-fold order type

 instead of the standard topology of Rn (as Hilbert did for the plane). The convenience

 of Riesz's approach relied on achieving a concept of an n-dimensional manifold that

 is independent of both the system of number coordinates Ert and the standard point

 set topology of Rn. This procedure avoids the artificial limitation Riesz addressed
 above.

 That Riesz's true concern was indeed the topologisation of space independently of

 R" follows from the last part of his letter.

 I find your Annalennote in this respect well thought and if I am not mistaken

 (that is possible because I have not worked that thing out), then my conception

 of K/1 and respectively of the plane is enough to arrive at either to Euclidean
 or to Bolyai-Lobachevsky geometry as a consequence of your motion axioms.

 That means, no manifold with bigger power than that of the continuum allows a

 motion in Lie's sense, respectively in yours (Riesz 1904a).

 According to Riesz, if an abstract n-fold order type that is dense everywhere, per

 fect and connected is used for the foundations of geometry, then it will follow from

 Hilbert's axiomatic definition of motion that its power is not bigger than that of the

 continuum. That means that the upper bound on the cardinality of space is a neces

 sary consequence and not an artificial assumption. This consequence is what justifies

 Riesz's abstract approach. It is an issue of mathematical formalism concerning the

 mutual independence of the elementary assumptions.

 Thus, Riesz's first attempt to extend Hilbert's concept of a two-dimensional man

 ifold consisted in an application of his theory of multiply order types. But then he

 got interested in a still more general approach, one based on purely abstract point-set

 topological methods without any ordering assumptions.

 Just before the end of the year, Riesz wrote â second letter to Hilbert asking

 him to hold back the publication of his short note because he needed to make some

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 75

 corrections.42 He announced a change of mind and explained that he had attempted

 to generalise the analysis situs of the theory of functions by applying his theory of

 multiple order types. During these investigations, he had realised that the use of fun

 damental sequences, or at least of subsets with a unique accumulation point, leads to

 a better end than the approach he had first tried.

 What then happened? Riesz worked fast, and in January 1905, he replaced his note

 from November 1904. The original short note became his long paper ‘On multiple

 order types I’ (1905c) which appeared that same year in the Mathematischen Annalen.

 Furthermore, he got the opportunity to present his results at the meeting of the Gôt

 tingen Mathematical Society on 25 July 1905. According to the records of that day's

 meeting, Riesz reported on ‘The connection between his soon-to-appear investigations

 on set theory and questions related to the space problem'.43

 ‘On multiple order types V appeared in December 1905 free from any connection to

 the foundations of geometry and the space problem. The title carries an T indicating

 that Riesz planed to publish a second part of this paper. He reconsidered the connection

 to the space problem in the Genesis.

 4 'Die Genesis des Raumbegriffs'

 A second part of ‘On multiple order types V did never appear as such. However, on 22

 January 1906, Gustav Rados presented a paper by Riesz to the Hungarian Academy

 of Sciences, that, judging by its contents, must be the second part of the paper Riesz
 once offered to Hilbert, or at least what had become of it.44

 The German version of this paper was to appear in 1906 as ‘Die Genesis des Raum

 begriffs' (Riesz 1906b) in the journal Mathematische und Natunvissenschaftliche

 Berichte aus Ungarn. The journal itself, although Hungarian, had a German name

 and used to publish only articles written in German. It had been established in 1883 to

 provide greatly improved chances for the diffusion of Hungarian works. The Hungar
 ian original version of the Genesis was published in two parts (Riesz 1906a, 1907a)

 in another Hungarian journal，。

 ‘Die Genesis des Raumbegriffs' is an long article of 35 pages that deals with the

 role of experience in the development of the concept of continuous space in geometry.

 Here, Riesz approached Hilbert's continuity of space problem from a broad perspective

 that included, apart from a modern mathematical treatment, current philosophical
 and psychological views. Thematically k consists of two parts: the first one has an

 introductory and theoretical (mathematical) character (pp. 309-322), and the second

 one focuses on the construction of a concept of space starting from a specific empirical

 notion of continuity in real space (pp. 323-345).

 42 The letter is undated (Riesz 1904b), but judging by its contents, it concerns the same note and it must

 have been written shortly after the one from November 1904 because Riesz wishes Hilbert a happy New

 Year's Eve. A transcription of this letter can be found in Appendix A and (Rodriguez 2006).

 43 See report of this meeting in Jahresbericht der DMV 14 (1905) p. 458.

 44 See report of the Academy meetings in Mathematische und Naturwissenschaftliche Berichte aus Ungarn
 24 (1906) p. 365. 一
 45 On these Hungarian journals, see Szénâssy (1992) p.221.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 7b L. Rodriguez

 In the Genesis, Riesz distinguished between geometry as an exact science and

 geometry as a natural science, asking how continuous space could be characterised

 best in each of them. In other words: what does it mean that the geometrical space is

 continuous? What does it mean that the real space is empirically continuous? While

 the first question strictly concerns a purely mathematical issue, the second unavoidably

 involves views about the philosophy of geometry.

 Hilbert's works on the foundations of geometry keenly motivated Riesz's interest

 in the concept of continuous space in geometry. But Riesz's interest in the empirical

 continuity of the real space arose from those contributions to philosophy of geometry

 in which Poincaré discussed the relation of the axioms of geometry to real space. Riesz

 explicitly refers to Poincaré's (1905) ‘La valeur de la science’.46

 Riesz approached these two different notions of continuity by redefining the con

 cepts of mathematical and physical continuum. These two concepts were discussed by

 Poincaré in ‘La valeur de la science’ and taken up by Riesz. Poincaré's conception of

 empirical continuity was contained within his notion of a physical continuum. Riesz

 redefined this concept in a more general and abstract way by formulating it axiomati

 cally and in terms of point-set theory. Furthermore, he developed a rudimentary theory

 of physical continua that he then applied to construct a three-dimensional space as an

 infinite numerable sequence of physical continua (pp. 323-335). From now on, I will

 refer to this space as Riesz's space Tl. However, I will not enter into a more detailed

 discussion on its construction because it would go far beyond the scope of this article.47

 The purpose of this note is to draw attention to Riesz、characterisation of continuous

 space in geometry.

 This characterisation was accomplished in two steps: first Riesz provided the space

 Tl with a specific concept of an accumulation point and then he showed that Tl defines

 a mathematical continuum that satisfies certain additional properties.

 What exactly these properties are, I discuss in Sect.4.7 where I summarise Riesz's

 characterisation of continuous space in geometry. In preparation, I introduce Riesz's

 concept of mathematical continuum in Sect.4.1.In Sect.4.2,1 discuss the epistemolog

 ical meaning of Riesz's approach. Then, I proceed to present some important concepts

 of Riesz's rudimentary theory of mathematical continua in Sects.4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.
 In Sect.4.6,1 explain how Riesz approached the issue of dimension.

 4.1 Mathematical continuum and its epistemological meaning

 Around 1900, the only known general concept of a continuum was due to Cantor who

 had called a continuum of points (Punktkontinuum) any subset of Rn that happened

 to be perfect and connected. That is the reason why the term mathematical continuum

 was at that time commonly related to the set of all real numbers, so for instance by
 Poincaré (1905).

 46 See Riesz (1906b, pp. 312-315). On the philosophy of geometry of that time, see Torretti (1978). On
 the influence of Poincaré's work on Riesz, see my thesis (Rodriguez 2006).

 47 On Poincaré's idea of empirical continuity of space and Riesz's constructive notion of space,
 see Rodriguez (2006).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 77

 Taking an abstract point-set theoretical approach, Riesz suggested a more general

 concept of a mathematical continuum: an abstract set provided with a concept of accu

 mulation point that satisfies four axioms.48 Let Mr denote the set of all accumulation

 points of the set M. In modern terms, Riesz、definition reads as follow (Riesz 1906b,
 p. 318):

 Definition 1{Mathematical continuum) X is a mathematical continuum if for every

 element x e X and for every subset M c X either x ^ Mr or x e M; and then the

 following conditions hold true:

 1.M = {x\t • • •, jc”} (n € IN) =» M' = 0;
 2. M CN CN'\
 3. M = P U (2 => M' C P' U Ô7；
 4. x e Mf and ；ヨ PcAf such that x e Pr but y ^ P'.

 It is odvious that Riesz's concept of mathematical continuum is not a continuum in

 Cantor's sense as it does not need to be either perfect or connected.

 Riesz did not just disengage the term ‘continuum’ from its traditional meaning;

 he also assigned a broader epistemological meaning to the mathematical concept of

 continuous space. For one, he called a mathematical continuum any arbitrary abstract

 set that is provided with a concrete concept of accumulation point satisfying the four

 axioms mentioned above. Consequently, he acknowledged that one and the same set

 can be regarded as continuous in different ways, each way depending on the concrete

 concept of accumulation point in consideration.

 Given an arbitrary set provided with a concept of an accumulation point, the chal

 lenging question is no longer whether it is continuous (because according to Riesz it

 is) but to find out further continuity properties.

 Mathematical continua in Riesz、sense are by definition provided with a continuity

 structure that is determined by the specific concept of accumulation point in consider

 ation. This continuity structure results from associating to each elements of the math

 ematical continuum a family of subsets, namely the family consisting of exactly those

 subsets for which the element x is an accumulation point. The structure of X as math

 ematical continuum can be described as the system of pairs (jc, Ax) e X x V(V(X))

 where jc is an element of the mathematical continuum X and Ax is the family of those

 subsets of X of which ；c is an accumulation point, i.e. AX = {M c X\x e Mf}.

 There may be elements of X that are not accumulation point of any subset of X.

 Riesz called x e X ‘main element’ if there exists a subset M of X such that x is an

 accumulation point of M. In his Rome lecture, he explained the fourth (separation)

 axiom as a condition that guaranties that to each main element x, there corresponds a

 unique family Ax.

 Coming back to the Genesis, Riesz explained that he had anticipated interesting

 applications of his rudimentary theory of mathematical continua to analysis and the

 calculus of variations. As examples of mathematical continua, he cited the Cartesian

 48 Instead of accumulation point, Riesz (just as Hilbert) used the term ‘Verdichtungsstelle’ which literally

 means 'condensation point'. However, as rightly pointed by Taylor (1982, p. 268), this term should not be

 translated as 'condensation point' in the special sense given to it by Ernst Lindelôf in 1905.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 78 L. Rodriguez

 spaces R" with their standard concept of accumulation point, multiple order types with

 the concept of accumulation point as defined in Sect. 3.3, as well as sets of functions

 with the concept of accumulation point defined by a metric or by different kinds

 of convergence principles: point-wise, uniform, weak and strong convergence. He

 stressed the importance of the selected continuity structure by pointing to fundamental

 differences between the concepts of strong and weak extreme values in the calculus

 of variations (Riesz 1906b, p. 318).

 Although it was already a common practice to distinguish between different kinds

 of convergence (weak, point-wise, etc.), it still represents a major conceptual shift to

 define different concepts of accumulation point on a set, thereby regarding the set as

 continuous in different ways. That is what Riesz did.

 Thus, the first condition that ought to be assumed of an abstract set, in order to be

 able to investigate its continuity properties, is that it may be regarded as a mathematical

 continuum. This applies in particular to the set upon which geometric space may be
 defined.

 From the viewpoint of geometry, it is not evident why Riesz thought it necessary to

 tackle the continuity of space problem using such an abstract approach. The first reason

 is one of the practical nature and goes back to those philosophical motivations that

 had led him to work on a concept of space whose elements are ‘groups of sensations’.

 To avoid any kind of philosophical and psychological controversy, he conceived those

 ‘groups of sensations’ as elements of an abstract set that satisfy a certain system of
 axioms.

 Besides, this general approach certainly allowed him to overcome those limitations

 he had criticised in his letter to Hilbert. In his Rome lecture, Riesz made the connection

 to geometry acknowledging Hilbert's approach to the foundations of geometry from
 1902 as the main motivation behind his concept of mathematical continuum:

 It is in Hilbert's work that for the first time it seems evident that the definition

 of this concept [the concept of continuity, LR] concerns primarily a definition

 of limit point, or more generally, a definition of accumulation point, whereas

 the concept of accumulation point is determined by the postulate asserting that

 the considered domains can be mapped on certain number manifolds and that

 the mappings fulfil certain conditions. The concept of an accumulation point for

 those number manifolds is, however, already determined.49

 Riesz asserted that it is in Hilbert's memoir where it seems evident for the first time

 that the issue of continuity is primarily about defining a concept of accumulation point.

 However, Hilbert solved this by using mappings from the plane to a number manifold.

 Not only did Hilbert assume that those mappings satisfy certain conditions but he also

 took advantage of the fact that the number manifold is already provided with a concept

 of accumulation point. In Riesz's approach, on the contrary, the space needs only to be

 a mathematical continuum. What is more, the concept of accumulation point defined

 on the mathematical continuum is independent of any number manifold.

 49 My translation of Riesz (1909, p. 18).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 79

 But most importantly, Riesz aimed to contribute a generalisation of Cantor's point

 set theory to abstract sets in the sense suggested by Jacques Hadamard at the first

 International Congress of Mathematicians in Zurich in 1897. Riesz explicitly said so

 in his Rome lecture (1909). Eventually, he succeeded in his purpose as the reception
 of his Rome lecture played a significant role in the emergence of general topology

 (see Sect. 6). That is the reason why Riesz's concept of a mathematical continuum is

 not just mathematically but also historically closely related to the modern concept of
 topological space.

 4.2 Classifying mathematical continua

 Riesz paid special attention to the issue of classifying mathematical continua. He

 tackled this issue by defining a variety of continuity properties that a mathematical

 continuum may possess or not. These properties were defined in terms of elementary

 topological concepts.

 Still, Riesz went a step further beyond Cantor's point-set topology. Having studied

 Cantor's theory of order types and having contributed to the theory of multiple order

 types, Riesz was familiar with the idea of classifying abstract sets by means of isomor

 phisms, the technique used in Cantor's theory to define order types. Riesz adapted this

 technique to classify mathematical continua according to isomorphisms that preserve

 their continuity structure. He called the isomorphic continua ‘similarly condensed’

 and he named the equivalence class consisting of all mathematical continua that are

 similarly condensed to each other a ‘condensation type' (Verdichtungstypus). A 'con

 densation type’ is a notion comparable to the concept of homeomorphism class which

 is used in general topology to classify topologically equivalent spaces:

 Definition 2 (similarly condensed—-ahnlich verdichtet) Let X and Y be two mathe

 matical continua. X and Y are similarly condensed if there exists a bijective mapping
 f : X — Y such that Vx e Z and VM c X it holds x e Mf if and only if
 f(x) e f(MY (Riesz 1906b, p. 319). “

 In Riesz's approach to Hilbert's continuity of space problem, the concept of sim

 ilarly condensed played a key role because it provided a method for comparing the

 continuity structure of the space as a mathematical continuum with the continuity
 structure of E3.

 4.3 Neighbourhoods

 Riesz proceeded to generalise the well-established elementary concepts of Cantor's

 point-set topology in Rn to abstract sets, e.g. open set, connected, dense.50 He started

 with the concept of neighbourhood:

 50 Some of Riesz's concepts and theorems have been already accurately described by Taylor (1982) but in

 a different context. My description focuses on Riesz's topological approach to Hilbert's space problem.

 旬 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Definition 3 (Neighbourhood) Let X bea mathematical continuum. A subset U C X
 is a neighbourhood of an element x e X if x e U and x 丰(X\UY (Riesz 1906b,
 p. 319).

 80 L. Rodriguez

 This concept is much more general than the one used by Hilbert (1902b; 1903).

 It does not depend either on Rn or on the notion of Jordan curve but only on the

 continuity structure of the mathematical continuum.51

 Furthermore, Riesz asserted that the concept of accumulation point can be charac

 terised in terms of neighbourhoods: let X be a mathematical continuum. The element

 x € X is an accumulation point of the subset M c X if and only if every neighbour

 hood of x contains infinitely many elements of M.

 Riesz proved only the proposition: if jc € M’ then every neighbourhood of x

 contains infinitely many elements of M • He claimed that the converse proposition holds

 true and he pointed to the fact that the intersection of a finite number of neighbourhoods

 of x is also a neighbourhood of jc. Both assertions can be proven easily.52

 The proof that the intersection of a finite number of neighbourhoods of ズ is a

 neighbourhood of x follows, as Riesz pointed out, from axioms two and three and via

 induction: let JJ\ and ひ2 be two neighbourhoods of x, then x e U ••= U\ D ひ2. Let

 Uc denote the complement of U. Uc can be written as the union of two disjoint sets
 Uc = (U\ D ひギ).By axiom three, if x is an accumulation point of Uc then x is

 an accumulation point of i/f or U\ butjc is not an accumulation point of and

 by axiom two it is neither of ひ1 fl ひダ C Since U =门レひ，=0""/ Ui fl Un，
 then induction on n shows that ひ is a neighbourhood of jc.

 Although this theorem reads just as today's definition of accumulation point in

 a topological space, the fact is that they use different notions of 'neighbourhood’.
 Therefore, they do not mean the same. The neighbourhoods of an element x in Riesz's

 sense are in general different from the neighbourhoods of jc in a topological space,

 since the former do not need to contain an open set containing x. This difference is

 the reason why the concepts of mathematical continuum and topological space are not

 equivalent.

 With his characterisation of accumulation point in terms of neighbourhoods Riesz

 found a way to define a given set as a mathematical continuum starting from neigh

 bourhoods. This approach is not altogether surprising because up to that time it was

 the traditional custom to define the notion of accumulation point or limit point in

 terms of neighbourhoods: Karl Weierstrass had used ど-neighbourhoods to define uni

 form convergence in classical analysis; Cantor developed his point-set topology for

 R starting with ^-neighbourhoods (implicitly, for he did not define the concept of

 neighbourhood at all), and Hilbert introduced a concept of limit point for the plane in

 51 As Taylor (1982, p. 268) rightly pointed out, Riesz ‘says nothing about the status of an empty set or of

 the entire class'. This was typical at that time.

 52 Let x be an element of the mathematical continuum X such that every neighbourhood of x contains
 infinitely many elements of M. As it happens, x e M or x 朱 M. Case one x 朱 M.iix ♦ then
 Ux := X \ M is a neighbourhood of x that contains infinitely many elements of M. This is a contradiction

 and so ズ € M’. Case two x e M: if x ^ M' then by axiom two of the definition of mathematical continuum

 Ux ：= (X \ M) U [x] is a neighbourhood of x and so Ux contains infinitely many elements of M but
 ひズ fi X = {jc}. This is a contradiction and so jc g M'.

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 81

 terms of neighbourhoods (Sect. 2.6). Another important example was given by Baire

 (1899a, b) who built up a rudimentary point-set topology for R that is different from
 the standard one.

 Baire's papers had a strong influence on Riesz for two reasons. First, because Riesz

 attributed the notion of what he called a ‘sufficient system of special neighbourhoods'

 to Baire (Riesz 1906b, p. 320). Actually, Baire did not define any concept of neigh

 bourhood at all. What he did was to characterise the concept of an accumulation point

 in terms of certain specific subsets which Riesz then identified as neighbourhoods.53

 Riesz succeeded in synthesising the essential properties of both Baire's subsets and

 Hilbert's neighbourhoods into what he called a ‘sufficient system of special neigh
 bourhoods’ :let X be a mathematical continuum and let ^ e X be a main element; that

 is, let ズ be an accumulation point of some subset M C X.A system of neighbourhoods

 W at ズ is called sufficient if for every neighbourhood Vx of the arbitrary main element

 x there exists a special neighbourhood Ux eU of x such that Ux c Vx.

 In a topological space, such a system of special neighbourhoods is called a neigh

 bourhood base. Clearly, the advantage of special neighbourhoods is that it suffices

 to define accumulation point in terms of special neighbourhoods. That is what Baire

 did. It is one of the technical issues that made Baire's papers so influential in Riesz's

 Genesis. Not only did Riesz identify those subsets used by Baire to define accumulation

 point as special neighbourhoods, but he also applied most of Baire's basic concepts

 and procedures to the construction of his space 尺 as an infinite numerable sequence

 of physical continua.54 Riesz also adapted Baire's notion of an accumulation point,

 thereby achieving a characterisation of his space 7^ as a mathematical continuum.

 4.4 Elementary concepts of an abstract point-set topology

 Riesz then generalised some elementary concepts of Cantor's point-set topology for
 subsets of W to subsets of a mathematical continuum: let Z be a mathematical con
 tinuum. An element x € X is to be called ‘internal element’ of A c X if A is a

 neighbourhood for ズ.A subset A C X is to be regarded as ‘open’ if all its elements
 are internal elements of A. The element x e A is à ‘boundary element’ of A if
 x e (X\A)f. The ‘frontier’ of A consists of all the boundary elements of A and all the

 boundary elements of X\A. Two subsets A and B are called ‘separated’ from each
 other if A 门 = 0. Two subsets A and B are called ‘isolated’ from each other if

 (A U A’）n (B U B') = 0, i.e. if A U A’ and S U are separated from each other
 (Riesz 1906b, p. 320).

 However, the concept of a ‘perfect set’ presented some difficulties. The problem is
 that in Riesz's theoretical framework of mathematical continua, the relation A" c Af

 does not hold in general, and consequently the set A U A' is not necessarily a closed

 set, as it is in Cantor's theory. Riesz himself pointed out this flaw, regretting that the

 relation A" c A’, so important for a true generalisation of Cantor's point-set topology

 53 See sections 3.2.4 and 7.1 of my thesis for a detailed account of the influence ofBaire's papers on Riesz's
 Genesis (Rodriguez 2006, pp. 189-201).

 54 On the space TZ, see the beginning of Sect. 4.

 名 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 82 L. Rodriguez

 and ‘perfect set’.

 for Rn, was missing in his rudimentary theory of mathematical continua (Riesz 1906b,

 p. 320). He therefore restrained himself from giving any tentative definition of ‘closed’

 Why did not Riesz change the axioms in his definition of mathematical continuum

 so that the relation A" c A! would necessarily hold true? Probably, as has been already

 suggested by Purkert et al. (2002)，he did not want his concept to become so narrow

 that his theory would then fail to apply on Baire's classification of real functions.55
 Baire's classification of real functions ア={/ : R — R} reads as follows: the

 class C° is defined as the set consisting of all continuous functions, C1 is the set

 of discontinuous functions that are the point-wise limit of a sequence of continuous

 functions, and Ca is the set of functions f that are the point-wise limit of a sequence
 of functions belonging to the classes but with f 朱for all卢 < a，with a, p
 ordinal numbers of the second class (i.e. a and are the order type of a well-ordered
 countable set).

 Baire's classification first appeared in (1898) and very soon became a research object

 in French analysis. In 1904, Henri Lebesgue showed that ^ 0 for a any countable

 ordinal number.56 In 1905，Maurice Fréchet, who at that time was developing his theory
 of ‘L-’，‘V-’，and ^-classes', discussed the Baire classes within the framework of his

 theory of L-classes.57

 Riesz definitely knew Fréchet's paper from 1905. He referred to it in the Genesis，

 rightly acknowledging Fréchet as a pioneer of the research area to which his own

 theory of mathematical continua belonged (Riesz 1906b, p. 322). Most interestingly,

 not only had Fréchet (1905) pointed to the fact that the statement ‘every derived set

 is closed’ does not hold for L-classes in general but he also argued against the option

 of adding this statement as a further condition defining an ‘[-class’. He pointed to
 Baire's classification as an example of a ‘classical’ concept of limit for which the
 derived set of a set is not closed.

 From Fréchet's perspective, T，provided with the limit concept of point-wise con

 vergence, constitutes an L-class. From Riesz's perspective, T may be regarded as a
 mathematical continuum by considering / e ア as an accumulation point of G c J7

 whenever there exists an infinite sequence {fn} C G that converges point-wise to /.

 In ア as a mathematical continuum, the Baire classes are examples of sets that do not

 contain all their accumulation points. This is a consequence of Lebesgue's proof that

 none of the classes Ca are empty, for a any countable ordinal number.

 This suggests that, following Fréchet, Riesz did indeed decide against a modification

 of his system of axioms because of the Baire classes.

 55 This explanation was suggested by Purkert et al. (2002)，but the author did not elaborate.

 56 See Dugac (1976, pp. 312-327).

 57 An ‘L-class’ in Fréchet's sense is an abstract set provided with a concept of limit point that satisfies

 the following conditions:(1)if a is limit of the sequence {an(/i€lN' then it is unique; (2) if the elements of

 the sequence {an}w€]N are all identical to the same element a, then the sequence has a as limit; (3) if the

 sequence {an}ne^ has a as limit, then every subsequence of {a«}w€]N has a as limit. Fréchet summarised
 his theory of し，V-, and £-classes in his PhD thesis in (1906). For an accurate discussion of Fréchet's PhD

 thesis and his earlier works on abstract point-set theory, see Taylor (1982).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 83

 (X,d) » (X,r)
 Fig. 5 If in the mathematical (X, d) > (X, r)
 Fig. 5 If in the mathematical
 continuum (X, d) the relation
 continuum (X, d) the relation
 d(d(A)) C d(A) does not hold
 d(d(A)) C d(A) does not hold

 true for every subset A of X,
 true for every subset A of X,
 then (X, dx) is not similarly ..
 then (X, dT) is not similarly
 (X,dT)
 condensed to (X, d) dr'
 condensed to (X，d)

 From today's perspective, on the other hand, the lack of the absolute validity of the
 relation A" c A' is crucial in order to understand how close Riesz came to today's

 concept of topological space. In order to clarify the matter, let call d the derivative

 operator that associates A c X its derived set A’ := d(A))andlet(X, d) be an arbitrary
 mathematical continuum. Finally, let x be the system of open sets A c X in Riesz's

 sense. It can easily be proven that (X, r) defines a topological space. Therefore, one
 can associate with any mathematical continuum (X, d) a topological space (X, r).

 Furthermore, using the standard definition of accumulation point in a topological

 space, one can associate to every topological space (X, r) its ‘standard，mathematical
 continuum (X，dx). However, the passage from the mathematical continuum (X，d)

 to its associated topological space (X，て)，and then from there to the mathematical

 continuum (X, dx), may not return us to (X, d), i.e. (X, d) and (X，dT) may not be

 similarly condensed (see Fig. 5). This is certainly what happens whenever in the
 mathematical continuum (X, d) the relation d(d(A)) C d(A) does not hold true for

 every subset A of X.58

 This is presumably what Hausdorff meant when he wrote in an unpublished note
 from 1938: "The foundation of topology on A' (instead of on A) seems unlucky to

 me because different functions Af can determine the same topological space’’.59 As

 illustrated in Fig. 5, the topological space (X，t) can be determined by both (X，d)

 and (Z, dて）.

 4.5 Connectednes

 Riesz considered connectedness as an additional property of a mathematical contin

 uum. As shown in Sects. 3.2 and 3.3, he had been working for years on sharpening this

 notion both for point-sets ofRn and for multiple order types. Within the framework of

 mathematical continua, he formulated three different concepts of connectedness: the

 first one for the space itself as a mathematical continuum, the other two for its subsets.

 58 That means: \id(d(A)) c d(A) does not hold true for every subset A of X，then (X，d) and (X, dx) are

 not similarly condensed. This can be demonstrates as follows: first, notice that (X,dT) is both a topological

 space and a mathematical continuum. Therefore, dx (dx (A)) C dz (A) holds true for every subset A of X.

 The assertion follows as consequence of this lemma: let (X, d\ ) and (X，ゴ2) be any two similarly condensed

 mathematical continua and let i be the isomorphism between them, then d\ (d\ (A)) C d\ (A) if and only if
 d2(d2(i(A))) C d2(i(A)) for every subset A of X.

 59 My translation of the quote appearing in Purkert et al. (2002, p. 728). Herrlich et al. (2002a, p. 753)

 described Riesz's mathematical continuum as a pre-topological space with a separation axiom weaker than

 T2 and stronger that r1.This characterisation is not helpful, because the concept of pre-topological space

 is very specialised and rather difficult to find in a standard book on general topology.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ô Springer

 84 し Rodriguez

 nis dennition of a connected matnematical continuum coincides with today's concept
 of connected topological space and reads as follows:

 Definition 4 (connected mathematical continuum) The mathematical continuum X

 is said to be connected if it is not possible to split it into two complementary open sets
 M, N such that X = M\JN (Riesz 1906b, p. 320).

 For subsets, he defined ‘connectedness’ and ‘absolutely connectedness’. His

 dennition of a connected subset is identical to the definition he gave in his paper
 ‘On discontinuous sets' (1905a). But while Riesz's connected sets may be not con

 nected in modern terms, his concept of absolutely connected is sharper and coincides
 with today's notion of connectedness: the subset P c X of the mathematical contin

 uum X is said to be absolutely connected if for every decomposition of P into two

 subsets M, N there exists at least one element that belongs at the same time to one of

 the subsets and to the derived set of the other, i.e. either M 门が # 0 or M’ fi 斤 # 0
 (Riesz 1906b, p. 321).60

 However, due to the poor reception of the Genesis (see Sect. 6), the modern notion

 of connected set was not established by Riesz but by N.J. Lennes (1911) and Hausdorff

 (1914), who developed it a few years later independently of each other and of Riesz.61

 A simple example illustrates the difference between Riesz's notions of connected and

 absolutely connected set: with respect to the standard topology in R, the set (—oc, 0)U

 (0, oc) is connected but not absolutely connected, while the set (一oc，0) U [0, oc) is

 indeed both connected and absolutely connected.

 Riesz pointed out that an absolutely connected subset A, considered in itself as

 a mathematical continuum, is a connected mathematical continuum. Furthermore,

 he stated that a mathematical continuum is connected if and only if for every pair

 of elements there exists an absolutely connected subset containing them. The proof

 of this last statement consists of two parts. Riesz observed that if the mathematical

 continuum is connected, then it can be regarded as an absolutely connected subset

 of itself (Riesz 1906b, p. 321). Thus, it follows that for every pair of elements, there

 exists an absolutely connected subset containing them. He omitted the second part of

 the proof, namely that if for every pair of elements there exists an absolutely connected

 subset containing them, then the mathematical continuum is connected. This can be

 easily proven.62

 In his Rome lecture, Riesz discussed some deficiencies in Cantor's concept of

 connectedness. He presented the following two homeomorphic sets M = R\0 and
 N = /?\[0,1]from which M is connected in Cantor's sense but N is not (neither

 is absolutely connected in Riesz's sense). The fact that M and N are homeomorphic

 demonstrates, as Riesz claimed, that the concept of connectedness is independent of

 60 Riesz again missed assuming that the sets are non-empty (Taylor 1982, p. 269).

 61 See Herrlich et al. (2002a). The authors do not refer to Riesz's early contributions from 1905.

 62 Let X = M U iV be an arbitrary splitting of the mathematical continuum X into the two disjoint sets
 M and N and letjc g M and y e N be a pair of elements of X. By hypothesis, there exists an absolutely
 connected set C c X such that x,y g C. Since COM and CDNarea splitting of C, then there exists
 ^ € (C H Af) fl(C fl Ny (or z € (C H A/)’ fi (C n NY). The second axiom in the definition of mathematical

 continuum implies that ミら M C\Nf (respectively, z ^ Mf C\ N), and therefore, M cannot be opened and X

 cannot be splitted into two disjoint open sets.

 旬 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 85

 the structure determined by the notion of accumulation point. Since connectedness is

 inherent to the notion of continuity, this means that continuity cannot be completely

 characterised by the notion of accumulation point (Riesz 1909, p. 21).

 4.6 Ordering the space

 Riesz resorted to his work on multiple order types in order to approach the issue of the

 dimension of space. He intended to introduce an n-fold order relation for the space.

 He incorporated some of the most important concepts and results of his theory of

 multiple order types, pointing to the fact that the order relation provides a natural con

 cept of neighbourhood. Using the characterisation of an accumulation point in terms

 of neighbourhoods he concluded that any multiple order type defines a mathematical
 continuum.

 However, the ordering of the mathematical continuum X induces a second conden

 sation type on X that is determined by the order relation. Therefore, Riesz defined: â

 mathematical continuum X can be continuously ordered if its condensation type coin

 cides with the condensation type of X as a multiple order type (Riesz 1906b, p. 345).

 4.7 Riesz's approach to Hilbert's continuity of space problem

 Now that his theoretical framework had reached this stage Riesz felt ready for a

 first approach to Hilbert's continuity of space problem. He started, as mentioned at

 the beginning of Sect. 4, with a concept of space defined by a system of axioms.

 These axioms determine the relationships between what he called groups of sensations,

 physical points and physical continua. The space was first defined as a numerable

 ordered sequence of physical continua (Riesz 1906b, pp. 323-330). This space, which

 I refer to as the space TZ，constitutes the domain on which Riesz then formulated a

 notion of continuous space for geometry.

 According to Riesz, the notion of continuous space for geometry is to be founded

 on the concept of mathematical continuum. Therefore, the first condition imposed
 on TZ is that it can be regarded as â mathematical continuum. For this, he defined

 ‘mathematical points’ on TZ in terms of physical points. Furthermore, he introduced

 â rule determining when 狂 mathematical point is an accumulation point of a set of

 mathematical points. Finally, he showed that K，as the space of mathematical points,

 defines a mathematical continuum (Riesz 1906b, pp. 331-334).

 Thus, TZ is provided with a double structure: it is defined as an infinite sequence of

 physical continua and as a mathematical continuum. Riesz then proved the following

 continuity properties of TZ which depend on this double structure:

 1.尺 has a non-denumerable infinity of mathematical points.
 2. 7?. is a mathematical continuum.

 3. The Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem is valid on ‘bounded’ subsets of TZ.

 4. For every element of 7^ as mathematical continuum there exists a countable, suf

 ficient system of special neighbourhoods (TZ is first countable).

 5. The Borel theorem is valid for ‘closed’ subsets of K.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 86 L. Rodriguez

 6.冗 is connected.

 to E3.

 7. TZ can be continuously threefold ordered so that it is locally ‘similarly condensed'

 Riesz's versions of the Bolzano-Weierstrass and the Borel theorems do not apply

 to subsets of any arbitrary abstract mathematical continuum but only to subsets of

 TZ. The reason is that Riesz characterised both ‘bounded’ and ‘closed’ sets only in

 terms of special properties of TZ. As already mentioned, Riesz did not give a general
 definition of ‘closed’ subsets of a mathematical continuum.63

 For the proof of the first six properties, no extra assumptions were needed. But in

 the case of the property seven, which he needed to approach the issue of dimension,

 he additionally assumed that for every mathematical point x of 尺，there exists a

 neighbourhood U such that U can be continuously threefold ordered. The continuity

 of the ordering means that the condensation type induced on U by the threefold order

 does not differ from the original condensation type of U • Riesz then claimed, without

 proper proof, that the space TZ is locally similarly condensed to Rへ i.e. for every

 mathematical point x of TZ, there exists a neighbourhood U，such that U is similarly
 condensed to R3.

 Riesz general characterisation of continuous geometrical space reads as follows:

 In this way, one achieves a characterisation of space as a connected mathematical

 continuum such that every element has a neighbourhood that, considered as an

 independent continuum, has the same condensation type as the three-dimensional

 space of numbers. So, one arrives at Hilbert's more general conception of con

 tinuous space.64

 That means that continuous space, understood as the set upon which geometry can

 be established, is a connected mathematical continuum locally similarly condensed to

 R3. This notion of three-dimensional space resembles the modern notion of a three
 dimensional topological manifold.

 Riesz was well aware of the difference between the local and the global topology

 of space. He pointed to the fact that such a local characterisation leaves the question

 unanswered as to what the condensation type of the global space is. He therefore

 concluded that the space TZ was still not ready for establishing geometry upon it
 (Riesz 1906b, p. 350).

 5 Continuous space as a n-dimensional manifold

 Both Hilbert's and Riesz's conception of continuous space was that of an
 n-dimensional manifold (with n = 2 in Hilbert's case, n = 3 in Riesz's). How

 ever, they approached the challenge of defining this concept with different degrees

 63 I translate as ‘bounded’ what Riesz called ‘im Endlich gelegen’，i.e. ‘located in a finite region' (Riesz

 1906b, pp. 335-336). Riesz's notion of 'bounded' is connected to the concept of compactness, see next
 section.

 64 Riesz (1906b, p. 359), my translation.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 87

 of generality. This was due not only to their different motivations, but also to the

 differences in their mathematical practices.

 The continuity of space problem set by Hilbert involved the challenge not only

 of finding an accurate definition of a continuous space but also of formulating an

 adequate characterisation of the continuity of the group of motions, as specified in

 Hilbert's fifth Paris problem.

 Riesz experienced a broader spectrum of motivations which included Hilbert's

 axiomatic foundation of geometry, recent contributions to the philosophical discussion

 of space, Cantor's theory of order types, as well as recent developments of analysis and

 point-set theory in France. Riesz was particularly interested in Fréchet's early works

 on abstract point-set topology, because Fréchet's topological approach to the study of
 functions whose domain are sets of functions generalised both the classic analysis as

 well as Cantor's point-set theory.

 The methods Hilbert used to define the plane as a two-dimensional manifold con

 sisted in mapping Jordan domains in R2 onto neighbourhoods and in working with the

 point-set topology of R2. Thus, his procedure was determined by those mathematical
 methods common to the classical analysis ofWeierstrass, Cantor and Lie. These meth

 ods used basic concepts such as the limit of sequences, the continuous function on E2

 (continuous function as a mapping that preserves the convergence of sequences) and

 the Cantor's point-set topology of R2.

 One original aspect of Hilbert、approach that is important for the present discussion,

 is that he induced a weak topology on the plane using the standard topology of E2. It

 is precisely this technical solution that struck Riesz and eventually led him to develop

 his theory of mathematical continuâ.

 Riesz regarded the space primarily as a mathematical continuum, i.e. he demanded

 that the space is a set provided with its own notion of an accumulation point and, con

 sequently, with its own point-set topology. He additionally assumed that each element

 of the space possesses a neighbourhood whose continuity structure as a mathemati
 cal continuum happened to be similar to that of the three-dimensional space TR?. The
 fundamental difference to Hilbert's definition is that the continuity structure did not

 need to be induced but could be defined from the start independently of R3. It is the

 difference between having a strong instead of a weak topology.

 Riesz's general approach proves that the modern practices in the French analy
 sis influenced him profoundly, above all Baire's exploration of other topologies for

 R and Fréchet's attempts to develop an abstract point-set topology. Nevertheless, it

 was definitely Hilbert's technical solution of inducing a topology on the plane that

 gave Riesz the key idea to provide the space with its own concept of accumula

 tion point, as Riesz explicitly acknowledged in his Rome lecture (see quotation in
 Sect. 4.1).

 Thus, the basic concepts that played an important role in Hilbert's and Riesz's

 characterisations of continuous space were cardinality, neighbourhood, accumulation

 point, condensation type, the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, the Borel theorem, con
 nectedness, dimension, motion and continuous function. However, they may have

 been understood and applied differently by both authors. These differences will be

 discussed in the following paragraphs.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 88 し Rodriguez

 5.1 Cardinality

 In Hilbert's work, the cardinality of the space was determined by the axioms defin

 ing the plane as a two-dimensional manifold. From the perspective of an axiomatic

 foundation of geometry, Riesz found this implication unsatisfactory because it means

 that the definition of the space is unnecessarily restrictive (see Sect. 3.4). According

 to him, a foundation of geometry based on Hilbert's notion of motion has the same

 implication on the cardinality of the space. All the same, Riesz proceeded just as

 Hilbert had done. The characterisation of the space TZ as locally similarly condensed

 to R3 implies as well that the cardinality of Tl is 2K°.

 The issue of the cardinality of space remained under scrutiny in the Genesis，because

 Riesz was particularly interested in certain sets of functions. This is revealed in his

 article ‘Sur une espèce de géométrie analytique des systèmes de fonctions sommables’

 (1907c) in which he discussed the development of an analytical geometry on the set

 of functions LL (the square-integrable functions in Lebesgue's sense).

 5.2 Neighbourhood

 This was the basic concept in Hilbert's dennition of the plane. It also played an impor

 tant role in Riesz's characterisation of the space. There is, however, a fundamental dif

 ference between Hilbert's and Riesz、concepts of neighbourhood. Hilbert defined the

 system of neighbourhoods using the images, under the coordinate functions, of Jordan

 domains in R2. Instead, Riesz defined the system of neighbourhoods independently

 of R3 and of any system of subsets of E3. Riesz's neighbourhoods are determined

 only by the continuity structure of the space as a mathematical continuum.

 5.3 Accumulation point

 Hilbert regarded a point x as an accumulation point of a subset M of the plane if
 the images of x and M under the coordinate functions on E2 are related in the same

 way. In contrast, Riesz defined the concept of accumulation point for an abstract set

 axiomatically via his dennition of mathematical continuum.

 5.4 Condensation type

 Riesz introduced this concept to classify mathematical continua according to their con

 tinuity structures (condensation types). Hilbert did not have such a concept. Hilbert

 regarded E2 as the prototype of the continuous two-dimensional space and, accord

 ingly, as the only imaginable continuity type. However, using Riesz、theoretical frame

 work to describe what Hilbert did, it is clear that Hilbert's plane has either locally or

 globally (assuming the existence of a global coordinate function) the condensation

 type of E2. Riesz noticed this. That is the reason why he generalised Hilbert's notion

 of two-dimensional manifold by defining three-dimensional continuous space as a

 mathematical continuum locally similarly condensed to R3.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 89

 5.5 Bolzano-Weierstrass property

 A set is said to satisfy the Bolzano-Weierstrass property if it holds true that any
 infinite subset has at least one accumulation point. In 1894, when he was searching

 for an adequate formulation of the continuity axiom in geometry, Hilbert resorted

 to the property that every infinite, monotone increasing and bounded sequence has

 a least upper bound.65 In the Genesis，Riesz characterised the sets that satisfy the

 Bolzano-Weierstrass property only for the special case of the space TZ. In his Rome

 lecture, Riesz discussed the importance of the Bolzano-Weierstrass property within

 the framework of an abstract point-set topology.

 5.6 Borel theorem

 This theorem, still used to characterise compact sets, belongs to the point-set topology

 that, after Cantor, was chiefly developed by a group of young French mathematicians at

 the beginning of the twentieth century, Borel among them. Hilbert never learnt to take

 full advantage of this branch of modern mathematics~his work on integral equations

 gives proof of that. His mathematical practices remained close to algebraic structural

 methods and to the classical analysis ofWeierstrass. Even though he certainly valued

 Cantor's work highly and never lost an opportunity to express his support for it, the fact

 remains that theAnnalennote and the memoir were the only occasions in which Hilbert

 came to apply Cantor's point-set topological methods. Therefore, it is not surprising

 that Hilbert did not grasp the analytical significance of the Borel theorem.

 Riesz managed to characterise those subsets of the space Tl for which the Borel

 theorem is valid, i.e. for which each cover consisting of neighbourhoods has a finite

 subcover. Furthermore, he suggested in his Rome lecture another three characterisa

 tions of compactness which he discussed in connection with the Bolzano-Weierstrass

 property.66 Within the framework of a general theory of mathematical continua, he

 characterised E as compact if for every sequence {En} of nonempty, infinite subsets

 of E such that En^.\ is a subset of En for each n, there is at least one element that

 belongs to all the subsets En.67

 5.7 Connectedness

 Hilbert did not discuss the concept of connectedness explicitly. Nevertheless, from

 Riesz's point of view, it is clear that the last axiom in Hilbert's definition of the plane

 65 For a detailed account of Hilbert's lecture on the foundations of geometry in 1894, see Toepell (1986,

 p. 74) and Hallett and Majer (2004, p. 68).

 66 One of them is acknowledged by Willard (1970, p. 318) as the first attempt to describe compactness

 using the finite intersection property. Instead of ‘compact’ Riesz spoke of 'bounded set’.

 67 Fréchet also used nested sequences of subsets in 1904. Fréchet did assume that the subsets En are
 closed. On Fréchet's the notion of ‘compactness’，see Taylor (1982), and on its further development, see
 Pier (1980).

 包 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ensures that the plane is a connected mathematical continuum.68 Riesz, on the other

 hand, had worked on sharpening the concept of connectedness for years. He considered

 it of great importance for the characterisation of continuous space. At the same time,
 he was well aware that this property is independent of the notion of ‘condensation

 90 L. Rodriguez

 type’.

 5.8 Dimension

 In Hilbert's work, the two-dimensionality of the plane was determined by the axioms

 defining the coordinate functions as bijective mappings onto E2 with continuous coor

 dinate changes. In Riesz's treatment, the three-dimensionality of space was determined

 in a similar way, except that here the corresponding coordinate functions were sup

 posed to be continuous (Riesz does not need coordinate changes). It is interesting how

 Riesz approached the issue of dimension in the Genesis. He knew from his own earlier
 work how difficult it was to determine the dimension of an arbitrary set, even for sub

 sets of Euclidean spaces. Therefore, he gave up such a general approach and, resorting

 instead to his own theory of multiple order types, he introduced the hypothesis that

 the space TZ can be continuously threefold ordered.69

 5.9 Motion

 Hilbert defined this concept as a bijective transformation of the space to itself whose

 corresponding mapping from R2 onto R2 was continuous, preserved the orientation

 of any closed Jordan curve and satisfied three further axioms. Riesz regarded a motion

 as a bijective continuous transformation of space in itself, i.e. a transformation that

 preserves the condensation type of the corresponding subsets.70 He discussed the
 notion of motion only superficially because, as he said (1906b, p. 350), no geometry

 could yet be established on his space TZ.

 5.10 Continuous function

 Hilbert used extensively the concept of continuous function from R" toR", n =1,2.

 Continuity played a fundamental role in his definition of the plane as a property of the

 coordinate functions. He implicitly extended the concept of a continuous function to

 mappings from the plane onto the plane via the coordinate functions; for instance, his

 concept of motion is defined as a continuous mapping from the plane onto the plane in

 68 Hilbert's neighbourhoods are absolutely connected in Riesz's sense, and for every two points of the plane,

 there exists a neighbourhood containing them, i.e. the plane fulfils Riesz's characterisation of connectedness
 in terms of absolute connectedness; see Sect. 4.5.

 69 See Sect. 3.2. Referring to his own article (1905a), Riesz said, 'Die groBte Schwierigkeit liegt darin, daB

 der Dimensionsbegriff fiir mathematische Kontinua schwer zu fassen ist’ (Riesz 1906b, p. 313).

 70 ‘Die Bewegungen sind eindeutig umkehrbare stetige Transformationen des Raumes, d.h. solche eindeutig

 umkehrbare Abbildungen des Raumes auf sich selbst, fiir welche die einander entsprechenden Punktmengen
 âhnlich verdichtet sind' (Riesz 1906b, p. 350).

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 91

 the sense that the corresponding mapping from R2 to R2 is continuous. Riesz did not

 explicitly define the concept of continuous function between different mathematical

 continua. However, such a concept is suggested through his definition of a 'contin

 uously ordered mathematical continuum' and his concept of motion. A function is

 continuous if it preserves the condensation type of the corresponding subsets.71

 6 Reception

 Riesz's participation in the International Congress of Mathematicians at Rome in 1908

 was crucial for the reception of his concept of mathematical continuum. If he had not

 attended it, then there would have been no reception at all. Not only because the Genesis

 went largely unnoticed but also because his Rome lecture was the only occasion in

 which Riesz summarised his theory of mathematical continua. Nevertheless, his lecture

 was successful for it eventually reached and inspired several future founders of general

 topology.

 His contribution was entitled ‘Continuity and abstract point-set theory' (1909).

 Continuity means the notion enclosed within the concept of space as a continuous

 manifold. Riesz made the connection with abstract point-set theory when, reading

 Hilbert's memoir，he understood that the issue of characterising continuity depends

 mainly on the concept of an accumulation point. This realisation, combined with

 the ideas he had learnt from Poincaré's philosophy about how basic geometric ideas

 develop in our intuition, led him eventually to conceive the space as a mathematical
 continuum. He did not enter this discussion but referred to Poincaré's ‘La Valeur de

 la Science’ (1905) and to his own ‘Die Genesis des Raumbegriffs'.

 He then presented his concept of a ‘mathematical continuum'. However, the def

 inition included only the first three axioms used in the Genesis. The fourth axiom is

 replaced by the assumption that each accumulation point jcofa given set M is uniquely

 determined by the totality of those subsets of M of which x is an accumulation point.

 Addressing the issue of how â theory of mathematical continua should be further devel

 oped, he made some suggestions, mentioning the work of Fréchet as a starting point,

 and presenting two theorems of his own related to the B olzano-Weierstrass property.

 But not every continuity property can be reduced to the concept of an accumulation

 point. That is the case of ‘connectedness’ as he illustrated with examples. Therefore,

 he proposed the new concept of ‘chaining’ which defines a relation between two sets,

 namely if they are near or far from each other (i.e. chained or not).

 The rest of the lecture deals with the relation between the spatial structures of

 ‘chaining type’ and ‘condensation type’. The first is determined by the sets being

 chained with each other, and the second by the accumulation point relation between

 the elements and the subsets of the space.72

 71 See Footnote 70 and Sect. 4.6. Since sequential convergence describes the topology of any first countable
 space and since the space V, is first countable, then f :1Z —1Z is continuous if and only if whenever
 xn x then f(xn) — f(x) in 1Z.

 72 In modern terminology, 'chaining type' is called a proximity structure, see Thron (1997). According to
 Bognâr and Csâszâr (2006), the proximity spaces of modern topology (introduced by V.A. Efremovis in

 姿 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Table 1 List of authors that referred to Riesz’ topological ideas. The references appear in works published

 between 1907 and 1933. The authors are ordered according to their country and the year their paper or book

 92 L. Rodriguez

 was published

 Year
 Year USA France Austria Poland Germany Switzerland

 Germany Switzerland

 Austria

 France

 Poland

 USA

 Schoenflies Fehr
 1908
 1908 Schoenflies Fehr

 1910  EH Moore
 1910 EH Moore Frechet

 Fréchet

 1911
 1911 Root
 Root

 1914
 1914 Root (2); Pitcher
 Root (2); Pitcher

 1915
 1915 RL Moore; Chittenden
 RL Moore; Chittenden

 1917
 Fréchet
 1917 Frdchet

 1918
 Fréchet
 1918 Frdchet

 1919 Chittenden
 1919
 Chittenden

 1921
 Vietoris
 1921 Frdchet Vietoris

 Fréchet

 1922
 Kuratowski
 1922 Kuratowski

 1923
 Tietze
 1923 Tietze

 1927
 1927 Sierpinski
 Sierpinski

 1928
 1928 Bouligand, Frdchet (2)

 Bouligand, Fréchet ⑵

 Baer
 1929
 1929 Putnam, Chittenden Baer

 Putnam, Chittenden

 1926
 Hildebrandt
 1926 Hildebrandt

 1930 Frink
 1930
 Frink

 1932
 1932 Stephans

 Stephans

 1933 Kuratowski
 1933

 Kuratowski

 In my opinion, the Rome lecture cannot be fairly regarded as a short description

 of the ideas contained in the Genesis.13 In Rome, Riesz focused only on the concept

 of mathematical continuum, leaving aside all the other important concepts he had

 developed in Genesis，e.g. connectedness and neighbourhood, not to mention their

 application to the space problem. Nevertheless, for the reception or Riesz's concept

 of mathematical continuum, the print version of the Rome lecture is undoubtedly the

 more important one of the two papers.

 The reception of Riesz's topological ideas can be traced as follows: a systematic

 research on publications appearing between 1907 and 1933 resulted in 24 articles in

 14 mathematical journals and four books containing references to Riesz. The search

 covered a total of 26 journals of that period. The complete list of journals searched is

 shown in Table 2. The references were made by 18 different authors from six countries

 (see Table 1).Their works were published in the USA, France, Italy, Austria, Poland,

 Germany and Switzerland. Among the authors, there are some of the most prominent

 Footnote 72 continued

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1951 independently ofRiesz) are in some respect similar to the chaining types ofRiesz. This similarity was

 responsible for the late reception of Riesz's topological ideas, e.g. Thron (1973).

 73 That is how the Rome lecture is commonly referred to, e.g. by Taylor (1982) and Bognâr and Csâszâr
 (2006).

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 93

 Table 2 Complete list of journals searched for references to Riesz’ Genesis and his Rome lecture. The
 columns contain the country in which the journal was published, the volumes and years searched and the

 number of references founded in the corresponding period

 Journal
 Journal

 Country
 Country

 Searched
 Searched

 Réf.
 Ref.

 Abhand. Math. Sem. Hamburg.
 Abhand. Math. Sem. Hamburg.

 Germany
 Germany

 1.1922-9.1933
 1.1922-9.1933

 Universitat
 Universitat

 Acta Mathematica
 Acta Mathematica

 Acta Scientiarium Mathematicarum
 Acta Scientiarium Mathematicarum

 American Journal of Mathematics
 American Journal of Mathematics

 Ann. Mat. Pura appl. ser. iii and iv
 Ann. Mat. Pura appl. ser. iii and iv

 Ann. scientifiques de l'Ecole
 Ann. scientifiques de l'École

 normale supérieure
 normale supdrieure

 Annali délia Scuola Normale
 Annali della Scuola Normale

 Superiore di Pisa - Classe di
 Superiore di Pisa - Classe di
 Scienze
 Scienze

 Sweden
 Sweden

 30.1906-62.1933
 30.1906-62.1933

 Hungary
 Hungary

 1.1922-6.1934
 1.1922-6.1934

 29.1907-55.1933
 29.1907-55.1933

 15.1907-31.1922; 1.1924-11.1933
 15.1907-31.1922; 1.1924-11.1933

 37.1920-47.1930
 37.1920-47.1930

 9.1907-16.1930; 1.1932-2.1933
 9.1907-16.1930; 1.1932-2.1933

 Bull, de la Soc math de France
 Bull, de la Soc math de France

 France
 France

 35.1907-61.1933
 35.1907-61.1933

 USA
 USA

 Italy
 Italy

 France
 France

 Italy
 Italy

 USA
 USA

 USA
 USA

 France
 France

 France
 France

 Poland
 Poland

 Germany
 Germany

 Germany
 Germany

 Germany
 Germany

 Switzerland
 Switzerland

 Germany
 Germany

 Austria
 Austria

 France
 France

 8.1907-34.1933
 8.1907-34.1933

 10.1904-39.1933
 10.1904-39.1933

 32.1908-57.1933
 32.1908-57.1933

 144,1907-151.1910
 144.1907-151.1910

 1.1920-21.1933
 1.1920-21.1933

 1907-1933
 1907-1933

 132.1907-169.1933
 132.1907-169.1933

 17.1908-29.1920
 17.1908-29.1920

 9.1907-32.1933
 9.1907-32.1933

 67.1909-108.1933
 67.1909-108.1933

 18.1907-40.1933
 18.1907-40.1933

 7.1907-20.1920;
 7.1907-20.1920;
 1.1922-3.1924;
 1.1922-3.1924;
 1.1925-2.1927
 1.1925-2.1927

 Proceedings of the London Math.
 Proceedings of the London Math.

 UK
 UK

 4.1907-35.1933
 4.1907-35.1933

 Proceedings of the National Acad, of
 Proceedings of the National Acad, of

 USA
 USA

 1.1915-19.1933
 1.1915 -19.1933

 Rend. Accad. Lincei ser. 5
 Rend. Accad. Lincei ser. 5

 Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo
 Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo

 Italy
 Italy

 Italy
 Italy

 16.1907-33.1924; 1.1925-18.1933
 16.1907-33.1924; 1.1925-18.1933

 23.1907-57.1933
 23.1907-57.1933

 Germany
 Germany

 15.1929
 15.1929

 USA
 USA

 9.1908-35.1933
 9.1908-35.1933

 Annals of Math.
 Annals of Math.

 Bull. Am. Math. Soc.
 Bull. Am. Math. Soc.

 Bull, des sciences mathématiques
 Bull, des sciences mathdmatiques

 Comptes Rendu Ac. Sci. Paris
 Comptes Rendu Ac. Sci. Paris

 Fundamenta Mathematicae
 Fundamenta Mathematicae

 Gottinger Nachrichten
 Gôttinger Nachrichten

 Journal fôr reine und angewandte
 Journal fur reine und angewandte

 Math.
 Math.

 Jahresbericht der DMV
 Jahresbericht der DMV

 L'Enseignement mathématique
 L'Enseignement mathdmatique

 Math. Ann.
 Math. Ann.

 Monatshefte ftir Math, und Phys.
 Monatshefte fiir Math, und Phys.

 Nouvelles Annales de
 Nouvelles Annales de

 Mathématiques
 Mathematiques

 Society
 Society

 Sci.
 Sci.

 Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger
 Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger
 Akademie der Wissenschaften.
 Akademie der Wissenschaften.

 Math.-naturwis. Klasse
 Math.-naturwis. Klasse

 Transactions of the AMS
 Transactions of the AMS

 0
 0

 0
 0

 0
 0

 4
 4

 0
 0

 1
 1

 0
 0

 1
 1

 6
 6

 1
 1

 1
 1

 1
 1

 1
 1

 0
 0

 0
 0

 0
 0

 1
 1

 2
 2

 1
 1

 0
 0

 0
 0

 0
 0

 0
 0

 1
 1

 1
 1

 3
 3

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 名 Springer

 94 L. Rodriguez

 founders of general topology: Kuratowski, Sierpinski, Tietze, Vietoris, Fréchet, Robert

 Lee Moore and Chittenden. All references, except the one by Schoenflies in 1908,
 concern the Rome lecture.

 The two references made in 1908 are not relevant. Schoenflies (1908) is the only

 one in the list who actually referred to the Genesis in his report on the development

 of point-set theory. That could have been a good start for Riesz but unfortunately

 Schoenflies was apparently interested only in Riesz's theory of multiple order types

 and missed all the other topological work contained in the Genesis completely. The

 second reference was made by Fehr (1908) who wrote a report on the International

 Congress of Mathematicians for ÛiQ]o\xïm\U Enseignement Mathématique. The report

 includes a brief summary of Riesz's lecture.

 Table 1 shows an accurate picture of how the reception of Riesz's topological

 ideas proceeded chronologically and geographically. The relevant reception started in

 France in 1910 and on the other side of the Atlantic, in the USA. Very slowly Riesz's

 ideas move on towards Austria and Poland to arrive finally in Germany. The table also

 shows clearly that Riesz's ideas achieved their widest reception in the USA.

 For the reception in the USA, E.H. Moore played a key role. E.H. Moore actually

 attended the International Congress of Mathematicians in Rome and was most prob

 ably present at Riesz's talk. At that time, E.H. Moore was working in what he called

 ‘general analysis'. He had therefore an open interest in the development of abstract

 point-set theory.74 E.H. Moore knew by then Fréchet's pioneer work on abstract point

 set topology and must have been very interested in what Riesz had to say. In any case,

 two years after the congress, E.H. Moore's book on general analysis (1910) appeared.

 The book contains references to Riesz's and Fréchet's topological work as examples

 of different principles that can be applied in order to develop an abstract point-set

 theory. In 1910, Fréchet referred to Riesz in that same way.

 Furthermore E.H. Moore propagated Riesz's approach in Chicago among five of his

 students successfully: Ralph E. Root, A. Pitcher, Robert Lee Moore, Edward Wilson
 Chittenden and Theophil H. Hildebrandt.75 Apart from R.L. Moore, they were all

 followers of E.H. Moore's general analysis.

 In spite of dramatic events, the reception of Riesz's Rome lecture went on as fol

 lows. First, came Root*s papers on iterated limits (1911，1914a, 1914b) and a paper

 by Pitcher (1914) on general analysis. Then, came the First World War with the effect

 that even the publication of Felix Hausdorffs book ‘Grundziige der Mengenlehre’ in

 1914 passed almost unnoticed.76 During the war, two papers appeared by Chittenden

 (1915), Chittenden (1919)，one by Moore (1915) and two by Fréchet (1917，1918).

 Until 1928, Fréchet remained in France quite isolated as receptor of Riesz's ideas.

 74 On Moore's general analysis, see Siegmund-Schultze (1998).

 75 On E.H. Moore's school and the beginning of Topology in the USA, see Jones (1997). The author

 discusses the reception ofFréchet's work within E.H. Moore's school, but Riesz is not mentioned at all. The

 reception of Riesz's ideas by Root and R.L. Moore is shortly mentioned by Purkert et al. (2002, p. 707). A
 detailed discussion of the reception of Riesz's topological ideas by Fréchet gives Taylor (1985).

 76 Purkert (2002) gives a detailed account of the reception of Hausdorff's 'Grundziige der Mengenlehre'.

 This reception suffered the effects of the war too.

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 95

 After the war, Europe was ready to catch up. Vietoris (1921) and Fréchet (1921)

 published papers on investigations they had started to pursue during their days at the

 front. After a second reference in Austria by Tietze (1923)，Riesz's ideas managed

 to infiltrate Poland and achieved in the hands of Kuratowski (1922) and Sierpinski

 (1927)，their most important contribution to general topology.77

 Before 1919, the authors who referred to Riesz seemed not to have noticed Haus

 dorff's approach for he is not mentioned by any of them.78 This changed radically

 after the war. Almost all of the papers listed in Table 1 deal with principles defining a

 continuity structure in an abstract set, i.e. principles on which to develop an abstract

 point-set topology. After the war, once Hausdorff's Grundziige began to be acknowl

 edged, his neighbourhoods axioms provided a way to topologize a set that was different

 to those of Riesz and Fréchet. Which approach is better? Or are they equivalent? That

 is in general the issue of most post-war papers: to find out which concept (accumula

 tion point, distance, neighbourhood, closure) is the most convenient one as the basic

 concept for the foundation of abstract point-set topology. For instance, Tietze stated:

 A ‘general topology’ is arising as a theory concerning the properties that, under

 topological mappings, remain invariant between so-called topological spaces.

 These investigations are related to the study of the different systems of axioms

 defining the mentioned relations of limes, neighbourhoods or distance, their own

 relevance and the connection between them. It is in this respect that the present

 paper makes some contributions.79

 Practically all post-war, authors discussed both Riesz、and Hausdorff's approach,

 evaluating their axioms and choosing those that seemed best adapted for their purposes.

 And although Hausdorff's axioms were eventually accepted as a satisfactory basis, this

 happened only after several efforts to improve Riesz's system of axioms (by modifying

 them or adding new axioms) so that k became a system equivalent or comparable to
 Hausdorff's.

 Most importantly, this procedure can be found in precisely those papers by Vietoris,
 Tietze, Fréchet’ Kuratowski and Sierpinski that were so fundamental for the estab

 lishment of general topology. Vietoris (1921), for instance, investigated the relation

 between two systems of axioms defining the notions of neighbourhood and of accu

 mulation point. The interesting point is that his second system consisted of the three

 axioms of Riesz and a fourth axiom proposed by his teacher W. Gross.80

 Another example is Sierpinski who said:

 77 The papers mentioned in Table 1 from 1926 on are Hildebrandt (1926)，Bouligand (1928)，Fréchet
 (1928b), Fréchet (1928a), Chittenden (1929)，Baer (1929)，Frink (1930), Stephens (1932) and Kuratowski

 (1933). Putnam's reference appeared in Dresden (1929), a report of a meeting of the American Mathematical
 Society.

 78 Hausdorff is first mentioned along with Riesz by Chittenden (1919). Hausdorff was acquainted only

 with Fréchet's work. In his GrundzUge，he therefore does not refer either to Riesz or to any member of the
 Moore's school (see Purkert et al. 2002, pp. 699-713).

 79 Tietze (1923), my translation.

 80 Reitberger (1997) provides a brief discussion of Vietoris' contribution to the foundation of general
 topology.

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 96 L. Rodriguez

 Since Fréchet's thesis we have seen various attempts to base topology (analy

 sis situs) on one or another primitive concept, e.g. on that of limit (Fréchet),

 accumulation point (F. Riesz), distance or neighbourhood (Hausdorff, Fréchet),

 and closure (Kuratowski). The purpose of this article is to show how topology

 could be developed by taking as primitive the concept of derived set.81

 This means that the accumulation point axioms of Riesz were at some point compet

 ing with the neighbourhoods axioms of Hausdorff, the closure axioms of Kuratowski,

 and the derived set axioms of Sierpinski. In fact, Riesz’ s axioms played a key role in

 the formulation of the axiom systems of Kuratowski and Sierpienski. This was Riesz's

 main contribution to the foundation of general topology.

 As for the reception of Riesz's Genesis，apparently the only section that has been

 studied until now, even by historians, is the one in which the notion of mathematical

 continuum is introduced.82 The question posed by Riesz about the role of experience

 in the emergence of the concept of space, and no mention his mathematical treatment
 of the issue, made the text difficult to read. Riesz wrote the Genesis for mathemati

 cians who, like Poincaré, were interested in both the foundations of geometry and

 the philosophical discussion about space. Such mathematicians were rare. Besides,

 the fact that Riesz's paper did not appear in an important German or French journal

 reduced the chances of its reception significantly. Sadly, the efforts made by the jour

 nal Mathematische und naturwissenschaftliche Berichte aus Ungarn to promote the

 work of its authors by publishing in German were not enough to prevent this.

 All the time historians of general topology have repeatedly overlooked Riesz's

 genuine interest in shaping the concept of continuous space for geometry. Therefore,

 they missed the chance of discovering that Riesz's topological work has indeed its
 roots in geometry, especially in Hilbert's foundations of geometry.

 Appendix A Letters to David Hilbert

 A.l Letter by F. Riesz to David Hilbert from 18th November 190483

 Lôcse, den 18. November 1904

 Hochgeehrter Herr Professor!

 81 Sierpinski (1927) according to the translation by Moore (2008,233). Moore (2008,221) concludes, just
 I did in my thesis (Rodriguez 2006, 240), that ‘HausdorfTs neighbourhood spaces did not immediately

 succeed in displacing their competitors', Riesz's mathematical continuum among them, but that ‘there was

 a period of evolution during which it was not clear what concept should be taken as primitive and what

 axioms should be assumed for such a space.' As late as (1982), Appert, a direct pupil ofFréchet's, occupied

 himself with this same question.

 82 An interesting exception is Willard (1970, p. 312), who refers to the Genesis acknowledging Riesz's
 contribution to the notion of connectedness.

 83 Riesz (1904a)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 97

 Sie entschuldigen, wenn ich Sie store. Es handelt sich um meine letzten Unter

 suchungen, iiber die ich vor ausfiihrlicher Publikation gerne eine kiirzere Note abgeben
 môchte und ich wende mich Ihnen mit der Bitte, dieselbe der Gesellschaft der

 Wissenschaften in Gôttingen giitigst vorzulegen. Die Untersuchungen kniipfen an die

 Cantor'sche Idee an, dass die sogenannten geometrischen Eigenschaften der Punkt

 mengen sich mit dem Begriffe der Fundamentalreihe auf Ordnungstypen iibertragen

 lassen. Dies beziigliche Untersuchungen sind erst flir lineare Ordnungstypen durchge

 fuhrt, ich unternahm es, dieselben fur mehrfach geordnete transfinite Mengen wei

 terzufuhren. Die Schwierigkeiten, die zu uberwinden waren, bestanden darin, dass der

 Massbegriff und damit die gleichmàssige Stetigkeit zu entbehren waren. Als Ersatz

 dafiir diente die Ûbertragung des sogen. Heine-Borelschen Satzes 一 dass nàmlich

 aus jeder unendlichen Intervallmenge, die aile Punkte eines Intervalles im Inneren
 enthàlt, eine endliche Anzahl von Intervallen àhnlicher Eigenschaft sich auswàhlen

 lâsst 一 auf lineare perfekte zusammenhângende Ordnungstypen. Damit liess sich auch

 der Bolzano-Weierstrass'schen Satz iibertragen. Nach allgemeinen Definitionen gehe

 ich auf zweifache Ordnungstypen von perfektem, zusammenhângendem Charakter

 ein, speziell auf solche, die nach Ausscheidung von Randelementen in einen iiber

 all dichten zusammenhàngenden Ordnungstypus 一Verallgemeinerung des Bereiches

 der Geometrie 一 iibergehen, und beschàftige mich mit den Zusammenhangs-, resp.

 Teilungseigenschaften derselben, d.h. mit der Analysis Situs der Ordnungstypen. Von

 den gebrauchlichen Instrumenten der Mengenlehre muss ich hier teilweise die ge

 rade Strecke entbehren, und kann nur spezielle Strecken und Poligone definieren, die

 mir aber gentigen，um die Untersuchungen liber Jordan-Kurven zu iibertragen, die

 Teilung des Bereiches durch dieselben nachzuweisen, wie auch die beiden Sinne fiir

 die Jordan-Kurven zu definieren. Auf weitere Teilungsfragen môchte ich in der Note

 nicht eingehen.

 Nun treten aber auch meine Untersuchungen in innigste Fiihlung mit jenen iiber

 die Grundlagen der Geometrie. Jene Untersuchungen nàmlich, die als primare Eigen
 schaft des Raumes die Stetigkeit voraussetzen, bauen den Begriff der n-fach aus

 gedehnten Mannigfaltigkeit auf den Zahlenbegriff und stellen somit der Màchtigkeit

 des Raumes Schranken, die gewissermassen fur gekunstelt erscheinen. Meines Erach

 tens nach sollten die einzigen wesentlichen Merkmale der En die n-fache Anord

 nung, das Ûberalldichte und die Stetigkeit (Perfektheit u. Zusammenhang), wie diese
 in Ihrem Ebenenbegriff, jedoch mit der obigen Beschrânkung, klar hervortreten,
 bilden. Demgemâss ware der Rn als Bereich von n-fachem Ordnungstypus auf
 zufassen. Nun halte ich Ihre Annalennote aus diesem Gesichtspunkte durchdacht
 und wenn ich mich nicht geirrt habe 一 was môglich ist, da ich die Sache nicht

 naher ausgearbeitet habe, so genligt schon meine Auffassung des Rn, resp. der
 Ebene, um auf Grund Ihrer Bewegungsaxiome zur Euklidischen oder zur Bolyai
 Lobatschewskyschen Geometrie zu gelangen. Also liesse keine Mannigfaltigkeit,

 welche von hôherer Màchtigkeit als das Continuumm ist, eine Beweglichkeit im

 Lie'schen, resp. Ihrem Sinne zu.

 Wenn Ihnen eine Note iiber diese Untersuchungen willkommen ist, so bitte ich Sie,

 mir mittels einer Postkarte die Erlaubnis zur Einsendung derselben zu ertheilen.

 Zugleich erlaube ich mir, Ihnen einen Abzug meiner Annalennote mit innigstem
 Dank fiir die Publikation einzusenden. Herr Schoenflies hatte mich brieflich auf einen

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 必 Springer

 Irrtum in Anmmerkung S. 410 aufmerksam gemacht, das aber auf die Sache nicht von

 98 L. Rodriguez

 Belang ist.

 Hochachtungsvoll Ihr ganz ergebener
 Riesz

 Adresse: F. Riesz, Lôcse /:Ungarn:/

 A.2 Letter by F. Riesz to David Hilbert, undated [probably December 1904, LR]84

 Hochgeehrter Herr Professor!

 Die eingehende Ausfiihrung meiner Untersuchungen iiber mehrfache Ordnungs

 typen, namentlich jener, die die Verallgemeinerung der Analysis Situs des Bereiches

 der Funktionentheorie zum Ziele haben, zeigte mir, dass eine Verwendung der Fun

 damentalreihen oder wenigstens von Teilmengen mit einer einzigen Hàufungsstelle

 eher zum Ziel fiihrt, als der eingeschlagene Weg. Demgemàss waren auch die ein

 leitenden Untersuchungen in einigen Punkten abzuândern. Ich bitte Sie deshalb, von

 der eingesandten Note vorlaufig nicht Gebrauch zu machen. Ich werde sie demnàchst
 ersetzen.

 Ich beniitze zugleich die Gelegenheit, Ihnen ein gliickliches Neujahr zu wiinschen.

 Hochachtungsvoll Ihr ergebener
 Riesz

 Appendix B A letter to Maurice Frechet

 B.l Letter by F. Riesz to M. Fréchet from 21 May 190785

 Paris 21 mai 1907

 Monsieur et cher Collègue!

 En quelques jours je quitte la France pour aller à r Allemagne. Je serais été ravi
 de faire votre connaissance; mais, étant en mission, ma route est déterminée, et je ne

 peux pas passer à Besançon. Ce que je regrette bien.

 Je vous remercie de votre aimable lettre. En ce qué concerne les applications de

 mes résultats à la théorie des opérations fonctionelles, non seulement des opérations

 ordonnant à chaque fonction un nombre, mais aussi aux transformations linéaires (ou

 alors distributives) de l'espace des fonctions, moi je pensais bien que vot. résultats
 et ceux de M. Hadamard peuvent être complétés et généralisés; en même temps,

 M. Hadamard m'avaits communiqué le même espoir1. Paimerais bien de pouvoir lire
 prochainement une publication sur ce sujets. Naturellement, pour pouvoir appliquer

 la méthode, il faudra augmenter le domaine des fonctions et en meme temps, élargir

 84 Riesz (1904b)

 85 Riesz (1907b)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology 99

 le sens de la notion de，，opération continue". Alors, les problèmes reviendront à la

 résolution des systèmes d'équations linéaires d'une infinite d'inconnues.

 Je veux vous communiquer un théorème qui siût inmédiatement de mes recherches

 mais que je n'avais pas encore communiqué. Pour la classe des fonctions sommables,
 de carré sommable et pour la notion de fonction limite que j'ai introduite dans ma

 publication autérieure sur les ensembles de fonctions (à l'aide de la notion de distance),

 pour qu'une série de fonctions fn converge (au sens donné) vers une fonction limite

 il faut et il suffits que la distance de deux fonctions de rang assez elevé dévienne tel

 petite que F on veux. Donc l'ensemble considéré rentrera dans votre classification de

 Je vous remercie encore de votre observation grammatique. N'étant pas français,

 votre belle langue me fait bien de difficultés.

 ，，classe normale".

 Votre tout dévoué

 Riesz

 11.6. L'année dernière, Vous aviez la bonté de m’envoyer votre thèse. Je vous en

 remercie. Mais possédât quelque chose, on souhaite toujours à augmenter la fortune.

 Le qui vent dire que je serais heureux d'être en possession de vos autres travaux.
 Pendant mon voyage je reçois mes lettres par l'adresse de mon frère: M. Marcel
 Riesz, Gôttingen, Gorslerstr. 6.

 References

 Aleksandrov, P. (éd.). 1998. Die Hilbertschen Problème, volume 252 of Ostwalds Klassiker der exakten

 Wissenschaften. Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Hani Deutsch.

 Appert, A. 1982. Sur le meilleur terme primitif en topologie. Cahiers du séminaire d'histoire des mathé

 matiques 3: 63-67.

 Baer, R.1929. Beziehungen zwischen den Grundbegriffen der Topologie. Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger

 Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse 15:1-23.

 Baire, R. 1898. Sur les fonctions discontinues qui se rattachent aux fonctions continues. Comptes Rendus

 de l'Académie des Sciences Paris 126: 1621-1623.

 Baire, R. 1899a. Sur la théorie des ensembles. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences Paris 129:

 946-949.

 Paris 129: 1010-1013.

 Baire, R. 1899b. Sur la théorie des fonctions discontinues. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences

 Bernkopf, M. 1966. The development of function spaces with particular reference to their origins in integral

 equation theory. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 3:1-96.

 Bognâr, M., and Â. Csâszâr. 2006. Topology, 9-25. In A panorama of Hungarian mathematics in the

 twentieth century I，ed. Horvath, J. Berlin: Springer.

 Bouligand, G.1928. Sur quelques points de topologie restreinte du premier ordre. Bulletin de la Société

 Mathématique de France 56: 26-35.

 Brouwer, L.1910. Beweis des jordanschen kurvensatzes. Mathemaîische Annalen 69(2): 169-175.

 Browder, F.E., (éd.). 1974. Mathematical developments arising from Hilbert Problems，volume 28 of Pro

 ceedings of symposia in pure mathematics. Providencem Rhode Island: AMS.

 Chittenden, E.W. 1915. The converse of the Heine-Borel theorem in a Riesz domain. Bulletin of the American

 Chittenden, E.W. 1919. On the Heine-Borel property in the theory of abstract sets. Bulletin of the American

 Mathematical Society 21:179-183.

 Mathematical Society 25: 60-66.

 Chittenden, E.W. 1929. On general topology and the relation of the properties of the class of all continuous

 functions to the properties of space. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 31:290-321.

 Crilly, T., D.M. Johnson. 1999. The emergence of topological dimension theory. In History of topology, ed.

 James, I.M., 1-24. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Dresden, A. 1929. The march meeting in new york. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 35:

 100 し Rodriguez

 433-446. ^

 Sciences 15: 297-383.

 Dugac, P. 1976. Notes et documents sur la vie et l'œuvre de René Baire. Archive for History of Exact

 Fehr, H. 1908. 4e congrès international des mathématiciens, Rome, 1908. H Enseignement Mathématique

 Fréchet, M. 1905. Sur les fonctions limites et les opérations fonctionnelles. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie

 10: 226-265.

 des Sciences Paris 140: 27-29.

 Palermo (2) 30(1): 1-26.

 Sciences Paris 165: 359-360.

 42:138-156.

 341-388.

 Mathematics 50(1):49-72.

 Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Society 36: 281-283.

 Fréchet, M. 1906. Sur quelques points du Calcul fonctionnel (thèse de doctorat, Paris, 1906). Rendiconti

 del Circolo Matematico di Palermo (2) 22:1-74.

 Fréchet, M. 1910. Les ensembles abstraits et le calcul fonctionnel. Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di

 Fréchet, M. 1917. Sur la notion de voisinage dans les espaces abstraits. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des

 Fréchet, M. 1918. Sur la notion de voisinage dans les espaces abstraits. Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques

 Fréchet, M. 1921. Sur les ensembles abstraits. Annales Scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure 38:

 Fréchet, M. 1928a. Démonstration de quelques propriétés des ensembles abstraits. American Journal of

 Fréchet, M.1928b. Les espaces abstraits et leur théorie considérée comme introduction à l'analyse générale.

 Frink, OJ.1930. The fourth postulates of Riesz and Hausdorff. Bulletin of the American Mathematical

 Gray, J.J. 2000. The Hilbert challenge. New York: Oxford University Press.

 Gray, J.J. 2008. Plato's ghost. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press.

 Guggenheimer, H.1977. The Jordan curve theorem and an unpublished manuscript by Max Dehn. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 17(2): 193-200.

 Hales, T.C. 2007. Jordan's proof of the jordan curve theorem. Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric

 23(10): 45-^0.

 Berlin: Springer.

 Hallett, M” and U. Majer (eds.). 2004. David Hilbert's lectures on the foundations of geometry, 1891-1902.

 Hausdorff, F.1914. Grundziige der Mengenlehre. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Hawkins, T.1999. Weyl and the topology of continuous groups. In History of topology, ed. James, I.M.,

 169-198. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 Herrlich, H.，Hu§ek, M.，and G. PreuB. 2002a. Zusammenhang. In Felix Hausdorff Gesammelte Werke Band

 II: Grundiizge der Mengenlehre, ed. Purkert,W., vol.2, 752-756. Berlin: Springer.
 Hilbert, D.1900. Mathematische problème. Gdttinger Nachrichten 1900(3): 25S-297.
 Hilbert, D.1902a. Mathematical problems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 8: 437-479.
 Hilbert, D.1902b. Ueber die Grundlagen der Geometrie. Gottinger Nachrichten 1902(4): 233-241.
 Hilbert, D.1903. Ueber die Grundlagen der Geometrie. Mathematische Annalen 56: 381-422.

 Hilbert, D.1956. Grundlagen der Geometrie, 8th ed. Stuttgart: Teubner.

 Hildebrandt, T.H. 1926. The Borel theorem and its generalizations. Bulletin of the American Mathematical

 Society 32:423-474.

 Johnson, D.M. 1981. The problem of the invariance of dimension in the growth of modern topology part 2.

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 25: 85-267.

 Jones, F.B. 1997. The beginning of topology in the United States and the Moore school. In Handbook of the

 history of general topology, eds. Aull,C.，and R. Lowen, vol. 1,97-103. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
 Publishers. —

 Kuratowski, C.1922. Sur l'opération A de 1'analysis situs. Fundamenta Mathematicae 3:182-199.
 Kuratowski, C.1933. Topologie，volume 1.Nakladem Polskiego Towarzystwa Matematycznego.
 Lennes, N.J.1911.Curves in non-metrical analysis situs with an application in the calculus of variations.

 American Journal of Mathematics 33: 287-326.

 Manheim, J. 1964. The genesis of point set topology. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

 Moore, E.H. 1910. Introduction to a form of general analysis. New Haven: Yale University Press.

 Moore, G. 2008. The emergence of open sets, closed sets, and limit points in analysis and topology. Historia

 Mathematica 35: 220-241.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Frigyes Riesz and the emergence of general topology

 Moore，R.L. 1915. The linear continuum in terms of point and limit. The Annals of Mathematics 16(2):

 123-133.

 Pier, J.-P. 1980. Historique de la notion de compacité. Hisîoria Mathematica 7(4): 425-443.
 Pitcher, A. 1914. On the connection of an abstract set, with applications to the theory of functions of a

 general variable. American Journal of Mathematics 36(3): 261-266.

 Poincaré, H. 1905. La valeur de la science. Paris: Flammarion.

 Purkert, W. 2002. Grundztige der Mengenlehre. Historische EinfUhrung. In Felix Hausdorff Gesammelte

 Werke Band II: Grundiizge der Mengenlehre, ed. Purkert, W., vol.2,1-89. Berlin: Springer.

 Purkert, W. et al. 2002. Zum Begriff des topologischen Raumes. In Felix Hausdorff Gesammelte Werke

 Band II: Grundiizge der Mengenlehre, ed. Purkert, W., vol.2,675-744. Berlin: Springer.

 Reitberger, H. 1997. The contributions of し Vietoris and H. Hetze to the foundations of general topology.

 In Handbook of the history of general topology，eds. Aull,C” and R. Lowen, vol.1,31-40. Dordrecht:
 Kluwer Academic Publishers.

 Riesz, F.1904a. Letter by Frigyes Riesz to David Hilbert from Nov.18,1904, Locse. Abteilung filr Hand

 schriften und seltene Drucke der Niedersâchsischen Staats- und Universitatsbibliothek Gôttingen,
 David Hilberts NachlaB, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 332,

 Riesz, F.1904b. Letter by Frigyes Riesz to David Hilbert, undated (probably from December 1904, LR).

 Abteilung fiir Handschriften und seltene Drucke der Niedersâchsischen Staats- und Universitatsbib
 liothek Gôttingen, David Hilberts NachlaB, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 332.

 Riesz, F.1904c. Uber einen Satz der Analysis situs. Mathematische Annalen 59:409-415.

 Riesz, F. 1905a. Sur les ensembles discontinus. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences, Paris 141:

 Riesz, F. 1905b. Sur un théorème de M. Borel. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences, Paris 140:

 650-653.

 224-226.

 Riesz, F. 1905c. Uber mehrfache Ordnungstypen I. Mathematische Annalen 61:406-421.
 Riesz, F. 1906a. A térfogalom genesise. Math, és Phys. Lapok 15: 97-122.
 Riesz, F. 1906b. Die Genesis des Raumbegriffes. Mathematische und naturwissenschaftliche Berichte aus

 Ungarn 24: 309-353.

 Riesz, F. 1907a. A térfogalom genesise. Math, és Phys. Lapok 16:145-161.
 Riesz, F.1907b. Letter by Frigyes Riesz to Maurice Fréchet from May 21,1907，Paris. Archive de l'Académie

 des Sciences de Paris Fonds Maurice Fréchet F2:10.

 Riesz, F. 1907c. Sur une espèce de géométrie analytique des systèmes de fonctions sommables. Comptes

 Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences Paris 144:1409-1411.

 Riesz, F. 1909. StetigkeitsbegrifF und abstrakte Mengenlehre. In Atti del IV Congress。Internazionale dei
 Matematici (Roma, 6-11 Aprile 1908), ed. Castelnuovo, G., vol.2,18-24. Accademia dei Lincei:
 Roma.

 Rodriguez, L. 2006. Friedrich Riesz' Beitràge zur Herausbildung des modernen mathematischen Konzepts
 abstrakter Ràume. Synthesen intellektueller Kulturen in Ungarn, Frankreich und Deutschland. PhD

 thesis, Johannes Gutenberg-Universitat Mainz, http://nbn-resolving.de/urn/resolver.pl?urn=urn:nbn:
 de:hebis:77-11793. Accessed 25 October 2006

 Root, R.E. 1911. Iterated limits of functions on an abstract range. Bulletin of the American Mathematical

 Society 17(10): 538-539.

 Root, R.E. 1914a. Iterated limits in general analysis. American Journal of Mathematics 36: 79-104.

 Root, R.E. 1914b. Limits in terms of order, with example of limiting element not approachable by â sequence.

 Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 15: 51—71.

 Rowe，D.E. 1995. The Hilbert problems and the mathematics of a new century, 1-39. Preprints-Reihe des

 FB Mathematik: Johannes Gutenberg-Universitât Mainz.

 Schoenflies，A. 1902. Ueber einen grundlegenden Satz der Analysis Situs. Gôtîinger Nachrichten 1902:

 185-192.

 Schoenflies, A. 1904. Beitràge zur Theorie der Punktmengen. I. Mathematische Annalen 58:195-234.

 Schoenflies, A. 1908. Die Entwicklung der Lehre von den Punktmannigfaltigkeiten II. Jahresbericht der

 DMV (Ergànzungsband II): Teubner, Leipzig.

 Scholz, E.1999. The concept of manifold,1850-1950. In History of topology，ed. James, I.M., 25-64.

 Siegmund-Schultze, R.1998. Eliakim Hastings Moore's 'General Analysis'. Archive for History of Exact

 Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 Sciences 52: 51-89.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 姿 Springer

 102 L. Rodriguez

 Annalen 97(1): 321-337.

 matical Society 34: 394-408.

 Sierpinski, W.1927. La notion de dérivée comme base d' une théorie des ensembles abstraits. Mathematische

 Stephens, R.1932. Continuous transformations of abstract spaces. Transactions of the American Mathe

 Szénâssy, B.1992. History of mathematics in Hungary until the 20th century. Berlin: Springer.
 Taylor, A.E. 1982. A study of Maurice Fréchet: I. His early work on point set theory and the theory of

 functionals. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 27: 233-295.

 Taylor, A.E. 1985. A study of Maurice Fréchet: II. Mainly about his work on general topology. Archive for

 History of Exact Sciences 34: 279-380.

 Thron, W.1997. Frederic Riesz' contributions to the foundations of general topology. In Handbook of the

 history of general topology, eds. Aull,C., and R. Lowen, vol. 1,21-29. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
 Publishers.

 Thron, W.J. 1973. On a problem of F. Riesz concerning proximity structures. Proceedings of the American

 Mathematical Society 40(1): 323-326.

 Tietze, H.1923. Beitràge zur allgemeinen Topologie I. Axiome fiir verschiedene Fassungen des Umge

 bungsbegriffs. Mathematische Annalen 88(3): 290-312.

 Toepell, M.M. 1986. Uber die Entstehung von David Hilberts "Grundlagen der Geometrie Gôttingen:

 Torretti, R.1978. Philosophy of Geometry from Riemann to Poincaré, volume 7 of Episteme. Dordrecht:

 Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

 Reidel.

 Veblen, 0.1905. Theory on plane curves in non-metrical analysis situs. Transactions of the American

 Mathematical Society 6(1): 83-98.

 Vietoris, L.1921. Stetige Mengen. Monatshefte fiir Mathematik und Physik 31:173-204.
 Willard, S.1970. General topology. Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

