 

 

 

 

From classical to Voigt's molecular models in elasticity
Author(s): Danilo Capecchi, Giuseppe Ruta and  Patrizia Trovalusci
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 5 (September 2010), pp. 525-559
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342430
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:36 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:525-559

 DOI 1 0. 1 007/s00407-0 1 0-0065 -y

 From classical to Voigt's molecular models in elasticity

 Danilo Capecchi • Giuseppe Ruta •
 Patrizia Trovalusci

 Received: 16 June 2009 / Published online: 23 June 2010

 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract In the first decades of the nineteenth century the French mechanicians -

 Cauchy and Poisson amongst them - developed a theory of linear elasticity according
 to which matter is composed of material points. They believed that these points inter-

 act by means of opposite central forces, whose magnitude depends on the length of

 the segment joining the particles. This theory suggested that homogeneous isotropic
 materials were characterized by a unique elastic constant. Later experiments, however,

 showed that two elastic constants were necessary. These results undermined the cor-

 puscular model of matter as well as the interpretation of elasticity in terms of central
 intermolecular actions. The continuous theory of Green, based on the postulate that a

 potential function exists, gained fresh consensus in light of these experiments. These

 opposite views continued throughout the nineteenth century until Woldemar Voigt pro-

 posed a molecular model confirmed by experiments. This article presents the theories
 of each of these scientists and describes the contrasting views of nineteenth-century
 mechanicians.

 1 Introduction

 The modern theory of linear elasticity dates back to the work of the French mechani-

 cians of the early nineteenth century. Most of their studies tended to use a molecular

 Communicated by Umberto Bottazzini.

 D. Capecchi • G. Ruta (E3) • P. Trovalusci
 Dipartimento di Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, "Sapienza" University, Rome, Italy
 e-mail: giuseppe.ruta@uniromal .it

 D. Capecchi
 e-mail: danilo.capecchi@uniromal .it

 P. Trovalusci

 e-mail: patrizia.trovalusci@uniromal .it

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 526 D. Capecchi et al.

 model of matter.1 In his studies of 1821 on the propagation of light in solids, Fresnel2

 was one of the first to introduce body-points, generally called molecules, to charac-
 terize linear elasticity.

 In the same year Navier presented a memoir to the Academy of Sciences in Paris

 (Navier 1827)3 where he obtained the differential equations of the motion of a lin-
 ear isotropic elastic body in terms of a unique material constant. Navier modelled an

 elastic solid body as an assemblage of material molecules that are very close to each

 other. These body-points interact by means of central forces depending on the distance

 between pairs of molecules, even if the force law is actually unknown. The magnitude

 of these forces is perceivable for close molecules, but quickly vanishes as the distance
 increases. Such an approach originated in Laplace's and Boscovich's studies on the
 composition of matter.

 In contrast with the molecular model presented by Fresnel and Navier, in a short

 note Cauchy (1823) presented a brief outline of the results that he had obtained by
 adopting a continuous model of matter. He clearly stated that an internal force, called

 tension or pressure, could be defined as being similar to the one exerted by a fluid on the

 surface of a solid body. This was further expounded in a series of later publications,
 where he formulated the famous theorems on stress (Cauchy 1827a) and obtained
 results on both the strain measures of a continuous medium and the differential bal-

 ance equations between inner and outer forces, regardless of the body's mechanical
 properties (Cauchy 1827b,c).

 In a subsequent article, Cauchy wrote down the differential equations of motion for

 an isotropic linear elastic body in terms of a single material constant (Cauchy 1828a,
 p. 204). In the same article, however, Cauchy obtained other equations of motion for
 isotropic bodies in terms of two elastic constants (Cauchy 1828a, pp. 215-218) and
 remarked that for a certain fixed ratio of the two constants he was able to obtain the

 same equations as Navier and Poisson (Cauchy 1828a, p. 221).

 The continuous model of matter adopted by Cauchy in these articles appears to
 be an exception: by the end of the 1820s the molecular model assumed a leading
 role in the studies of elasticity and remained a reference tool for some time to come,

 especially in France. On October 1st, 1827, Cauchy and Poisson presented similar

 memoirs to the Academy of Sciences in Paris, in which Navier's molecular approach
 was re-considered.4 In 1 828 and 1 829 Poisson presented two more extensive memoirs
 to the Academy, published between 1829 and 1831, which were to become milestones

 in the theory of linear elasticity.

 1 For the origins and the development of linear elasticity, see, amongst others (Todhunter and Pearson 1 886;

 Love 1907; Marcolongo 1907; Whittaker 1910; Dugas 1950;Timoshenko 1953; Truesdell and Toupin 1960;
 Fichera 1979; Beihoste 1991; Benvenuto 1991; Dahan Dalmedico 1992; Capecchi et al. 2006).

 See A. Fresnel, Oeuvres complètes , Paris, Imprimerie Impériale, 1866-1870; tome 2, pp. 261-368.

 3 An abstract with the same title appeared in the Bulletin de la Société philomathique, 1822, pp. 177-181.

 4 Cauchy 's memoir was published later in his Exercices. We refer to it as Cauchy (1828b); see Navier
 (1864, civ). As for Poisson's memoir, apart from two excerpts published in the Annales de chimie et de

 physique , 1827, and in the Bulletin des sciences (Férussac), t. IX, 1828, it was published in 1829. We refer
 to it as Poisson (1828); see Navier (1864, clix).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 527

 Poisson established the very foundations of the molecular theory of elasticity: in

 his article of 1828 he rejected Lagrange's Mécanique Analytique by claiming that any

 theory of mechanics should be based on molecular actions, they alone being respon-

 sible for equilibrium and the transmission of given external forces. He introduced the

 concept of a molecular sphere of action and obtained the equations of motion for iso-

 tropic bodies in terms of a single elastic constant, remarking that his results coincided
 with Navier's.

 In two articles of 1 828 Cauchy ( 1 828b, c) reflected Poisson's view of matter to some

 extent. Whilst in his previous studies he had clearly conceived of a body as continuous,

 here he proved that the same results could be obtained by supposing the matter to be
 an assemblage of material points subjected to central forces.5 The main difference
 between Poisson's and Cauchy's molecular models is given by their different views
 of molecules: corpuscles for Poisson, points without extension for Cauchy.

 The constitutive relations obtained by both Cauchy 's and Poisson's molecular the-

 ories were characterized by 1 5 constants in the case of general linear elasticity, and by

 only one in the case of isotropic bodies. This confirmed the early results obtained by

 Navier.6 The first experimental results on the constitutive properties of elastic materi-

 als were not particularly precise, and did not question the validity of the results based
 on the molecular model of matter. As measurements became more precise, however, it

 was apparent that experience contradicted the predictions of the theory. The doubt also

 arose that, at least for isotropic bodies, linear elasticity should not be characterized by
 two material constants.

 In Green (1839) a completely different approach and a continuous model of mat-

 ter are adopted. Since Green thought that the actual law of molecular interactions is

 unknown, he postulated that elastic forces are described by a potential, the existence

 of which was proved later on in Thomson (1855) on thermodynamic grounds. Green
 obtained two elastic constants, as observed in experiments. In spite of this, there was

 a certain reluctance, especially in France, to adopt Green's model, as it abandoned the

 interpretation per causas of elastic phenomena. Indeed, not even Lamé, Clapeyron and
 Saint- Venant were able to indicate where the traditional molecular theory of elasticity,

 so elegant and precise, could have gone wrong.

 The contrast amongst the molecular and continuous theorists of elasticity continued

 until the mid-nineteenth century, and studies on crystals shed no light on the prob-
 lem.7 The studies of Bravais on crystallography (Bravais 1866)8 marked a turning

 point. According to Bravais, molecules are not simply body-points but polyhedra at
 the vertices of which are the atoms of the material under consideration. The polyhedra-

 ^ In a subsequent article Cauchy (1829) considered a continuous distribution of matter and obtained the
 equations of motion for isotropic linear elastic bodies in terms of two elastic constants.

 6 We point out that Cauchy was somewhat ambiguous and on some occasions introduced two constants
 for linear elastic isotropic bodies, claiming that the equations so obtained were "more general". This quite
 weak position was applied to a very particular situation, hence it is beyond the scope of this article.

 7 This subject has not been dealt with in depth in the historical literature and, to the authors' knowledge,
 it is only mentioned in passing in the standard studies on the history of elasticity such as Todhunter and
 Pearson (1886), Timoshenko (1953) and Benvenuto (1991).

 ® These studies were presented at the Academy of Sciences in Paris in 1 849 but published posthumously
 in 1866.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 528 D. Capecchi et al.

 molecules are arranged in regular lattices which repeat themselves in space according

 to precise symmetry groups, which were studied and classified by Bravais. Such an

 approach used a discrete, 'refined' description of matter, yet was completely different

 from the body-point conception of Cauchy and Poisson. It constituted the starting
 point for Woldemar Voigt, whose studies were able to reconcile the molecular and the

 continuous approaches to the linear theory of elasticity.

 In this article we briefly present the molecular theory of elasticity as founded by

 Navier, Cauchy and Poisson. We point out its advantages and drawbacks, and we show

 how the latter gave rise to a debate amongst mechanicians that lasted for decades. This

 introductory part deals with well-known aspects of the theory of elasticity from an
 unusual point of view. Attention is focussed more on the drawbacks of the molecu-

 lar model of linear elasticity than on other aspects. Our aim is to show how Voigťs
 approach, molecular but not rejecting 'abstract' energetic techniques, can reconcile the

 attempt at justifying phenomena per causas and the wish for strong continua theories.

 This technique is still up-to-date, and it is useful for studying mechanics of 'complex'
 bodies.

 2 The molecular model and its shortcomings

 2.1 The molecular model of Navier, Cauchy and Poisson

 Although Navier, Cauchy and Poisson used different analytical techniques to obtain
 their results, their models of matter were similar and clearly molecular. Matter was

 thought of as composed of body-points that are very close to each other, and the stan-

 dard notions of central attractive-repulsive forces depending on the length could be
 applied.

 We consider a solid body as an assemblage of material molecules placed at a very
 small distance [from each other]. These molecules exert two opposite actions
 on each other, that is, a proper attractive force, and a repulsive force due to the
 principle of heat. [...] we assume here as a principle that the [...] forces n' ,
 developed by the change of shape of the body between any two material mole-

 cules M, M', and which alone must balance the forces applied to this body, are
 respectively proportional to the amount of variation of the distance MM' of the

 two molecules due to the change of shape (supposed very small). The force nf is

 an attraction if the distance M' has increased; it is a repulsion if that distance has
 decreased. On the other hand, we consider the discussed molecular actions as

 existing only between very close molecules, and having values which are very
 quickly decreasing, according to an unknown law, for molecules which are more
 and more distant.9 (Navier 1 827, pp. 375-377)

 9 On regarde un corps solide élastique comme un assemblage de molécules matérielles placées à des dis-
 tances extrêmement petites. Ces molécules exercent les unes sur les autres deux actions opposées, savoir, une

 force propre d'attraction, et une force de répulsion due au principe de la chaleur, f . . .1 nous prenons ici pour
 principe que ces [...] forces développées par le changement de figure du corps entre deux molécules
 matérielles quelconques M, M', et qui doivent seules faire équilibre aux forces appliquées à ces corps,
 sont respectivement proportionelles à la quantité dont le changement de figure (supposé très-petit) a fait

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 529

 Navier's idea originated in Laplace's concept of matter. To describe natural

 phenomena Laplace proposed a model of particles of very small dimensions that

 exchanged forces,10 thus elaborating on the ideas expressed by Newton in his Opticks.

 The description of the model of matter introduced by Navier was almost exactly repro-

 duced by Poisson, who sought to explain elasticity by means of the laws of molecular

 interaction. Poisson emphasized the existence of a characteristic length for the inter-
 molecular action, which he called the radius of the molecular activity (Poisson 1828,

 pp. 368-369). In 1828 Cauchy, too, proved his results using Navier's and Poisson's
 view of matter as a bunch of dimensionless molecules (Cauchy 1 828b, p. 227).

 The molecular models of Navier, Cauchy and Poisson share some common features:

 a. the molecules are body-points subjected to opposite central forces;

 b. the total effect of the interacting forces is obtained by the vector sum of all forces;
 c. the molecular interaction is a smooth function of the distance between the mole-

 cules and may be linearized;

 d. there is a sphere of molecular activity, the radius of which is much larger than the
 intermolecular distances; within this sphere the molecular interaction is sensible

 but quickly decreasing, and totally disappears outside;

 e. the displacements of body-points are described by a smooth field, the domain of

 which is the continuum in which the system of molecules is embedded;

 f. the system of body-points can be assumed homogeneous and in particular isotro-

 pic.

 Once the expression of intermolecular forces is known, a suitable definition of

 stress provides its constitutive relations in terms of the strain and of the displacement

 components. By applying linearization procedures Cauchy and Poisson obtained con-
 stitutive relations of stress components in terms of strain components which generally

 depended on 36 material constants. They showed that there are 21 symmetry relations
 (later on named after Cauchy and Poisson) amongst the constants. Thus, the number

 of independent elastic constants was 15 and, in the case of an isotropic body, reduced

 to only one.

 2.2 Shortcomings of the molecular model

 The conclusions of Navier, Cauchy and Poisson were widely accepted, especially in

 France, given the undoubted simplicity of the underlying theory and because of their

 appeal from a physical point of view. On the other hand, they were gradually under-

 mined by experimental results,11 which showed, especially with to the refinement of

 the experimental techniques, that two elastic constants were needed to characterize

 Footnote 9 continued
 varier la distance MM' des deux molécules. La force nf est une attraction si la distance MM' a augmenté;

 elle est une répulsion si cette distance a diminué. Nous regardons d'ailleurs les actions moléculaires dont il
 s'agit comme ne subsistant qu'entre des molécules très-voisines, et comme ayant des valeurs qui décroissent
 très-rapidement, suivant une loi inconnue, pour des molécules de plus en plus éloignées l'une de l'autre.

 '0 See for instance his Exposition du système du monde , in Œuvres complètes , vol. 6, pp. 349-350.

 1 1 For instance, those widely illustrated in Wertheim ( 1 844).

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 530 D. Capecchi et al.

 linear elastic isotropie bodies. The more reliable were the experimental results,12 the
 more the theoretical predictions by Cauchy and Poisson went wrong, and no one could

 explain why.

 A first step to match the 'classical' molecular model with the experimental results

 was to get rid of a number of hypotheses on which the theory was based. Poisson

 was amongst the first timidly to suggest a variation. In his memoir presented at the
 Academy of Sciences in 1829 (Poisson 1831), Poisson advanced the hypothesis that
 the molecules are not body-points and that solids are crystallized, with a regular
 disposition of the molecules. The notion of central forces was therefore somewhat
 undermined.

 One supposes that in bodies of this nature the molecules are regularly distributed,

 and that they attract or repel each other differently on their different sides. For

 this reason, in calculating the action exerted by a part of the body on another one

 it is not permitted anymore to consider the mutual action between two molecules
 as a simple function of the distance separating them [...]. If one deals with a

 homogeneous body which is in its natural state, where it is not subjected to any
 external force, one may consider it as an assemblage of molecules of the same
 kind and shape , of which the homologous sections are parallel to each other

 (Poisson 1831, p. 69)

 According to Poisson, the 21 relations reducing the number of independent con-

 stants to 15 no longer hold in linear elastic crystallized bodies (Poisson 1831, p. 85).
 On the other hand, in non-crystallized bodies, or in bodies with weak or irregular
 crystallization, even if molecules are not body-points, the mechanical behaviour con-

 tinues as if the exchanged forces were central, due to a series of compensatory causes
 (Poisson 1831, pp. 7-8).

 Even Cauchy expressed doubts about the validity of the 'classical' molecular model

 in a series of memoirs presented in 183914 and in a review15 of experimental memoirs

 by Wertheim on elastic constants (March 3rd 1851). There he stated that in crys-
 tallized bodies the molecules should not be considered as body-points but instead
 as very small particles composed of atoms. Since there is a regular arrangement
 of molecules in crystals, the elastic moduli should not be considered as constants
 but rather as periodic functions of the spatial coordinates. To obtain a constitu-

 tive relation with constant coefficients, Cauchy found it necessary to enlarge the

 12 For instance, those presented in Kohlrausch and Loomis (1870).

 13 On suppose que dans les corps de cette nature, les molécules sont régulièrement distribuées, et quelles
 s'attirent ou se repoussent inégalement par leurs différens cotés. Par cette raison il n'est plus permis, en
 calculant l'action exercée par une partie du corps sur une autre, de regarder l'action mutuelle de deux
 molécules comme une simple fontion de la distance qui les sépare [...]. S'il s'agit d'un corps homogène
 qui soit dans son état naturel, où il n'est soumis á aucune force étrangère, on pourrá le considérer comme un

 assemblage de molécules de même nature et de mêm e forme, dont les sections homologues seront parallèles
 entre elles [...].

 14 Œuvres ser. 2, t. XI, pp. 1 1-27, 51-74, 134-172.

 15 Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des sciences , vol. 32 (1851), pp. 326-330.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 53 1

 number of elastic moduli, eventually obtaining two elastic constants for isotropic
 bodies.16

 In his studies on elasticity17 Lamé advanced a series of doubts on the subject. For
 instance, in Lamé (1859) most of the 20th lesson is devoted to his doubts regarding
 what a molecule actually is, the exact postulate concerning mutual interactions, the

 acceptable form of the law of the intermolecular action, and the right direction of the

 molecular force. According to Lamé, the hypothesis of homogeneous matter, whilst

 permitting symmetry considerations, is not admissible:

 Such is the method followed by Navier and other geometers to obtain the gen-

 eral equations of elasticity in solid media. But this method clearly supposes the

 continuity of matter, an inadmissible hypothesis. Poisson believed he had elim-

 inated this difficulty, [. . .] but [. . .] in reality only replaced the sign f by the sign
 E [. . .]. The method which we have followed [. . .] finds its origins in the studies

 by Cauchy18, [and] seems to us to be free of any objection.19 (Lamé 1866, p. 38)

 Though the results of the molecular theory of elasticity were clearly queried by the
 followers of the French school of mechanics, the validity of the molecular approach

 was not. Barré de Saint- Venant was amongst the main supporters of the molecular

 theory and his ideas on the subject, apart from his memoirs, can be found in the vast
 amount of notes, comments and appendices attached to Navier (1864) and Clebsch
 (1883). Saint- Venant was perfectly aware that experimental results contradicted the
 conclusion of the 'classical' molecular models attributing one elastic constant only to

 isotropic bodies. However, since he found no evident fault in the traditional molecular

 theory of elasticity, he concluded that there are no isotropic bodies in nature:

 Yet experiences [...] and the simple consideration of the way which cooling
 and solidification take place in bodies, prove that isotropy is quite rare [...]. So,
 instead of using, in place of the equations [...] with one coefficient only, the
 formulae [...] with two coefficients [...], which hold, like these others, only for

 perfectly isotropic bodies, it will be convenient to use as many times as possible
 the formulae [...] relative to the more general case of different elasticity in two

 or three directions.20 (Navier 1864, p. 583)

 16 A detailed and commented reconstruction of Cauchy 's reasoning may be found in Saint- Venant's Appen-

 dix V of Navier ( 1 864, pp. 69 1-706).

 17 We have considered Lamé (1859, 1866), the first edition of which appeared in 1852.

 18 Lamé clearly refers to the studies in which Cauchy did not follow a molecular approach, but rather a
 'continuous' one, such as, Cauchy (1828a, 1829).

 19 Telle est la méthode suivie par Navier et autres géométres, pour obtenir les équations générales de
 l'élasticité dans les milieux solides. Mais cette méthode suppose évidemment la continuité de la matière,

 hypothèse inadmissible. Poisson croit lever cette difficulté, f . . .] mais f . . .] il ne fait, en réalité, que substituer

 le signe Г au signe /[...]. La méthode que nous avons suivie [. . .1 dont on trouve l'origine dans les travaux
 de Cauchy, nous paraît à l'abri de toute objection [...].

 20 Mais les experiences [. . .1 et la simple considération de la manière dont s'opèrent le refroidissement et la
 solidification des corps, prouvent que l'isotropie est fort rare [...]. Aussi, plutôt que de prendre, au lieu des
 formules [...] à un seul coefficient [...], les formules [...] à deux coefficients [...], qui ne sont composées
 comme celles-ci que pour des corps parfaitement isotropes, il conviendra de se servir le plus qu'on pourra
 des formules [...] relatives au cas plus général d'une élasticité inégale dans deux ou trois sens.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 532 D. Capecchi et al.

 In the over 200 pages of notes and appendices attached to Navier (1864),

 Saint- Venant presented experimental results and theoretical explanations of the para-

 dox, showing an amazing knowledge of the literature (amongst others he quoted Savart,
 Wertheim, Hodgkinson, Regnault, Oersted, Green, Clebsch, Kirchhoff, Rankine, and
 William Thomson).

 However, there was no agreement amongst the contemporaries of the great French

 mechanician, and the question still remained: as it was apparent that two elastic con-

 stants were needed, where could the failure of such a seemingly perfect theory as that
 by Navier, Cauchy and Poisson reside?

 Discussion was further enriched by the contributions of Green and Bravais. These

 generated completely different schools of elasticity in England and Germany, not to

 mention different ways of studying crystallography.

 3 Green's energetic model and Bravais's crystals

 In his search for a model for the luminiferous aether, in 1 839 George Green pub-
 lished an article (Green 1839) which was completely opposed to the principles of the
 French school of mechanics. Obviously aware of the criticism directed at the tradi-

 tional molecular model, Green abandoned the primitive role of force in favour of the
 role of virtual work, and later of energy. He considered a continuous mathematical

 model of matter, and admitted that inner forces can be characterized only by the fact
 that their virtual work is an exact differential:

 M. Cauchy seems to have been the first who saw fully the utility of applying

 to the Theory of Light those formulae which represent the motions of a system
 of molecules acting on each other by mutually attractive and repulsive forces;

 [. . .however,] we are so perfectly ignorant of the mode of action of the elements
 of the luminiferous aether on each other, that it would seem a safer method to

 take some general physical principle as the basis of our reasoning, rather than

 assume certain modes of action, which, after all, may be widely different from

 the mechanism employed by nature; more especially if this principle include in
 itself, as a particular case, those before used by M. Cauchy and others, and also
 lead to a much more simple process of calculation. The principle selected as
 the basis of the reasoning contained in the following article is this: In whatever
 way the elements of any material system may act upon each other, if all the
 internal forces exerted be multiplied by the elements of their respective direc-

 tions , the total sum for any assigned portion of the mass will always be the exact
 differential of some function. (Green 1839, pp. 245-246)21

 Green's approach was juxtaposed to Poisson's desire to found "Physical mechan-

 ics", based only on molecular forces as the ultimate descriptors of the inner exchanges
 of action. In other words, Green completely abandoned the attempt at finding an
 explanation per causas of elasticity. We point out, however, that, whilst he assumed

 21 The use of italics was chosen by the authors to highlight the relevant passage.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 533

 a continuous mathematical model of matter, Green did not query the existence of
 molecules:

 Let us conceive a mass composed of an immense number of molecules acting
 on each other by any kind of molecular forces, but which are sensible only at
 insensible distances [...]. (Green 1839, p. 248)

 What distinguished Green's treatment from that of the French school of mechanics

 was the fundamental equation he assumed to describe any motion:

 [. . .] we get, by combining D' Alemberťs principle with that of virtual velocities,

 E Dm - тгЬи + -7г 8v + - r- 8w - E Dv8(f)

 d2w d2i> d2u>

 d tL d t¿ d t¿

 Dm and D v being exceedingly small corresponding elements of the mass and
 volume of the medium, but which nevertheless contain a very great number of

 molecules, and 8ф the exact differential of some function and entirely due to

 the internal actions of the particles of the medium on each other. Indeed, if 8ф

 were not an exact differential, a perpetual motion would be possible [...]. (Green

 1839, p. 248)

 Green's empirical assumption of the existence of the function 0, which could be a
 weak point, was later given a rational background and proved by William Thomson
 (Lord Kelvin) on thermodynamic bases (Thomson 1855).22 Green observed that the
 function ф must maintain its value when any arbitrary small volume element remains

 undeformed during the process, hence for small deformations ф must depend on the

 first-order quantities expressing strain. Green wrote the infinitesimal strain measures,
 which he denoted s i, 52, ^3, a , ß , y , in the form we know them nowadays.23 Since
 Green assumed small kinematical increments, it was reasonable to consider a series

 expansion of ф ,

 But s 1, S2, S3, a, ß , y being very small quantities of the first order, we may

 expand ф in a very convergent series of the form

 Ф = 00 + 01 + 02 + 03 + &c. :

 00» 01 » 02» &c. being homogeneous functions of the six quantities a, ß, y, s 1,

 S2, S3 of the degrees 0, 1,2, &c. each of which is very great compared with the

 next following one. (Green 1 839, p. 249)

 Since in his Eq. 1 the first-order variation of ф appears, it is obvious that the con-
 stant 0o is immaterial. Green remarked (Green 1839, pp. 249-250) that the first-order
 variation of ф' must also vanish, since it represents the first-order variation of the

 22 Lord Kelvin called the function ф "potential" and proved its existence in isothermal, non-dissipative

 processes.

 2^ This is the reason why, for instance, Truesdell in (Truesdell 1 99 1 ) gave the name "Green - Saint- Venant"

 to the expression of the infinitesimal strain components.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 534 D. Capecchi et al.

 virtual work in a neighbourhood of the equilibrium configuration, assumed to be the
 natural one. Thus, the first meaningful term of the function ф is фг' moreover, one

 may ignore higher-order terms, and

 If now we can obtain the value of фг, we shall only have to apply the general

 methods given in the Mécanique Analytique. But фг being a homogeneous func-
 tion of six quantities of the second degree, will in its most general form contain

 21 arbitrary coefficients. The proper value to be assigned to each depend on the

 internal constitution of the medium. If, however, the medium be a non-crystal-
 lized one24, the form of фг will remain the same, whatever be the directions

 of the coordinate axes in space. Applying this last consideration, we shall find

 that the most general form of фг for non-crystallized bodies contains only two
 arbitrary coefficients. (Green 1839, p. 250)

 Green then expressed фг in terms of the displacement components, and by means
 of standard calculus of variations, obtained the balance and boundary equations in
 terms of two elastic constants (Green 1839, pp. 255-256). As already remarked, these

 equations hold for the luminiferous aether in Green's intentions, but fit any other linear

 elastic isotropic body perfectly.

 Green's approach was widely followed, especially in England,25 and Germany26

 but at times it was also strongly opposed. We have already seen to what extent it was

 rejected by Saint- Venant, and even in England an outstanding scientist like Stokes

 searched for a refinement of the molecular model instead of adopting Green's ener-
 getic approach (Stokes 1845).

 In 1866 a posthumous book by Auguste Bravais appeared (Bravais 1866), con-

 taining memoirs that he had read at the Academy of Sciences in Paris. These studies

 mainly dealt with crystallography, and with rigorous organization of crystals in groups
 of symmetry. They contained assumptions which were to be essential for the work of

 the mechanicians who wished to overcome the empasse related to the 4rue' number

 of elastic constants. That Bravais' ideas shed a new light on the molecular theory of
 the composition of matter was quite clear to the editors of the posthumous volume,
 who pointed out in the Introduction that according to Bravais:

 [...] the crystals are assemblages of identical molecules with the same orienta-

 tion, which, reduced by thought to a unique point, i.e., their centre of gravity, are

 disposed in rectilinear and parallel ranges, in which the distance of two points
 is uniform.27 (Bravais 1866, VII)

 24 It is apparent, from further examination of the article, that by the term "non-crystallized" Green intended

 "isotropic"; indeed, on p. 253 he affirmed that "[...1 non-crystallized bodies, [are those] in which it is per-
 fectly indifferent in what directions the rectangular axes are placed".

 25 For instance, one may consider the monograph Thomson and Tait (1867).

 26 For instance, one may consider Clebsch (1862), Kirchhoff (1876).

 27 [...] les cristaux sont des assemblages de molécules identiques entre elles et semblablement orientées,

 qui, réduites par la pensée à un point unique, leur centre de gravité, sont disposées en rangées rectilignes et
 parallèles, dans chacune desquelles la distance de deux points est constante.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 535

 In the language of a contemporary mechanician the introduction of an orientation

 in the internal structure of matter endowed the ultimate components of matter with a

 local structure, that of a rigid body:

 [. . .] no longer considering the molecules as points but as small [rigid] bodies.28
 (Bravais 1866, VIII)

 The words used by Bravais in his memoirs clearly indicate what his thinking was:

 It is admitted today by all physicists that massive bodies are aggregations of
 molecules of the same kind, kept at a distance by attractive or repulsive forces
 the resultant of which is nil, for each of these molecules, since these bodies have

 achieved their state of internal equilibrium. By the term <Cmolecules of the same

 kind» we subsume not only that the chemical composition shall be the same, but

 also that the geometrical disposition of the constituting atoms is the same around
 the centre of mass of each molecule. [...] In non-crystallized solid bodies, the
 relative disposition of the centres of the molecules does not seem to follow any

 fixed rule, and corresponding lines of molecular polyhedra are directed towards

 any direction in space with no preference. If we isolate a cylinder of such a sub-
 stance to determine its characteristic constants, [...] one finds constant results,

 independent of the direction that the axis of the cylinder, thus separated, occu-

 pies in the interior of the mass. On the contrary, in crystallized bodies the results

 obtained vary in general with the direction of the axis; a kind of molecular polar-

 ity appears, and one is also led to admit that molecular polyhedra are similarly

 rotated, their corresponding lines being parallel.

 The molecules of a crystal are not only similar and similarly oriented; they are,

 moreover, arranged in rectilinear rows, and separated from each other, in any
 row, by equal intervals.29 (Bravais 1866, pp. 101-102)

 Bravais advanced experimental evidence of his hypothesis based on cleavage speci-

 men. He did not question the existence of ideal isotropic non-crystallized media (those
 modelled by Navier, Cauchy and Poisson), made up of undifferentiated spheres. He
 wished to stress that crystallized media are in principle composed of different mole-

 28 [...] cessant de regarder les molécules comme des points et le considérant comme des petits corps.

 29 II est admis aujourd'hui, par tous les physiciens, que les corps pondérables sont des agrégations de
 molécules de même espèce, tenues à distance par des forces attractives ou répulsives dont la résultante est
 nulle, pour chacune de ces molécules, dès que ces corps sont parvenus à leur état d'équilibre interne. Par
 le terme de ^molécules de même espèce» on sous-entende non-seulement que la composition chimique
 doit être identique, mais encore que la disposition géométrique des atoms constituants est la même autour
 du centre de gravité de chaque molécule. [...] Dans les corps solides non cristallisés, l'arrangement relatif
 des centres des molécules ne paraît soumis à aucun règle fixe, et les lignes homologues des polyhèdres
 moléculaires sont indistinctement dirigées vers toutes les régions de l'espace. Si l'on isole un cylindre
 d'une tel substance pour déterminer ses constantes spécifiques, [...] on trouve des résultats constants et
 indépendants de la direction qu'occupait dans l'intérieur de la masse général l'axe du cylindre ainsi séparé.
 Dans les corps crystallisé, au contraire, le résultats obtenus varient en général suivant la direction de cet
 axe; une sorte de polarité moléculaire se manifeste, et l'on est ainsi conduit à admettre que les polyhèdres
 moléculaires sont semblablement tournés, leurs lignes homologues étant parallèles.
 Non-seulement les molécules d'un crystal sont semblablee et semblablement orientées; elles sont, de plus,

 disposées en files rectilignes, et séparées l'une de l'autre, sur chaque file, par des intervalles égaux.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 536 D. Capecchi et al.

 cules with an orientation. Indeed, after having examined the geometrical symmetries

 of the relative disposition of the centres of gravity of molecules, Bravais went on to

 examine the molecular structure, that is, the geometry of the elements constituting

 molecules around their centres of gravity. For this purpose, he observed that:

 The exterior signs that let us single out the molecular structure, if it is compound,

 or at least its shape, if it is simple, cannot be but the result of attractive and repul-

 sive forces exerted by the molecule along different directions. If these forces

 spherically radiated from the centre, if they were the same at a given distance
 in all directions, if, in a word, all were similar around the centre, the molecule

 would act as if it were spherical, or, still better, as a simple point, a pole of forces;

 its intimate structure would not reveal any sensible phenomenon, and could be
 deduced only by theoretical considerations, for instance, the atomistic laws of

 chemistry.

 However, this is not the case; the forces exerted by the molecules are not the

 same in all directions; the reactions that they are subjected to do not always pass

 through their centre of gravity and the effects of their inequality, when stud-

 ied properly, allow us to determine their internal organisation.30 (Bravais 1866,
 p. 194)

 In the crystallization process, when a fluid slowly becomes solid, the molecules

 must necessarily follow the crystal symmetry group: hence a moment must be present

 and one shall suppose a different geometrical structure for the molecules of crystallized
 bodies:

 The molecules of crystallized bodies will henceforth be polyhedra, the vertices

 of which, distributed at will around the centre of gravity, will be the centres, or

 poles, of the forces exerted by the molecule.31 (Bravais 1866, p. 196)

 This view of matter would in time lead to Voigťs molecular model.

 4 Voigt's molecular model

 Woldemar Voigt (1850-1919) attended the university of Königsberg, where, under
 Franz Neumann's direction, he studied mineralogy and crystallography. In the early

 30 Les signes extérieurs capables de trahir au dehors la structure de la molécule, si elle est composée, ou du

 moins sa forme, si elle est simple, ne peuvent être que le résultat de forces attractives ou répulsives exercées

 par la molécule suivant différentes directions. Si ces forces allaient en s' irradiant sphériquement à partir du
 centre, si elles étaient les mêmes pour une distance donnée suivant toutes les directions, si en un mot tout

 était semblable autour de se centre, la molécule agirait comme étant spherique, ou, mieux encore, comme
 un simple point, pôle de forces; sa structure propre ne se traduirait par aucun phénomène sensible, et ne
 pourrait se déduire que de considérations théoriques, par exemple de lois atomistiques de la chimie.
 Mais les choses ne se passent point ainsi; les forces émanées de la molécule ne sont pas les mêmes dans
 tous les sens; les réactions qui la sollicitent ne passent pas toujour par son centre de gravité et les effects de
 ses inégalité permettent, lorsque'on les étudie convenablement, de pénétrer dans son organisation intime.

 31 Les molécules des corps cristallisés seront donc pour nous dorénavant des polyèdres dont les sommets,
 distribués ďune manière quelconque autour du centre de gravité, seront les centres, ou pôles, des forces
 émanées de la molécule.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 537

 1880s Voigt published a series of fundamental contributions on crystallography and

 theory of elasticity, reconciling the results of the corpuscular and the continuous mod-

 els of matter. The importance of his results was immediately acknowledged by his
 contemporaries.32 In 1902 Marcolongo provided a brief but clear account of Voigťs
 ideas and procedures:

 [. . .] By supposing that the body is formed by an aggregate of corpuscles (hence

 that the matter constituting the body is discrete), and by supposing that each

 corpuscle is subjected by the others to actions reducible to a force and a couple,
 infinitely decreasing with distance, Voigt (1887) found the general equations of

 elasticity to be the same as those obtained by the theory of potential, without

 necessarily verifying the relations of Cauchy and Poisson.33 (Marcolongo 1902,
 p. 97)

 The article to which Marcolongo refers (Voigt 1 887) appeared in the annals of the

 Society of Sciences of Göttingen, where Voigt presented his ideas systematically for
 the first time.

 These ideas were re-considered and better expounded in a memoir (Voigt 1900)

 presented at the International Congress of Physics in Paris in 1 900.34 After the intro-

 duction, Voigt began to tackle the molecular theory :

 [...] elasticity was first investigated by means of a particular conception of the
 mechanism of [natural] phenomena which we will call the molecular hypoth-

 esis. According to this hypothesis, the body is supposed to be built by distinct

 elementary masses, the molecules, in the wide sense of the word, being kept in

 their positions or displaced by mutual actions having sensible magnitude only
 at insensible distances. In particular, for a homogeneous undeformed crystal, its
 molecules are identical, oriented in the same way and regularly distributed so

 that each molecule is surrounded by the others in the same way. The distances at
 which these mutual actions are exerted are considered much larger compared to

 the distance of near molecules, and deformations occur so slowly in space that,

 even in the deformed body, the disposition of the molecules can be considered

 regular, in the sense specified above, within the range of the sphere of molecular
 activity.35 (Voigt 1900, pp. 287-288)

 32 See for instance Poincaré (1892), Marcolongo (1902) and Hellinger (1914).

 33 il Voigt (1887) supponendo il corpo come formato da un aggregato di corpuscoli (e quindi dis-
 continua la materia costituente il corpo): supponendo che ogni corpuscolo risenta dagli altri delle azioni
 riducibili ad una forza ed una coppia, decrescenti indefinitamente col crescere della distanza; ha ritrovate le

 equazioni generali della elasticità sotto la stessa forma ottenuta dalla teoria del potenziale, senza che siano
 necessariamente verificate le relazioni di Cauchy-Poisson.

 34 In this memoir Voigt claimed to have been the first to introduce in a previous study (W. Voigt, Die

 fundamentalen physikalischen Eigenschaften der Kry stalle, Leipzig, Von Veit, 1898) the terms tensor and

 triple tensor to mean algebraic quantities undergoing certain laws of variation under changes of coordinates.
 These have a strong correspondence with the quantities nowadays called 'tensors'.

 35 [...1 l'élasticité a été explorée d'abord à l'aide d'une conception particulière du mécanisme des
 phénomènes que nous appelerons Y hypothèse moléculaire. Dans cette hypothèse, l'édifice du corps est
 supposé construit de masses élémentaires distinctes, les molécules, au sense large du mot, maintenues dans
 leurs positions, ou déplacées par des actions mutuelles qui n'ont de grandeur sensible qu à des distances

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 538 D. Capecchi et al.

 Voigt gave credit to the French mechanicians for founding the molecular theory of

 elasticity, but at the same time he emphasized that their theory, even if correct from

 a deductive point of view, was contradicted by numerous and sufficiently accurate
 experimental results:

 The molecular theory, or theory of actions at a distance, proposed by Navier,

 Cauchy and Poisson [. . .] made the elastic properties of isotropic bodies, depend

 indeed on a single parameter, while numerous observations did not seem to agree
 with this result.36 (Voigt 1900, p. 288)

 On the other hand, Voigt remarked that a continuous theory of matter yielded results

 which contradicted those of Navier, Cauchy and Poisson, but which were confirmed
 by experimental evidence:

 A new theory has for some time been generally adopted [. . .] that supposes that

 matter is continuous and that the mutual actions between near portions of matter

 are localized at their separation surface [...]. This theory, which we will call the

 theory of immediate actions , provides, contrary to the former, two characteris-

 tic constants for isotropic media, and all these results agree with observation.37
 (Voigt 1900, p. 288)

 Voigt, however, was not satisfied simply with the fact that a theory matched the

 experimental results. He insisted on finding the causes that underpinned the fallacies
 of the molecular theory:

 If the only aim is to obtain the elementary laws of elasticity in a form responding
 to reality, one can be satisfied with the theory of immediate actions, without
 asking why the molecular hypothesis leads to incorrect results. But, if one seeks

 a general and coherent theory of the subject [...] the search for the underlying
 reasons for this failure will be instructive [...].38 (Voigt 1900, p. 289)

 Footnote 35 continued

 insensibles. Plus particulièrement, pour un cristal homogène, non déformé, on admet que ses molécules
 sont identiques, orientées de la même manière et distribuées régulièrement de façon que chaque molécule
 soit entourée par les autres de la même manière. Les distances auxquelles s'exercent ces actions mutuelles
 sont considérées comme très grandes par rapport à les distances des molécules voisines, et Ton convient

 que les déformations varient avec une lenteur telle dans l'espace que, même dans le corps déformé, la
 répartition des molécules puisse être considérée comme régulière, au sens indiqué plus haut, dans l'étendue
 de la sphère d'activité moléculaire.

 36 La théorie moléculaire ou des actions à distance, fondée par Navier, Cauchy et Poisson [. . .1 fait dépen-
 dre, en effet, les propriétés élastiques des corps isotropes d'un seul paramètre, alors que de nombreuses
 observations semblant être en désaccord avec ce résultat.

 37 C'est alors que fut généralement adoptée pendant quelque temps une nouvelle théorie [. . .] en supposant
 la matière continue et les actions mutuelles entre les portions de matière voisines localisées dans leur surface

 de séparation [...]. Cette théorie, que nous appelerons théorie des actions immédiates, donne, contrairement

 à la précédente, deux constantes caractéristiques des milieux isotropes, et tous ses résultats se sont trouvés
 d'accord avec l'observation.

 ® Si l'on ne se propose d'autre but que d'obtenir les lois élémentaires de l'élasticité sous une forme

 répondant à la réalité, on se déclarera satisfait par les résultats de la théorie des actions immédiates, sans
 demander pourquoi l'hypothèse moléculaire conduit à des résultats inexacts. Mais si l'on tend vers une

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 539

 According to Voigt, this failure could be traced to the fact that the traditional mole-

 cular theory was "unnecessarily specialized":

 [...] the previous molecular theory of elasticity starts from an unnecessarily

 specialized fundamental conception, that is, the hypothesis of central molecular

 actions depending only on distance [...]. 39 (Voigt 1900, p. 289)

 Experimental observations on crystals, suggested Voigt, provided a hint as to which

 corrections needed to be made:

 [...] the regular formation of a crystal [...] cannot be understood unless an
 orienting moment acts on the particle which unites with the crystal and gives it

 [the particle] an orientation parallel to those already part of the building. But,
 according to the principle of conservation of energy, mutual actions directed

 along the line of the centres and depending only on the distance are incompati-
 ble with such moments. Indeed, the existence of moments requires a potential of

 the mutual action depending on the orientation, and this leads to forces varying
 with the orientation of the molecules and, in general, not coinciding with the

 line of centres.40 (Voigt 1900, p. 289)

 Voigťs starting point is clear: if material corpuscles have extension and orienta-

 tion, it is useless to limit oneself by reducing mutual actions to forces only, and, more

 importantly from the constitutive point of view, the mutual actions shall in principle

 depend on orientation, too. This is a strong assumption, clearly departing from all the

 previous attempts to improve the ancient molecular theory and reconcile its results

 with experiments:

 Poisson has already built [. . .] a molecular theory that tries to take these circum-
 stances into account; but he still made some restrictive hypotheses and his results

 are, as a consequence, more particular than those of the theory of immediate
 actions and in part incompatible with experience.41 (Voigt 1900, pp. 289-290)

 It is interesting to remark that Voigt pointed out that the same results of his refined

 molecular theory could also be obtained by means of the techniques of the continuous

 model of matter, that is, by the introduction of a potential of inner actions:

 Footnote 38 continued

 théorie générale et conséquente de la matière f...l on tiendra pour instructive la recherche des raisons qui
 les firent échouer [...].

 39 [...] la théorie moléculaire ancienne de l'élasticité part d'une conception fondamentale inutilement
 spécialisée, à savoir l'hypothèse d'actions moléculaires centrales et ne dépendant que de la distance [...].

 40 [. . .] la formation régulière d'un cristal [. . .1 n'est compréhensible que si un moment directeur agit sur la

 particule qui va s'associer au cristal en lui donnant une orientation parallèle à celles qui font déjà partie de
 l'édifice. Mais, d'après le principe de la conservation de l'énergie, des actions mutuelles dirigées suivant
 la ligne des centres et ne dépendant que de la distance sont incompatibles avec de semblables moments.
 Car l'existence des moments exige un potentiel de l'action mutuelle dépendant de l'orientation, et celui-ci

 conduit à des forces qui varient avec l'orientation de la molécule et, en général, ne coïncident pas avec la

 ligne des centres.

 41 Poisson a déjà édifié [. . .1 une théorie moléculaire qui cherche à tenir compte de ces circonstances; mais
 il fait encore quelques hypothèses restrictives et ses résultats sont, en conséquence, plus particuliers que
 ceux de la théorie des actions immédiates et en partie incompatibles avec l'expérience.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 540 D. Capecchi et al.

 [...] the method based on the theory of immediate actions leads to analogous

 results. [. . .] The work [. . .] is the (negative) differential of [. . .] the general elastic
 potential [...]. 42 (Voigt 1900, pp. 298-299)

 The same assumptions were later considered again and more widely expounded

 by Voigt in a comprehensive monograph on crystal physics (Voigt 1910), in which he

 gave credit to Bravais and put forth the key points at the basis of his theory, that is,
 kinematics and the existence of a potential:

 A molecular theory of the elastic phenomena that offers the perspective to explain

 all observations shall have such a general basis as Bravais ' structural theory [. . .]

 provides. According to this, the crystal shall be thought of as composed by iden-

 tical and parallel oriented bricks or elementary masses, arranged so that each of

 these is surrounded by the others in the same way inside the sphere of [molecu-

 lar] action. There is no need to make special assumptions on the nature of these
 bricks; these could in some way be identified with the chemical molecules of

 the substance, with the only limitation being that the construction shall show the

 characteristic symmetry of the crystal. As a matter of fact, an assumption is only
 necessary regarding the forces that the elementary masses exert on each other,

 and about the displacements that each of these masses is subjected to.

 Considering the former [the forces], we will not restrict generality by introduc-

 ing any other limitations except that the mutual actions shall have potential;

 considering the latter [the displacements], in order to report the elastic phenom-
 ena we will allow to consider the elementary masses as rigid bodies. By this
 we do not say that these maintain their rigidity under all circumstances; we will

 simply consider their changes of configuration as not particularly noticeable in
 the phenomena of interest to us.

 The global effect of a deformation on the system of masses of the crystal there-

 fore consists in an alteration of the length and angle of the spatial grid of the

 elementary masses and in a change of the orientation of the elementary masses

 compared to the same [spatial grid]. We may assume that both changes have
 sensibly uniform values inside the range of molecular action, and also that the

 modified system is again sensibly homogeneous in the [above] quoted range.43
 (Voigt 1910, pp. 596-597)

 42 f . . .] la méthode fondée sur la théorie des actions immédiates conduit à des résultats anologues. f . . .1 Le
 travail f...l soit la différentielle (négative) f.. .1 du potentiel général élastique f...].

 43 Eine molekulare Theorie der elastischen Vorgänge, die Aussicht bietet, alle Beobachtungen zu erklären,
 wird eine so allgemeine Grundlage verlangen, wie sie etwa der Bravaiss che Strukturtheorie [...] an die
 Hand gibt. Der Kristall ist nach ihr aus unter einander identischen und parallel orientierten Bausteinen
 oder Elementarmassen aufgeführt zu denken, die so angeordnet sind, daß jeder von diesen innerhalb der
 Wirkungssphäre in gleicher Weise von anderen umgeben ist. Über die Natur dieser Bausteine braucht
 man spezielle Annahmen nicht zu machen; dieselben können irgendwie aus den chemischen Molekeln der
 Substanz zusammengesetzt sein, mit der einzigen Beschränkung, daß das Gebilde die charakteristische
 Symmetrie des Kristalles aufweisen muß. Wesentlich ist aber eine Annahme über die Kräfte, welche die

 Elementarmassen aufeinander ausüben, und über die Bewegungen, die eine jede dieser Massen auszuführen
 vermag.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 541

 Voigt did not abandon a discrete description of matter (Navier, Cauchy and Pois-

 son) but chose to adopt the powerful tools provided by the equation of virtual work

 (Lagrange) and by the potential theory (Green). The hypothesis that an elastic potential
 exists has a constitutive background and implicitly leads to symmetries in the consti-
 tutive relations.

 Voigt highlighted that a molecular description shall not consider a single elemen-

 tary mass but rather what in contemporary language is called a representative volume
 element:

 Following the fundamental studies of Cauchy and Poisson, it is common to base

 the molecular theory of elasticity not on the consideration of a single molecule,
 but on those [molecules] of a volume element, which is large compared to the

 sphere of molecular action, and containing, as a consequence, an extremely large
 amount of molecules. The molecules surrounding the volume element therefore

 act only on the inner molecules immediately next to the surface [of the volume
 element] and combine with each other to give the components of pressure.44

 (Voigt 1900, p. 290)

 4.1 The pressure of forces

 It is remarkable how Voigt, following the tradition dating back to the French mecha-
 nicians of the first decades of 1800, adopted the term "pressure" (pression in French,

 Druck in German) to denote the representative of the inner actions, while at that time

 the scientific community had begun to use the more neutral term "stress" ( tension in

 French, Spannung in German). It is also remarkable how Voigt, following again the
 school of Navier, Cauchy and Poisson, made a clear distinction between the idea of
 the actions exchanged amongst corpuscles (a well-known and established concept of
 the mechanics of body-points and rigid bodies) and that of stress, a surface density
 of the total force exchanged amongst the molecules of the volume element and the

 surrounding ones compared to the area of the surface of separation. In the memoir

 Footnote 43 continued

 In bezug auf ersteres wollen wir der Allgemeinheit halber keine andere Beschränkung einführen, als daß
 die Wechselwirkungen ein Potential haben sollen; in bezug auf letzteres wird es zur Wiedergabe der elas-
 tischen Erscheinungen erlaubt sein, die Elementarmassen wie starre Körperchen zu behandeln. Damit ist
 nicht ausgesagt, daß dieselben sich unter allen Umständen starr verhalten; wir wollen nur ihre Konfigura-
 tionsänderungen als bei den uns interessienden Vorgängen nicht merklich wirksam betrachten.

 Die Gesamtwirkung einer Deformation auf das Massensystem des Kristalles besteht hiernach in einer
 Veränderung der Längen und der Winkel des Raumgitters der Elementarmassen und in einer Änderung
 der Orientierung der Elementarmassen gegen dasselbe. Wir dürfen annehmen, daß beide Änderung inner-
 halb des sehr kleinen Bereiches molekularer Wirkung merklich konstante Größen besitzen, daß also das

 veränderte System in dem genannten Bereich wieder merklich homogen ist.

 ^ Depuis les travaux fondamentaux de Cauchy et de Poisson, il est d'un usage général de fonder la theorie
 moléculaire de l'élasticité, non sur la considération d'une molécule unique, mais sur celle d'un élément

 de volume, grand par rapport à la sphère d'action moléculaire et contenant, par conséquent, un nombre
 extrêmement grand de molécules. Les molécules environnant l'élément de volume n'agissent alors que sur
 les molécules intérieures immédiatement voisines de la surface de séparation et se combinent pour donner

 les composantes de la pression.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 542 D. Capecchi et al.

 of 1900 Voigt introduced the components of stress directly, referring to Poisson45 to

 derive the stress components starting from intermolecular forces. In the more extended

 monograph of 1910, the primitive quantities were the kinematics of the elementary
 masses and the potential. The latter was a linear functional of the first-order increments

 of the possible displacements of the elementary masses. Intermolecular forces were

 then obtained by Voigt as first-order derivatives of the potential with respect to the
 kinematical quantities (Voigt 1910, pp. 597-598). Irrespective of these differences,
 stress was in both cases defined by Voigt following Poisson:

 [The components of pressure] have been defined by Cauchy and Poisson as the
 sums of the parallel components [of molecular forces] that all the molecules (i)

 inside a right cylinder elevated on a surface element q are exerted on by all the

 molecules ( e ) located at the other side of q9 divided by q , that is, with respect to
 the unit of area.46 (Voigt 1900, p. 290)

 According to Voigt's definition, the component of stress in direction S on the surface

 element q having normal n is provided by Eq. 27 in Voigt (1900, p. 291):

 i e

 (D

 where 5/e is the component in direction S of the force f¡e. Following a notation origi-

 nally introduced by Kirchhoff, Voigt adopted the symbols Xx, Xy , Xz , YXi Yy , Yz ,
 Zjc, Z y , Zz to indicate the nine components of stress with respect to a Cartesian set
 of coordinates.

 Since Voigt considered elementary masses as rigid particles, he could not reduce
 their interaction, in general, to mutual opposite forces, but rather to a force and a
 couple:

 The interactions occurring between two rigid bodies (Л) and (k) give origin
 to both global [force] components X/,*, ... and also rotation moments

 ^ In particular to Poisson (1828) and the article "Mémoire sur l'équilibre et le mouvement des corps
 cristallisés" ( 1 839), Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de l'Institut de France , vol. 1 8, pp. 3-152, 1 842.

 ^ [Les composantes de la pressioni ont été définies par Cauchy et Poisson comme les sommes de compo-
 santes parallèles que toutes les molécules (j ) à l'intérieur d'un cylindre droit élevé sur un élément de surface

 q éprouvent de la part de toutes les molécules (e) situées de l'autre côté de q, divisées par q, c'est-à-dire
 rapportées à l'unité de surface.

 This is the definition of "pression" according to Poisson:

 [...] soit M un point situé dans l'intérieur du corps, à une distance sensible de la surface. Par ce

 point menons un plan qui partage le corps en deux parties, et que nous supposerons horisontal [...].
 Appelons A la partie supérieure et A ' la partie inférieure, dans laquelle nous comprendrons les
 points matériels appartenant au plan même. Du point M comme centre, décrivons une sphère qui
 comprenne un très-grand nombre de molécules, mais dont le rayon soit ce-pendant insensible par
 rapport au rayon d'activité des forces moléculaires. Soit co l'aire de sa section horisontale; sur cette

 section élevons dans A un cylindre vertical, dont la hauteur soit au moins égale au rayon d'activité
 des molécules; appelons В ce cylindre: l'action des molécules de A' sur celles de B, divisée par со,
 sera la pression exercée par A' sur A, rapportée à l'unité de surface et relative au point M (Poisson
 1831, p. 29).

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 543

 ¿Ab Lkh , . • -, which we will calculate around the centre of gravity of the con-

 sidered body. We assume analogous actions occurring between two elementary
 masses of our crystal model.47 (Voigt 1910, pp. 597-598)

 Since in principle there is no reason to distinguish between interactions represented

 by a force and others represented by a couple, Voigt remarked that all considerations
 on the interactions of the kind 'force' must hold also for the interaction of the kind

 where Die is the component in direction D of the moment that the molecule i inside

 the cylinder is exerted upon by the molecule e outside the cylinder. Voigt commented
 that

 'couple'. Hence, intermolecular torques depend on the distance between the centres

 of gravity of elementary masses, there is a sphere of molecular action for the couple,
 and so on:

 [...] we have considered only the pressure of forces acting between molecules,
 but the moments, or couples , acting between them may be considered in the

 same way.48 (Voigt 1900, p. 293)

 Voigt suggested that, in analogy with the stress induced by forces, he would define
 the stress induced by moments ("pressions de moments") according to the relation

 expressed by his Eq. 32 in Voigt (1900, p. 293)

 = (2)

 i e

 [...] one has the nine special components of the stress-moments

 L*x i L'y i Lz, MXì My , MZì Nyy Nz,

 which exactly correspond to the X*, , Zz.49 (Voigt 1900, p. 293)

 4.2 The vanishing of the pressure of moments

 In order to provide an expression for the stress-moments, Voigt needed to calculate the
 moments exchanged between elementary masses and to establish the basic laws for
 these mechanical quantities. Hence, Voigt build a potential of molecular interactions

 47 Die zwischen zwei starren Körper (Л) und (*) stattfindenden Wechselwirkungen geben Veranlassung
 sowohl zu Gesamtkomponenten X/,*, X */,, ... als auch zu Drehungsmomenten L/,*, L*/,, . . ., die wir je
 um den Schwerpunkt des betreffenden Körpers rechnen wollen. Analoge Wirkungen nehmen wir auch
 zwischen zwei Elementarmassen unseres Kristallmodelles als stattfindend an.

 48 [...] nous avons considéré exclusivement les pressions des forces agissant entre les molécules, mais il

 est que les moments, ou les couples , qui agissent entre elles peuvent être traités de la même manière.

 49 [...1 on a les neuf pressions de moments particulières

 Lx , Ly , Lz , Mx , My , Mz , Nx, Ny, Nz,

 qui correspondent exactement aux Xx , • • • , Zz .

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 544 D. Capecchi et al.

 made up of sums of products of forces and first-order displacements as well as of
 moments and first-order rotations:

 If we denote by Фик the potential of mutual actions, [...] for any possible [vir-

 tual] displacement of both elementary masses it must be equal to (Voigt 1910,
 598)50

 - $0hk = Xhk Sx/, + • • ' + Lhk &l'h + '•• + Xkh &Xlc + - ■ --{-Lkh Sl'k + ••• (3)

 where 8хи, 8x к and the like for y , z are the variations of the Cartesian coordinates of

 the centres of gravity of the elementary masses (Л), (к), respectively; 8l'h , 8l'k and the
 like for m, n are variations of the rotations, with respect to a fixed system of Cartesian

 axes, of the elementary masses (Л), ( k ), respectively. By means of the equation of
 virtual displacements, Voigt obtained the balance equations, expressing the 'law of
 action and reaction' for forces and moments between elementary masses:

 Relations exist among the [force] components and the moments, which derive

 from the fact that the potential must be a function of the relative position of the
 interacting masses, and so must remain unaltered if one dislocates both elemen-

 tary masses in a rigid link, i.e., [if one introduces] for the variations

 8 x/i, .. . 8 xic, .. . 8 1 fa, . . . 5 /д. , . . .

 the values that express such a dislocation.

 Such values are easy to build [. . .] and lead to the following six general relations5 1
 (Voigt 1910, p. 598):

 Xhk + Xkh =0, . . .

 Lhk + Lkh + Zhk (Уи - Ук ) - Yhk ( Zh - Zk) =0, . . .

 (4)

 50 Wird das Potential der Wechselwirkungen mit Ф/,* bezeichnet, so muß [...1 bei jeder zulässigen Dislo-
 kation beider Elementarmassen (h) und ( к ) gelten

 - №hk - %hk Sx/, + • • • + Lfj ¿ Sl'fj + • • • + Хм 8xk + • • • + Lkh 8l'k + • • • (71)

 5 1 Zwischen den Komponenten und den Momenten bestehen Relationen, die daraus fließen, daß das Poten-

 tial eine Funktion nur der relativen Lage der aufeinander wirkenden Massen sein kann, also ungeändert
 bleiben muß, wenn man beide Elementarmassen in starrer Verbindung miteinander disloziert, d.h., für die
 Variationen,

 Werte einführt, die solche Dislokation ausdrücken.

 Derartige Werte sind [...] leicht zu bilden und ergeben folgende sechs allgemeine Relationen:

 Sxk,... &l'h,.ě.6l'k,...

 Xhk + Хы =0, . . .

 Lhk + Lkh + Zhk (Vh - Ук) - Yhk ( Zh ~ Zk) = 0, . . .

 (72)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 545

 The reduced expression for the potential of molecular interactions thus is expressed

 by Eq. 74 in Voigt (1910, p. 598):

 (n'u Sxhk + Уик S - +

 (n'u Sxhk + Уик S - +

 ť - ť

 H

 where Xhk = хи~хк and the like (Voigt did not actually write down the passages which

 lead from his Eqs. 71 and 72 - ours (3) and (4) - to his Eq. 74 - ours (5)).

 At this point Voigt made a basic assumption on the kinematics of his model:

 If we now introduce the above quoted assumption, that when dealing with real

 displacements inside the range of molecular action the elementary masses rotate

 by sensibly equal angles, because of l'h - I fk = • • • = Owe obtain for the same
 [expression of the potential]

 - d<Phk = Xhk (d Xhk + yhk d n' - Zhk dm') + . . . (6)

 where the now common components of the rotation d/', dm ' , d n! are introduced

 without subscript.52 (Voigt 1910, p. 599)

 That is, Voigt considered sensibly uniform values of the rotation of the molecules

 inside the molecular sphere of action; therefore, the potential of molecular interactions

 (5) was further reduced to the expression (6), depending only on intermolecular forces.

 This is a strong deduction: in modern language, we may say that an inner constraint

 is imposed and as a consequence this implies that constitutive prescriptions shall be

 produced for intermolecular forces only.

 Voigt added some considerations with the intention to explain the structure of the
 Lhk , . • • better and further prove that the only meaningful stresses are those of force.

 Indeed, both in the report of 1900 and in the monograph of 1910, Voigt claimed that

 symmetry considerations yield the equivalence of the moment exerted by the elemen-

 tary mass ih) on the elementary mass ( к ) and vice-versa:

 [. . .] because of the parallel orientation of ( h ) and (к), from symmetry [it follows

 that] Lhk = Lkh

 ^ Indem wir nun die oben signalisierte Annahme einführen, daß innerhalb der Weite molekularer Wirkung
 die Elementarmassen sich bei den wirklichen Veränderungen um merklich gleiche Winkel drehen, gelangen

 wir für dergleichen wegen l'h - lfk = • • = 0 zu

 - d Фик = Xhk (d Xhk + УНк àn' - Zhk à>n ) + . . . (75)

 Dabei sind die jetzt gemeinsamen Drehungskomponenten di', dm', d n' ohne Indizes geführt.

 53 [...] dabei parallelen Orientierungen von (Л) und (к) nach Symmetrie Lhk = Lkh

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 If one considers that Lhk = Lkh and the like, the balance equations for the moments,

 Eq. 3-2, let Voigt obtain his Eq. 76 in Voigt (1910, p. 599)

 546 D. Capecchi et al.

 2Lhk - YhkZhk - Zhkyhk • • • (7)

 showing that mutual couples are actually moments of intermolecular forces, and the

 constitutive characterization must be provided only for the latter, whilst the former

 are obtained by balance equations as is standard today when one introduces an inner
 constraint.

 A fundamental consequence of this is that the pressure of moments, or stress-
 moment, vanishes. Indeed, let us introduce the expressions (7) into the definition (2)
 and let Die = Mie , Nie. Voigt observed that in (2 )-(7) only the molecules inside
 the sphere of molecular action should be taken into account. Thus, since this sphere is
 infinitesimal and the lever arms xie , yie , це are smaller than the radius of molecular

 activity, Dn , and hence Ln , Mn , Nn are infinitesimals of higher order compared to Sn
 and are hence negligible. More precisely,

 On the one hand, one obtains a comparison between the relative orders of mag-
 nitude of the Xn, . . . and of the L„, - Because of (76) [our equation (7)] one
 can indeed write

 Ln = (ZiaYi0 - yiaZia) » • • • (8)

 Now, since the relative coordinates xia , yia, ца must be smaller than the range

 of action of the molecular forces, the sums expressing the Ln , . . . are in general

 vanishingly small in comparison with those [sums] which express the Xn

 (Voigt 1910, p. 602)

 In the quotation above, the symbol / (Flächenelement in German) has the same role
 as q in our Eqs. 1 and 2; the subscript a (außer in German) has the same role as e in

 the same equations; the symbol S stands for a sum.

 The use of two different symmetry considerations (the first for the rotations of the
 elementary masses inside the molecular sphere of action, the second for the inter-

 molecular couples) does not seem quite clear. From the contemporary point of view
 one could instead probably make the following constitutive reasoning: since Voigt
 had assumed the rotation to be uniform inside the molecular sphere of action, the
 relative rotation between two molecules vanishes. The constitutive function for the

 Einerseits gewinnt man daraus eine Beurteilung der relativen Größenordnungen der Xn , . . . und der

 Ln , - Nach (76) kann man nämlich schreiben

 L>n = 2f (¿ia Yia ~ yia^ia) » • • • (86)

 Da nun die relativen Koordinaten x¡a, y¡a, z¡a kleiner als die Wirkungsweite der Molekularkräfte sein

 müssen, so sind die Summen, welche die Ln , . . . ausdrücken, im allgemeinen werschwindend klein gegen
 diejenigen, welche die Xn, . . . bestimmen.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 547

 intermolecular couples depends in general on the relative rotation between molecules.

 Since the latter vanishes, the intermolecular couples cannot depend on it and cannot
 be different.

 After these premises, Voigt obtained the expressions for pressure in terms of sums

 of forces.55 Owing to the supposed homogeneity of the distribution of the molecules,

 the number of molecules interacting in pairs from both sides of the elementary surface

 / is Çfriia , provided Ç is the number of molecules in the volume unit and ща is the

 projection along n of the distance between the centres of gravity of two corresponding

 molecules on opposite sides of / (which cannot be greater than the radius of molecular
 action) (Voigt 1910, p. 603).56

 Moreover, again because of homogeneity, Voigt stated that it was immaterial to
 exchange the role of the molecules inside the cylinder with those outside. Hence, one

 could in fact consider only one half of the total number of pairs of interacting mol-
 ecules, and the subscripts denoting inner and outer molecules could be omitted. By

 considering n parallel to the coordinate axes, it assumes the values x , у , z of the rela-

 tive coordinates of the centres of gravity of the corresponding molecules with respect

 to the assumed coordinate frame. Eventually, the components of stress are provided

 by Eq. 89 in Voigt (1910, p. 604)

 = y, = ^S*y, Zx = ySxZ, (9)

 and the like for the other components.

 Owing to these fundamental results, Voigt had to provide constitutive relations

 only for ordinary stresses, thus recovering one of the basic assumptions of the French
 mechanicians of the first decades of 1 800. Voigt derived the constitutive relations by

 means of standard techniques.

 4.3 Constitutive laws - first approach

 In the memoir of 1900, Voigt adopted what a reader of our times would interpret

 as a procedure of linearization of the equations of interest (that is, Voigt considered

 only infinitesimal displacements). He did not actually show the passages of his proce-
 dure, but referred to his previous article (Voigt 1887). Roughly speaking, he assumed

 the expressions (9) as given, then he expressed дс, у , z as well as Ç in terms of the
 first-order variations of the displacement components starting from a natural state.

 Voigt then performed the symbolic sums and products indicated in (9) and retained

 only linear terms. Thus, each component of stress turned out to depend, in principle,
 on the first-order increments of displacement and rotation:

 [...] admitting that the body is deformed, starting from a state in which all

 pressures are zero, by continuous and infinitely small displacements with com-

 55 In Voigt (1900) he limited himself to quote the same result as obtained by Poisson (183 1).

 ^ The surface element was called q in Voigt (1900), / in Voigt (1910).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ponents u, v, w , and by continuous and infinitely small molecular rotations with

 components /, m, n, one may develop the sums appearing in those formulae.

 The result of the calculation is a system of nine equations of the kind

 548 D. Capecchi et al.

 _ 3 и (du ' (du '
 - Xx = С, _ , - 3 и + С, 2 (du + n) ' + С, 3 (du - m J '
 „ (dv ' Эи ^ (dv '
 +Ci4{dI~n)+Cl5dï „ (dv ' Эи + Ci6'Tz+l) ^ (dv '

 ( dw ' ( dw ' d W

 +Ci7 (-+m)+ ( dw ' C, « ( dw - / j ' + C19 - d W , (10)

 in which the Chk are characteristic parameters of the body (in the undeformed
 state) and of the orientation of the coordinate axes, which are determined, on one

 hand, by the law of elementary actions and, on the other hand, by the distribution

 of the molecules in the space; the relations Chk = Qa take place among them.
 The number of independent constants Chk is, as a consequence, 45. 57 (Voigt
 1900, p. 296)

 Voigt did not clarify the reasons why the symmetry relation Chk = Qa hold; one

 might infer from the context and from a comparison with (Voigt 1 887) that this derives
 from the existence of an elastic potential.

 Voigt claimed that the local balance equations for force and torque he had written in

 Voigt (1900, p. 295) were well known. At this point, he advanced the hypothesis that

 no couple densities were distributed inside the body. Therefore, the standard symmetry

 relations for six of the components of the stress held, and these represented a set of lin-

 ear relations which permitted the elimination of the components of the rotation I , m , n

 from the constitutive relations (10). Thus, only six independent components of stress

 remained, depending on six arguments which consist only in the partial derivatives of
 the displacement components:

 57 f...l en admettent que le corps est déformé, à partir d'un état dans lequel totes les pressions sont nul-
 les par des déplacements infiniment petits et continus dont les composantes sont u, v, w, et des rotations

 moléculaires infiniment petites et continues dont les composantes sont /, m, n , on peut développer les
 sommes qui figurent dans ces formules.

 Le résultat du calcul est un système de neuf équations de la forme

 -X, = Cllg + Cl2(g+„)+C13(g-m)

 +C|4 (ë_n)+C|5ë+C|6(ë+/)

 /Эи> ' /dw A dw

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 +c,7(ã7 /Эи> )+ ' 18(э7" /dw A )+ |9"э7' dw (39)

 dans lesquelles les Chk sont des paramètres caractéristiques du corps (à l'état non déformé) et de l'orien-
 tation des axes de coordonnées, qui sont déterminés, d'une part, par la loi des actions élémentaires et, de

 l'autre, par la distribution des molécules dans l'espace et entre lesquels les relations Chk = Q/i ont lieu.
 Le nombre des constantes Chk indépendantes est, par suite, 45.

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 549

 If there are no moments in the volume [. . .] one has [. . .]

 Yz = Zy, Zx = Yz , Xy = Yx,

 one can [...] eliminate the components of the rotation /, m, n in the formulae

 The result of this operation consists in six expressions for the components of

 for the components of pressure.

 pressure

 X*, Yy, ZZi Yz = Zv, Zx = Yz, Xy = Yx

 which are linear and homogeneous with respect to the six arguments.58 (Voigt

 1900, p. 297)

 du dv d w dv dw d w du du dv

 dx ' d у 9 dz ' dz dy ' dx dz' dy dx

 Voigt arranged both the six components of stress and those of strain so as to form
 a list:

 We will pose, following Kirchhoff,

 du dv dw dv dw
 7Г~ - Xx у 7Г~ - Ум "7Г~ = ¿z* ~г~ + ~Г~ = у Z = zy,
 dx у dy dz dz oy /19ч

 dw ou du dv
 - + - = Zx = Xz> T- + 7- = *v = Ух'>
 dx dz dy dx

 [. . .] These six arguments, лгд; , . . . , jcv, will always be arranged in the same order

 in the following, corresponding to that of the components of pressure.
 The result of the above indicated elimination [that of the components of the

 rotation from the variables on which the components of stress depend] are thus

 six equations of the kind

 58 S'il n'y a pas de moments dans le volume f...l on a f...l

 Yz = Z y , Zx = Xz, Xy = Yx ,

 on peut f...] éliminér les composantes de la rotation /, m, n dans les formules des composantes de la
 pression.
 Le résultat de cette opération consiste en six expressions pour les composantes de la pression

 Xx, Yy , Zz, Yz = Z y , Zx = Yz, Xy = Yx

 qui sont linéaires et homogènes par rapport aux six arguments

 du dv dw dv dw ' dw du ' du ^ dv
 dx ' dv ' dz ' dz dy ' dx dz ' Э.у dx '

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 - Xx = C' i Я* + С'2Уу + C'3Zz + C'4yz + C'5Zx + C'6Xy, (13)

 where Chk are parameters characteristic of the substance of the body and of the

 orientation of the coordinate system. Among them one has the relations

 the number of independent parameters Chk is thus 21. 59 (Voigt 1900, pp. 297-
 298)

 550 D. Capecchi et al.

 chk=cjch' (14)

 Voigt obtained the linear elastic constitutive equations in matrix form, since both

 stress and strain were written as vector-like lists of six independent components.60

 Hence, Voigt proved that the constitutive moduli were in general 36 in number,
 and because of the symmetry of the tangential components of stress this number was

 reduced to 21 .61 In the memoir of 1900, Voigt proved this result also by means of ther-

 modynamics. Like Green, he showed that the elastic potential, being a homogeneous
 second-order polynomial of the six strain independent components, is completely
 represented by means of 21 coefficients (Voigt 1900, pp. 298-300).

 Voigt remarked how his refined molecular approach, built improving the model
 by Navier, Cauchy and Poisson, provided results in complete agreement with those
 provided by assuming a continuous model and the existence of an elastic potential, as
 Green did:

 But the theory of actions at a distance lets us bypass the results of the theory of

 immediate actions from an important point of view. Since, according to this [the

 theory of actions at a distance], the parameters Chk , and as a consequence c/,*,

 59 Nous poserons, avec Kirchhoff,

 du dv d w dv d w
 T~ = ' 7Г" = Уу» ~7~ = Zz, TT* + - Уг = Zy »
 a* dw 1 dz au Ii dy » m

 _ + _ + __x, = Ä;

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 f . . -1 Ces six arguments, xx , . . . , xy , seront dans la suite constamment rangés dans cet ordre, correspondant
 à celui des composantes des pressions.
 Le résultat de Г élimination susindiquée est alors six équations de la forme

 - Xx - c'' xx + с'2Уу "Ь CÌ3ZZ + c'^yz +c'5zx +c'6Xyt (41)

 où Chk sont des paramètres caractéristiques de la substance du corps et de Г orientation du système de
 coordonnées. On a entre eux les relations

 Chk = ckh ; (42)

 le nombre des paramètres Chk indépendants est donc 21.

 60 Such a representation is still attributed to Voigt in many textbooks on strength of materials.

 61 We point out that there are two different symmetry reasonings: the first is due to the fact that an elas-
 tic potential exists, the second holds only when there are no distributed couples and hence the stress is

 symmetric. In modern language, the first assumption implies the so-called main symmetry of the elasticity
 tensor Eijhk = Ehkijy whereas the second assumption holds then the so-called secondary symmetry exists,
 E i jhk = Ejihk = Eijkh-

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 55 1

 may be calculated based on the law of molecular actions and the arrangement

 of molecules in space, one can, by means of particular hypotheses on such a law

 and such an arrangement, establish particular relations among the parameters of
 elasticity and compare the results with experience. Observations may also be
 useful for examining certain particular hypotheses and ' as a consequence , for
 developing our ideas on molecular actions.

 The most important specialization of the general hypotheses on molecular actions

 has already been presented; it is the hypothesis of forces coinciding with the
 straight line joining the centres and function of the distances only. It leads, as
 Poisson and Cauchy showed [...], without making any particular assumption

 on the arrangement of the molecules, to the following six relations among the
 parameters Chk [•••] which we will call [...] of Poisson and Cauchy.
 [...] the observations are, in general, in contradiction with the relations of Pois-

 son and Cauchy [...] and, as a consequence, with the concepts at their basis;
 one cannot therefore refuse to make molecular actions depend on the relative

 orientation of the molecules. Yet, it seems possible that specializations of other
 kinds lead to relations which are confirmed by experience, at least in certain
 cases.62 (Voigt 1900, pp. 300-302)

 Voigt remarked that if he assumed intermolecular forces to be central he was also
 able to recover the conditions of Cauchy and Poisson, reducing the number of indepen-

 dent elastic coefficients from 21 to 15. By introducing the further specializations of

 orthotropy and complete isotropy, he was finally able to prove that the number of

 independent elastic coefficients is 2 for the isotropic case (1 assuming that forces are
 central).

 Voigt replaced the traditional definition of isotropy (that is, equal arrangement of
 molecules in all directions of space) with that of quasi-isotropy; this overcame the

 paradoxes inside the old definition of isotropy provided by Cauchy and Poisson:

 All metals, almost all compact rocks seem at first to be bunches of crystals of

 varying extension according to circumstances, juxtaposed in all possible orienta-

 tions. [. . .] One may then admit that a structure of this kind, called quasi-isotropic

 by the author, is the rule in nature. [. . .] The elastic proprieties of isotropic bodies

 Mais la théorie des actions à distance permet de dépasser à un point de vue important ces résultats de la
 théorie des actions immédiates. Puisque, dans celle-là, les paramètres C/,*, et par suite aussi c/,*, peuvent

 être calculés en partant de la loi des actions moléculaires et de la répartition des molécules dans l'espace,

 on peut, par des hypothèses particulières sur cette loi et cette répartition, établir des relations particulières
 entre les paramètres élastiques et comparer les résultats avec l'expérience. Les observations peuvent ainsi
 servir à l'examen de certaines hypothèses particulières et, par suite, au développement de nos idées sur les
 actions moléculaires.

 La plus importante des spécialisations des hypothèses générales sur les actions moléculaires a déjà

 été indiquée; c'est l'hypothèse des forces coïncidant avec la droite joignant les molécules et fonctions des
 distances seulement. Elle conduit, comme Poisson et Cauchy l'ont montré f . . .1, sans faire aucune hypothèse

 particulière sur la disposition des molécules, aux six relations suivantes entre les paramètres c^k [•••! Яие
 nous appellerons [...1 de Poisson et Cauchy.

 [...] les observations sont, en général, en contradiction avec les relations de Poisson et Cauchy [...] et,

 par suite, avec les conceptions qui sont à leur base; on ne peut donc renoncer à faire dépendre les actions
 mutuelles de l'orientation relative des molécules. Mais il semble possible que des spécialisations d autre

 espèce conduisent à des relations qui soient confirmées par l'expérience, au moins dans certains cas.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 552 D. Capecchi et al.

 cannot be explained by means of the molecular hypothesis if one does not admit
 that bodies are composed of fragments of crystals.63 (Voigt 1900, pp. 339, 343)

 4.4 Constitutive laws - second approach

 Analogous results were revealed by Voigt in a more extended form in the monograph of

 1910, where he adopted a different approach and obtained a more precise identification

 of the number of independent elastic coefficients.

 Voigt remarked that if the coordinate axes solidai with the two molecules (h) and

 (fc), denoted А, В , С, rotate by a very small angle of components /', m', n! with

 respect to the fixed coordinate system of axes, denoted X , Y , Z,64 his relations (77)

 in Voigt (1910, p. 599), characteristic of a rigid infinitesimal motion, hold

 a = X + yn - zm'
 b = y + zi' - хп' (15)

 с = z + X mf - yť ,

 Therefore, in the reduced expression (6) for the potential of inner actions the terms

 multiplying the Xhk, • • . coincide with the first-order increment of the relative quan-
 tities a, b, с in Eqs. 15 as related to the molecules ( h ) and (fc). Hence, the reduced

 expression for the potential can assume the simple form expressed by his Eqs. 82, 83
 in Voigt (1910, p. 600)

 - d<Phk = Ahk dahk + Bhkàbhk + Chkàchk, (16)

 where Ahk and the like denote the intermolecular actions as referred to the coordinate

 axes A , В , С.65 Voigt then operated a linearization procedure:

 The components [of force] А, В , С are [...] functions of the relative coordi-
 nates of the elementary masses on which the mutual actions act; because of

 the deformation their variations therefore consist only in the modification of
 these quantities. Let us denote a, b , с the coordinates of a mass (a) relative to
 a mass (/) with respect to the axes А, В , С, thus their variations are denoted

 Aa , Ab , Ac. Due to the smallness of these variations one may pose

 * .o /9¿'° л P¿'° , / 3A'°
 л=л * .o +ш /9¿'° м+ы) л P¿'° ль+ь) , / 3A'° лс

 63 Tous les métaux, presque toutes les roches compactes se présentent immédiatement comme des accumu-

 lations de cristaux de grandeur variant avec les circonstances, qui sont juxtaposés dans toute les orientations
 possibles On peut donc admettre qu'une structure de cette espéce, appelée quasi-isotrope par le rappor-
 teur, est la règle dans la nature. [. . .] Les propriétés élastiques des corps isotropes ne peuvent être expliquées
 par l'hypothèse moléculaire que si l'on admet que ces corps sont composés de fragments de cristaux.

 64 It is indeed remarkable that Voigt used a notation which induces confusion in the reader, since X is both
 a coordinate axis and a component of intermolecular force.

 65 We point out, as already noted above, the possible confusion induced by Voigt, who denoted both
 coordinate axes and force components by the same symbol.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 553

 where the superscripts characterize the function in the original, undeformed
 state.66 (Voigt 1910, p. 605)

 Since the axes А, В, С were supposed as slightly shifted and rotated with respect
 to the fixed axes X , У, Z, Voigt easily found the laws relating the A a, ... to the

 Аде, ... and to the components of the small rotation /', m' , w', since they are those of

 a rigid motion. He thus obtained from his Eq. 77 (our Eq. 1 5) the expressions provided

 by the unnumbered equation in Voigt (1910, p. 605)

 Aa = Ax + n'y0 - mfz° = Ax + n'b° - m с °, . . . (18)

 but, since he supposed the displacements to be small, he also obtained his Eq. 94 in

 Voigt (1910, p. 605)

 д, = дх + IV + = |ï„o + ob + »v, ... (W

 дх dy oz oa ob oc

 and, by combining Eqs. 18 and 19,67

 -=^o+fë+">o+fë-m')"° • oo)

 and expressed in his Eq. 97 in Voigt (1910, p. 605) the number of molecules in the
 unit volume in terms of the deformation:

 '-<°0 -£-£-£)■

 By inserting Eqs. 20-22 into Eq. 16, performing all the lengthy operations and retain-

 ing only linear terms, Voigt obtained the desired constitutive relations, assuming that

 the reference configuration is a natural, stress-free state:

 By means of these [relations, i.e. our equations (20)- (22)] all the quanti-
 ties [...providing] XXi Yx, Zx are expressed through the partial derviatives

 66 Die Komponenten А, В, С sind f...] Funktionen der relativen Koordinaten der Elementarmassen, auf
 deren Wechselwirkungen sie sich beziehen; ihre Änderungen infolge der Deformation beruht also aus-
 schließlich auf der Veränderung dieser Größen. Die relativen Koordinaten der Massen ( а ) gegen eine (/)
 nach den Achsen А, В, С sind jetzt kurz a, b, с zu nennen, ihre Änderungen mögen demgemäß mit
 Aa, Ab, Ac bezeichnet worden. Wegen der Kleinheit dieser Änderungen kann man setzen

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 wobei die oberen Indizes die auf der ursprünglichen, undeformierten Zustand bezogenen Funktionen char-
 akterisieren.

 67 These correspond to Eqs. 95, 96 in Voigt ( 1910, p. 605).

 554 D. Capecchi et al.

 of м, v, w with respect to the coordinates, through /', m' n' and through
 parameters that relate to the original state. The obtained values are then inserted

 and all multiplications are performed [retaining] only the members until the first

 order with respect to the variations [induced] by the deformation.

 The result of this operation is very complicated. It becomes significantly simpler

 if one remembers that under our assumption the deformation takes place starting

 from the natural, stress-free state, so that for vanishing w, v , w , /', m', n ' the

 components of pressure must also vanish. [. . .]

 The thus obtained result, which one may complete through the use of the expres-

 sions for Xy, Y y , Zy, XZt YZt Zz, yields all the components of pressure which
 are linear in the nine arguments

 du du . . du . .

 +»=*,. a-='r
 dv , , dv dv . ,
 Tx~n=y" dï=yy' э7+ Zv (23)
 dw , , dw . , dw
 37+m=Z" , , 9 J-I=z>' ,

 Here the x'y, . . . are new quantities, of which y'z is not equal to zy, in the same
 way as Yz is not equal to Zy.
 The coefficients of these expressions are sums of the kind

 ^°Sa°(S)0=c- <24>

 which will be shortened in the suggested [following] way; the superscripts of

 the С stand for the coordinates present in the numerator, the subscripts for those
 in the denominator.

 The coefficient system in the nine components of pressures assumes the follow-
 ing global expression:

 x* *v хг I Ух Уу y'z I 4 Zz
 _ л* у n'' /^12 /^>13 /^11 f* 12 /^13 ^>11 rAl. /-13
 л* у 4l 4l 4l 12 f* 12 12 Чз C13 Чз

 -У Г21 Г22 Г23 Г21 r22 Г23 r21 Г22 Г2*
 Лу Cji Cjj cn U|2 C12 Cj2 C13 C13 C13
 _ у Г31 Г32 Г33 Г31 Г32 Г33 Г3* Г*2 Г33

 Лг у ип ии и,2 С12 С12 С13 С13 С,з

 _ V с11 Г 12 Г*13 Г11 rl¿ CVi rïl rW
 x 21 21 21 ^22 <-22 <-22 <-91 <-94 <-94

 / y 1^21 U21 21 c22 c22 u22 u23 С21 С22 L23 С c23

 -Y / С21 1^21 С22 U21 С23 С21 c22 c22 С22 u22 С23 u23 С21 L23 С22 c23 С 23 (25)
 _y r31 r32 r33 r21 r22 r23 >-31 r32 >-33
 /г «-21 °21 °21 c22 u22 c22 c23 *"23 L23

 4l 4l 4l c32 c32 c32 c33 c33 c33

 -7 ^ Г21 Г22 Г23 Г21 Г22 Г 23 Г21 Г22 Г23
 ^ У 4l 4l 4l 32 c32 Г 32 c33 C32 Чз

 -7 Г31 Г32 Г33 Г31 Г32 Г33 Г31 Г32 Г33
 <-31 <-31 <-31 <-32 <-32 32 Чз Чз Чз

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 555

 The total amount of coefficients in this scheme is not 81, as it would seem at

 first sight, but 36, because according to (100) [our (24)] the relationships

 Cmn Cmn hk

 exist, and only six combinations of the subscripts or of the superscripts occur
 respectively.68 (Voigt 1910, pp. 606-607)

 68 Hiermitsindalle[...]fürXjc, Yx, Zx auftretenden Größen durch die Differentialquotienten von и, v, w
 nach den Koordinaten, durch /' , m' n' und durch Parameter, die sich auf den ursprünglichen Zustand be-

 ziehen, ausgedrückt. Die gefundenen Werte sind nunmehr einzusetzen und alle Multiplikationen nur bis
 auf die Glieder erster Ordnung bezüglich der Veränderungen durch die Deformation auszuführen.

 Das Resultat dieser Operation ist sehr kompliziert. Es vereinfacht sich erheblich, wenn man einmal berücks-

 ichtigt, daß nach unserer Annahme die Deformation von dem natürlichen, spannungsfreie Zustand aus stattf-
 inden soll, daß also bei verschwindenden u, v, w, /', m' , n' auch die Druckkomponenten verschwinden
 müssen. [...]

 Das so gewonnene Resultat, das man durch Heranziehung der Ausdrücke für Xy , Yy , Zy , Xz, Yz, Zz
 vervollständigen kann, ergibt die sämtlichen Druckkomponenten lineär in den neun Argumenten

 du du ,, du , ,
 dx By - xv > , dz z

 - =jtr,

 dv ' ' dv dv , Ř> ' taa' (99)
 Тх-"=У, ' ' уу=Уу Tz+l=Z- , Ř> ' taa' (99)
 dw , , dw ,, , dw
 ^+m , =ZX, , --I ,, -zy, , "ä7 ~Zz'

 Hierin sind die xfyj ... neue Bezeichnungen, bei denen y'z ebenso wenig gleich z'y ist, wie jetzt Yz gleich
 Zy-
 Die Parameter dieser Ausdrücke sind Summen von dem Typ

 5<°Sa°(Ä)°-c-

 die in der angedeuteten Weise abgekürzt werden sollen; die oberen Indizes der С weisen dabei auf die
 Koordinaten hin, die im Faktor, die unteren auf diejenigen, die im Nenner auftreten.

 Das Parametersystem in den neun Druckkomponenten besitzt folgende Gesetzmäßigkeit:

 Xx К I Ух Уу y'z I z'x 4 гг
 -Äx у /-11 /-12 /-13 /-11 /-12 /-13 /-11 /-12 /-13
 -Äx у Cn Cn Cn Cj2 b,2 C,2 C13 c13 c13
 Y /-21 r22 r23 /-21 Г 22 r2 3 r2ì Г2 2 Г2 3
 -Лу Y С,, С,, C,, c12 Г C12 C12 c,3 u,3 c,3
 Y /-31 /-32 r33 /-31 г 32 /-33 Г31 Г32 Г33
 -Äz Y Cjj Си Ljj C,2 г C,2 C,2 C13 Cj3 Cj3
 Y /-11 /-12 /-13 /-11 /-12 /-13 /-11 /-12 /-13
 ^21 21 21 22 22 c22 u23 c23 ^23

 у /-21 /-22 /-23 /-21 /-22 r23 /-21 r22 /-23
 -Yy у C2j C21 C21 C22 ^22 22 23 u23 u23
 v /-31 /-32 /-33 /-21 /-22 /-23 r31 r32 r33
 -Yz v C2j C21 C21 C22 ^22 22 C23 c23 c23

 -Zjf 7 /-11 /-12 /-13 /-11 /-12 /-13 /-II /^12 (-13
 -Zjf 7 /-11 C31 /-12 C3j C3, C32 C32 C32 C33 C33 U33
 7 /-21 /-22 /-23 /-21 /-22 r23 r21 r22 r23
 -Ly 7 C3, C31 C31 C32 C32 C32 C33 C32 b33
 7- /-31 /-32 /-33 /-31 /-32 r33 /-31 r32 r33
 -Lz 7- C31 C31 C3, C32 C32 C32 C33 C33 C33

 Die Gesamtzahl der in diesem Schema auftretenden Parameter ist nicht 8 1 , wie auf den ersten Blick scheinen

 möchte, sondern 36, da nach (100) die Relationen bestehen

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 556 D. Capecchi et al.

 We point out that the symmetry of the subscripts in Eq. 26 derives from the hypothesis

 that a regular enough elastic potential exists, hence its mixed second-order derivatives

 coincide. Voigt did not say so explicitly; yet, it is apparent that the symmetry of the

 superscripts is of constitutive origin, since it states that it is immaterial to change the

 role of the relative positions of the centres of gravity of the elementary masses.

 Voigťs matrix representation (25) is easy to grasp and still up-to-date; in principle

 the elasticities are 36 in number, hence Voigťs results are more general than those pre-

 sented by the French mechanicians at the beginning of the 1800s. Voigt then proved

 that for central mutual actions he obtained the relations of Poisson and Cauchy (Voigt
 1910, pp. 607-608).

 Voigt completed the study of linear elasticity in his monograph of 1910, passing

 from the elementary masses inside the molecular sphere of action to a volume element,

 small enough to apply the techniques of differential calculus but also large enough
 to encompass a vast amount of elementary masses (a representative volume element,

 RVE). Voigt obtained the local balance equations by means of the so-called 'principle
 of solidification':

 One easily obtains the balance equations for one part of a deformable body
 through the hypothesis that equilibrium cannot be altered if one lets the consid-

 ered part become rigid.69 (Voigt 1910, p. 609)

 It is remarkable that in principle he obtained equations both for force and torque.70
 In the end, Voigt presented the particular hypothesis that no external volume cou-

 ples are present: in this case, the local balance equations for the moments reduce to the
 symmetry of the components of the stress.71 This reflected on constitutive relations,
 since some coefficients shall equal others because of the coincidence of some stress
 components, and Voigt concluded that

 [ . . . ] the result of this operation are expressions for the six components of pressure
 [...] with 21 constants, as was supposed by earlier hypotheses.72 (Voigt 1910,
 pp. 613-614)

 rmn _ rnm - rmn _ rnm / 1 г» i '
 rmn Lhk _ ~Lhk rnm - ~Lkh rmn _ ~Ckh rnm ' (101> / 1 г» i '

 und nur sechs Kombinationen oberer resp. unterer Indizes vorkommen.

 69 Die Gleichgewichtsbedingungen für einen Teil eines deformierbaren Körpers erhält man sehr einfach
 durch die Überlegung, daß das Gleichgewicht nicht gestört werden kann, wenn man den betreffenden Teil
 starr werden läßt.

 70 These are provided by Eq. 103 in Voigt (1910, p. 609).

 71 Expressed by Eq. 1 17 in Voigt (1910, p. 613).

 7^ [...] das Resultat dieser Operation sind Ausdrücke für die sechs Druckkomponenten [...] mit 21
 Konstanten, wie sie den früheren Überlegungen zugrunde gelegt war.

 Thus, Voigt was once again able to reconcile the seemingly irreducible discrete,
 force-based, and continuous, energy-based, theories of mechanics, which had caused
 such great debate amongst the mechanicians of the 1 800s.

 Footnote 68 continued

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 557

 5 Final remarks

 The French mechanicians of the first decades of the 1 800s, amongst them Cauchy and
 Poisson, developed a theory of linear elastic phenomena based on a model of matter

 made of point-particles interacting by mutual central forces depending only on the

 distance between the body-points. Such a model brought results which did not agree
 with experience, since the model predicted one elastic modulus for isotropic materi-

 als, whilst experience suggested two. To justify such a result, the theory proposed by

 Green, based on a continuous model of matter and the existence of an elastic potential,

 gained credit.

 On the basis of the crystallographic studies carried out by Bravais, Voigt proposed
 a mechanical theory for linear elasticity which is more general than the "unneces-
 sarily specialized" one by Cauchy and Poisson. The ultimate components of matter
 are rigid corpuscles oriented in space, exchanging systems of forces reducible to a

 resultant through the centre of gravity of the elementary mass and a couple. Indeed,

 the formation of crystalline lattices requires an orienting moment to allow the parti-

 cle to respect the orientation of the lattice. Voigt postulated that moments as well as

 forces depend on the distance between the centres of gravity of the particles and on

 the orientation of the particles. By admitting that inside the sphere of molecular action

 the particles rotate according to the same angle, he found that the exchanged moments

 are actually moments of forces, and the only constitutive relations needed are those
 for the intermolecular force. This result can be traced to Cauchy and Poisson's, if one

 assumed the central force hypothesis, and the more general constitutive relations for

 linear elasticity found by Voigt agreed with experimental results. Voigt also proposed

 a more general definition of isotropy, which completed the agreement between theory

 and experiments.

 The study of Voigt, which sometimes seems to have been forgotten in the textbooks

 on strength of materials and continuum mechanics, still appears to be of great interest:
 it shows how a discrete approach, if suitably refined, is able to find a justification

 per causas of the phenomena of interest. This may still be of great importance nowa-
 days when studying 'complex' or 'new' materials, for which reasonable constitutive
 relations must be investigated starting from a refined, 'microscopic' approach.

 Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the grant "Progetti di ricerca
 d'Ateneo" of "Sapienza" University of Rome for the year 2007.

 References

 Hevelius.

 Beihoste, Bruno. 1991. Louis Cauchy. A biography. New York: Springer- Verlag.
 Benvenuto, Edoardo. 1991. An introduction to the history of structural mechanics. New York: Springer.

 Bravais, Auguste. 1866. Etudes cristallographiques. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.
 Capecchi, Danilo, Giuseppe Ruta, and Rossana Tazzioli. 2006. Enrico Betti. Teoria della elasticita. Bari:

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1823. Recherches sur l'équilibre et le mouvement intérieur des corps solides ou

 fluides, élastiques ou non élastiques. Bulletin de la Société Philomathique 10 (3): 9-13; Œuvres 2 (2):
 300-304.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 558 D. Capecchi et al.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1 827a. De la pression ou tension dans un corps solide. Exercices de Mathématiques

 2: 42-56; Œuvres 1 (2): 60-78.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1827b. Sur la condensation et la dilatation des corps solides. Exercices de

 Mathématiques 2: 60-69; Œuvres 1 (2): 82-93.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1827c. Sur les relations qui existent dans l'état d'équilibre d'un corps solide

 ou fluide, entre les pressions ou tensions et les forces accélératrices. Exercices de Mathématiques 2:
 108-1 11; Œuvres 1 (2): 141-145.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1828a. Sur les équations qui expriment les conditions d'équilibre ou les lois

 du mouvement intérieur d'un corps solide, élastique ou non élastique. Exercices de Mathématiques 3:
 160-187; Œuvres 8 (2): 195-226.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1828b. Sur l'équilibre et le mouvement d'un système de points matériels sollicités

 par des forces d'attraction ou de répulsion mutuelle. Exercices de Mathématiques 3: 188-213; Œuvres
 8 (2): 227-252.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1828c. De la pression ou tension dans un système de points matériels. Exercices

 de Mathématiques 3: 214-238; Œuvres 8 (2): 254-277.

 Cauchy, Augustin-Louis. 1829. Sur l'équilibre et le mouvement intérieur des corps considérés comme des

 masses continues. Exercices de Mathématiques! 4: 293-319; Œuvres 9 (2): 243-369.

 Clebsch, Rudolf Friedrich Albert. 1862. Theorie der Elasticität fester Körper. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Clebsch, Rudolf Friedrich Albert. 1883. Théorie de l'élasticité des corps solides, Traduite par MM. Barré

 de Saint-Venant et Flamant, avec des Notes étendues de M. Barré de Saint-Venant. Paris: Dunod.

 Dahan Dalmedico, Amy. 1992. Mathématisations. Augustin- Louis Cauchy et l'École française. Paris:

 Blanchard.

 Dugas, René. 1950. Histoire de la mécanique. Neuchâtel: Griffon.
 Fichera, Gaetano. 1979. Il contributo italiano alla teoria matematica della elasticità. Rendiconti del Circolo

 Matematico di Palermo 28 (2): 5-26.

 Fresnel, Augustin-Jean. 1821. Supplément au mémoire sur la double réfraction. In Œuvres complètes ,
 Publiées par MM. Hendri de Senarmont, Emile Verdet, Léonor Fresnel 2, 335-368. Paris: Imprimerie
 Impériale. 2 (1868).

 Green, George. 1 839. On the reflection and refraction of light at the common surface of two non-crystallized
 media. In Mathematical papers , ed. Norman Macleod Ferrers, 245-269. London: MacMillan (1871).
 Hellinger, Ernst David. 1914. Die allgemeine Ansätze der Mechanik der Kontinua. In EnzyklopMie der

 mathematischen Wissenschaften IV 30, ed. Felix Klein, 602-694. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert. 1876. Vorlesungen über mathematischen Physik. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Kohlrausch, Friedrich, and F.E. Loomis. 1870. Ueber die Elasticität des Eisens, Kupfers und Messings,
 insbesondere ihre Abhängigkeit von der Temperatur. Annalen der Physik und Chemie 141 : 481-503.

 Lamé, Gabriel. 1859. Leçons sur les coordonnées curvilignes et leurs diverses applications. Paris: Mallet-

 Bachelier.

 Lamé, Gabriel. 1 866. Leçons sur le théorie mathématique de l'élasticité des corps solides. Paris: Gauthier-

 Love, Augustus Edward Hough. 1907. A treatise on the mathematical theory of elasticity (4th ed.).

 Villars (1st ed. 1852. Paris: Bachelier).

 Cambridge: The University Press.

 Marcolongo, Roberto. 1902. Teoria matematica dell'elasticità. Messina: Regia Università (2nd ed. 1904

 as Teoria matematica dello equilibrio dei corpi elastici. Milano: Hoepli).

 Marcolongo, Roberto. 1907. Progressi e sviluppo della teoria matematica della elasticità in Italia ( 1 870-

 1907). /I Nuovo Cimento 14 (5): 371-410.

 Navier, Claude-Louis-Marie-Henri. 1827. Mémoire sur les lois de l'équilibre et du mouvement des corps

 solides élastiques. Mémoires de l'Academie des Sciences de l'Institut de France 7: 375-393.

 Navier, Claude-Louis-Marie-Henri . 1 864. Résumé des leçons données a l ' École des ponts et chaussées [...].

 Troisième édition avec des notes et des appendices, par M. Barré de Saint-Venant. Paris: Dunod.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1892. Leçons sur la théorie de l'élasticité. Paris: Carré.

 Poisson, Claude-Louis-Marie-Henri. 1828. Mémoire sur l'équilibre et le mouvement des corps élastiques.

 Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de l'Institut de France 8 (2): 357-570 (1829).

 Poisson, Claude-Louis-Marie-Henri. 1829. Mémoire sur les équations générales de l'équilibre et du mouv-
 ement des corps solides élastiques et des fluides. Journal de l'École Polytechnique 13: 1-174 (1831).

 Stokes, George Gabriel. 1845. On the theories of the internal frictions of fluids in motion, and of the equi-
 librium and motion of elastic solids. In Mathematical and physical papers , 75-129. Cambridge: The
 University Press (1880).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Voigťs molecular models in elasticity 559

 Thomson, William (Lord Kelvin). 1855. On the thermo-elastic and thermo-magnetic properties of matter.

 Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 1 : 57-77 ( 1 857).

 Thomson, William (Lord Kelvin), and Peter Guthrie Tait. 1 867. Treatise on natural philosophy. Cambridge:

 The University Press.

 Timoshenko, Stephen Prokofievich. 1953. History of strength of materials. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Todhunter, Isaac, and Karl Pearson. 1 886. A history of the theory of elasticity and of the strength of materials,

 from Galilei to the present time. Cambridge: The University Press.

 Truesdell, Clifford, and Richard Toupin. 1960. The classical field theories. In Handbuch der Physik III/l,

 ed. S. Flügge, 226-793. Berlin: Springer.

 Truesdell, Clifford. 1991. Л first course in rational continuum mechanics. New York: Academic Press.

 Voigt, Woldemar. 1887. Theoretische Studien über die Elasticitätsverhältnisse der Kristalle. Abhandlun-

 gender Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen - Mathematische Classe 34: 1-100.

 Voigt, Woldemar. 1900. L'état actuel de nos connoissances sur l'élasticité des cristaux. In Rapports présen-
 tés au Congrès international de Physique , rassemblés et publiés par Ch.-Ed. Guillaume, L. Poincaré,
 277-347. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Voigt, Woldemar. 1910. Lehrbuch der Kristallphysik. Leipzig: В. G. Teubner.
 Wertheim, M.G. 1 844. Recherches sur l'élasticité. Annales de Chimie et de Physique 1 2: 385-454; 58 1-624.

 Whittaker, Edmund Taylor. 1 9 1 0. Л history of the theories of aether and electricity, from the age of Descartes

 to theclose of the nineteenth century. Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:36:16 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

