 

 

 

 

From Problems to Structures: the Cousin Problems and the Emergence of the Sheaf

Concept
Author(s): Renaud Chorlay
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 1 (January 2010), pp. 1-73
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342411
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:42 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:1-73
 DOI 10. 1007/s00407-009-0052-3

 From Problems to Structures: the Cousin Problems

 and the Emergence of the Sheaf Concept

 Renaud Chorlay

 Received: 19 November 2008 / Published online: 30 July 2009

 © Springer- Verlag 2009

 Abstract Historical work on the emergence of sheaf theory has mainly concen-

 trated on the topological origins of sheaf cohomology in the period from 1945 to 1950
 and on subsequent developments. However, a shift of emphasis both in time-scale
 and disciplinary context can help gain new insight into the emergence of the sheaf
 concept. This paper concentrates on Henri Cartan's work in the theory of analytic
 functions of several complex variables and the strikingly different roles it played at

 two stages of the emergence of sheaf theory: the definition of a new structure and for-
 mulation of a new research programme in 1940-1944; the unexpected integration into

 sheaf cohomology in 1951-1952. In order to bring this two-stage structural transition

 into perspective, we will concentrate more specifically on a family of problems, the
 so-called Cousin problems, from Poincaré (1883) to Cartan. This medium-term nar-
 rative provides insight into two more general issues in the history of contemporary
 mathematics. First, we will focus on the use of problems in theory-making. Second,

 the history of the design of structures in geometrically flavoured contexts - such as for
 the sheaf and fibre-bundle structures - which will help provide a more comprehensive
 view of the structuralist moment , a moment whose algebraic component has so far
 been the main focus for historical work.

 Contents

 1 Introduction

 2 Poincaré's generalisation of a Weierstrass theorem

 Communicated by J.J. Gray.

 R. Chorlay (E3)
 REHSEIS (UMR 7219), CNRS, Université Denis Diderot, Case courrier 7064, 5 rue Thomas Mann,
 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France

 e-mail: renaud-chorlay@noos.fr

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 5.4 Morphisms, exactness: the general framework of axiomatic (co)homology 58

 2.4 What context for Poincaré's proof? "Site technique" points to potential

 2 R. Chorlay

 2.1 "Same" problem, new ekthesis

 2.2 Same problem, different tools

 2.3 Same problem, different research programmes

 theory

 2.5 A standard technique when dealing with manifolds?

 2.6 Problem form and problem label

 3 The "Cousin problems", from Cousin ( 1 895) to Oka (1938)

 3.1 A family of three

 3.2 A "fundamental theorem" with three corollaries

 3.3 Gronwall finds fault with Cousin's reasoning

 3.4 Enduring problems, indirect use

 4 Cartan's structural transition

 4.1 An "ideal" generalisation of Cousin data and Oka lemma

 4.2 Mixed structure, inner concepts, and problems

 4.3 Algebraic transition or structural transition?

 5 The Cousin problems in the setting of sheaf theory

 5.1 "Modern methods" in topology

 5.2 The tool and the theme: beyond topology

 5.3 The fibre-bundle model

 5.5 The return of Cousin

 6 Conclusion

 1 Introduction

 Sheaf theory has already been investigated from a historical viewpoint, by Gray (1979),
 Fasanelli (1981) and Houzel (1990, 1998), for instance. These narratives document

 the first stages of sheaf cohomology and usually start with Leray's introduction of
 both the word "faisceau" and a first form of sheaf cohomology, in his 1946 lessons

 on algebraic topology (Leray 1946). They document the refinement of cohomology
 techniques - as with Weil's introduction of what would soon become the spectral
 sequence (Weil 1947) - and the central part played by Henri Cartan's algebraic topol-
 ogy seminar, from 1948 onwards. When moving on into the 1950-1957 period, they
 have investigated several topics: the first significant achievements in algebraic topol-
 ogy and in the theory of functions of several complex variables, the dissemination of

 sheaf cohomology techniques beyond the Parisian circles where they originated, the

 introduction of sheaves and cohomology in algebraic geometry, or the interaction with
 emerging category theory.

 Although the long-term roots of sheaf cohomology do not go unacknowledged, we

 would like to show that their study can provide new insight into more general questions
 about the historical development of contemporary mathematics.

 We will thus change focus, time-scale and theoretical context. We will focus on

 the emergence of the sheaf concept or structure (rather than sheaf cohomology) in
 Henri Cartan's work on the theory of functions of several complex variables (and not

 in topology). More specifically, we will focus on Cartan's 1940-1944 papers in which

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 3

 he defined a new abstract structure and spelled out a new research programme. So

 as to better characterise this pivotal moment, we shall locate it at the intersection of

 two time-lines. The first time-line covers the period from 1883 to 1940 and is devoted
 to the history of what Cartan called the "Cousin problems", from Poincaré's (1883)

 paper on the representation of meromorphic functions of two complex variables to
 Cartan's 1940-1944 structural articulation of a research programme for the handling

 of all Cousin-like problems. Roughly put, the two main problems (Cousin I and Cousin
 II) are to find a meromorphic function with given poles and principal parts (Cousin I

 problem), which is the analogue for several complex variables of what Mittag-Leffler's

 classic theorem states for the one complex variable case; to find a holomorphic function

 with given zeroes or zero-locus (Cousin II problem), which is the analogue for several
 complex variables of a classical Weierstrass theorem in one complex variable. Cartan

 christened them "Cousin problems" because they were both tackled in a uniform way
 in Pierre Cousin's 1895 dissertation (Cousin 1895).

 Our second time-line will cover the period from 1945 to 1953. The background

 of Cartan's (1940) paper leads to a historical narrative which differs significantly
 from those that centre on the topological background and cohomological techniques.

 Among other things, interpreting the 1945-1952 definitions of the sheaf concept as

 a second generation of definitions will help us highlight the fact that, in addition to

 great technical efficiency, sheaf cohomology also brought conceptual clarification. We
 will also stress the fact that, in spite of Cartan's involvement, the sheaf cohomology

 theory of 1945-1950 was developed independently of Cartan's 1940-1944 structural
 approach to global problems in several complex variables; it can be argued that the

 unexpected merger of the two research lines, in the work of Cartan and Serre in the

 early 1950s, would be the real take-off point for sheaf theory as we know it.

 This historical narrative should enable us to touch on two more general issues in

 the history of mathematics: the various uses of problems in the contemporary period,
 on the one hand; the nature and time-sequence of the structuralist movement, on the
 other hand.

 The Cousin problems are a rather unusual instance since, to a large extent, their
 formulation and even the technical tools used to tackle them were reasonably stable

 over a rather long time span (1883-1940). The stability of core elements allows for
 long-term comparisons and a close chartering of the more variable elements, such
 as, for instance, their insertion in various research programmes. Beyond the issue of

 research programmes, we will endeavour to characterise the various uses of problems
 (Chemla 2009); along the way, we will see the Cousin problems used as mere tools
 to tackle a more general problem (as in the 1930s); as paradigmatic problems from
 which to carve out a general problem form and a general structure (as in Cartan's 1940
 paper); eventually, as an unexpected field of application for new technical tools (in
 the 1951-1953 period). Among the variable elements, we will also pay close heed to

 problem labels , so as to provide empirical elements for the reflection on general issues
 such as: how do mathematicians assess and express the similarity or dissimilarity of

 problems? How and for what purpose do they constitute problem families?

 Cartan's (1940) pivotal paper is also an example of structural transition, or tran-
 sition to structuralism; as such, it can be used to investigate several aspects of struc-

 turalism which, we feel, have not received the attention they deserved. There are of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4 R. Chorlay

 course many ways to look at the "structuralist moment", say, from Emmy Noether's
 Idealtheorie in Ringbereiche (Noether 1921) to Bourbaki's 1942 L'architecture des
 mathématiques (Bourbaki 1950) and Eilenberg and MacLane's (1945) General
 Theory of Natural Equivalences (Eilenberg and MacLane 1 945). 1 To name a few,
 one can strive to document the long-term origins of structuralism (Corry 1996); one

 can study the 1930-1945 phase on the background of the first, turn of the twentieth-

 century, structuralist phase, with its theories of abstract spaces (Fréchet), its abstract

 theories of fields (Steinitz) or of topological spaces and Riemann surfaces (Hausdorff,

 Weyl); the more philosophically oriented will investigate the links (if any) with foun-
 dational issues, axiomatic style, and logicist or formalist views of mathematics; the

 various attempts at formalising the very notion of structure can be analysed.2 None of

 these important issues are directly touched upon in this paper. Rather than the concep-

 tual roots of structuralism or the mathematical formalisation of the structure concept,

 we propose to investigate it as a specific mathematical practice, and focus on two less

 well-known aspects on which the emergence of the sheaf concept bears directly.

 Hermann Weyl's sceptical view of the structural, axiomatic approach in algebra and

 topology is well-known. In 1931, he concluded his address to the Swiss association

 Gymnasium teachers with a rather grim forecast:

 But I do not want to conceal from you the growing feeling among mathematicians

 that the fruitfulness of the abstracting method is close to exhaustion. It is a fact

 that beautiful general concepts do not drop out of the sky. The truth is that,
 to begin with, there are definite concrete problems, with all their undivided

 complexity, and these must be conquered by individuals relying on brute force.

 Only then comes the axiomatizers and conclude that instead of straining to
 break in the door and bloodying one's hand one should have first constructed
 a magic key of such and such shape and then the door would have opened
 quietly, as if by itself. But they can construct the key only because the successful

 breakthrough enables them to study the lock front and back, from the outside and

 from the inside. Before we can generalize, formalize and axiomatize there must
 be mathematical substance. I think that the mathematical substance on which

 we have practiced formalization in the last few decades is near exhaustion and I

 predict that the next generation will face a tough time. (Weyl 1 995b, pp. 650-65 1 )

 The fact that major landmarks of the structural moment, such as van der Waerden's

 Moderne Algebra (van der Waerden 1930, 1931) or Bourbaki's Eléments de mathé-

 matiques, , are textbooks or encyclopaedias, written in an occasionally dogmatic style,

 comes as a support to Weyl's unforgiving appraisal: the structural approach is merely a

 textbook style, a way of tidying-up and streamlining a wealth of mathematical knowl-
 edge previously gathered by completely different means; clean but not fruitful, and,
 to some extent, deluded as to its own epistemic power. However, Cartan's 1940/44

 1 The choice of these landmarks as significant (both for their contents and as dates) for the delineation
 of something I call the "structuralist moment" calls for justification - this is an understatement. However,
 the content of this paper does not depend on general assumptions on this structuralist moment, and this
 introduction is no place to go into that.

 2 As in Corry (1996) and Krömer (2007).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 5

 papers give an example of the exact opposite: he introduced a structural approach to

 find the proper tools to deal with a family of problems that had not been solved by
 other means. It is indeed true that in the 1952-1953 talks by Cartan and Serre on sheaf

 cohomology and global problems in several complex variables, the "door" seems to

 open "quietly, as if all by itself"; but the history of sheaf theory on the 1940-1953

 period sheds light on the making of this "magic key".

 Structuralism as an ars inveniendi and not as a mere streamlining practice; Bourbaki

 as group of researchers - Ehresmann, Weil, Dieudonné and Schwartz will play a part in
 our narrative - and not only as a group of self-proclaimed legislators in mathematics.

 We will eventually shift emphasis as to the part of mathematics concerned, turning
 away from algebraic structures and their importation into combinatorial topology
 (resulting in algebraic topology). We will study the emergence of the sheaf concept

 in a context of the design of structures in geometry and, in particular, contrast it with

 the emergence of the fibre-bundle structure. Both the sheaf and fibre-bundle structures

 are examples of mixed-structures , the design of which require the skilful weaving

 together of several threads: vector spaces and groups on manifolds for fibre-bundles,
 rings and modules on topological spaces for sheaves. It takes some time to perfect
 these delicate structures, and know-how in structure design is accumulated in the

 process. We shall see that the progressive design of these two highly sophisticated
 structures entailed trading of concepts (e.g. "sections"), models of formulation (e.g.

 gluing together), general ideas (e.g. going global) and technical tools (e.g. partitions of

 unity, cohomology with local coefficients). In this final part of our narrative, technical
 streamlining will go hand in hand with conceptual bricolage.

 2 Poincaré's generalisation of a Weierstrass theorem

 This first part on Poincaré could have been very short. Indeed, we could have just
 mentioned the theorem that would later be referred to as the starting point of a specific

 research line, thus ignoring nineteenth century issues to a large extent. We felt, how-

 ever, that presenting subsequent developments on the background of a rather detailed

 description of Poincaré's (1883) theorem was necessary to dispel the illusion that "it

 was there all along". To reach this goal, we distinguished among various elements - the

 laying-out of the problem, proof techniques, research programmes (if any) etc. - in
 order to show that some played no part in later developments, while others played
 significant but evolving parts. We shall also place emphasis on two elements which
 would later become parts of general mathematical knowledge, but were not in 1883:
 first, the use of open coverings and patching-up site techniques (a notion we shall
 define); second, the "passing from local to global" problem label.

 2.1 "Same" problem, new ekthesis

 The starting point of Poincaré's (1883) paper Sur les fonctions de deux variables
 (Poincaré 1883b) lies in a theorem of Weierstrass that can be found, for instance, in the

 1876 paper Zur Theorie der eindeutigen analytischen Functionen (Weierstrass 1876).
 In his paper, Weierstrass aimed at classifying single-valued functions of one complex

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 6 R. Chorlay

 variable according to the localisation and type (polar/essential) of their singular points.

 One of the major building blocks for this classification is the following:

 Let f(x) be a one-valued function of x with oo as its only essential singular
 point; in that case, it is possible to form a function G2U) whose sequence of
 zeroes is identical to that of function l/f(x) (it may have an arbitrary, even
 an infinite, number of inessential singular points). Then G2U )./(*) is also an

 entire function of x , and, denoting it by G| (дг), we get / (jc) = Gi (jc)/G2(jc).3

 If we focus on the case of an infinite family of poles, it is stated explicitly in other

 parts of the paper that the "sequence of zeroes" ( Reihe der Nullstellen) is made up
 of a pair of sequences, one of complex numbers (01,02,....) and one of non-null

 integers (m 1 , Ш2, . . .) indicating the multiplicity of the poles. It is, of course, standard

 knowledge at the time that poles are isolated in the domain of meromorphy (which,
 in this particular case, is assumed to be C), so the (a¡) sequences converges towards
 the point at infinity 00 for any such meromorphic function. Weierstrass' theorem

 proves that this necessary condition is also sufficient; hence, the converse of a simple

 (topological) fact about the locus of zeroes of a meromorphic function turns out to be

 a significant theorem on functional existence (of a meromorphic function with given

 zero-locus) and function representation: any function which is meromorphic over С

 can be written as the quotient of two power series with infinite convergence radius.4

 The goal of Poincaré's paper is quite straightforward: to establish the analogous

 theorem in two complex variables. However, the very statement of the two-variable

 problem cannot proceed along the same lines as its one- variable counterpart and, this

 very change of formulation would, by itself, single out Poincaré's paper as the natural
 starting point for our inquiry. Indeed, in the one- variable case, to denote a locus which

 could be that of an entire functions, two simple sequences would do (one of complex

 numbers, one of integers), with a simple topological proviso : the (< a' ) sequence has to

 go to infinity. The locus of zeroes of a functions in two complex variables, though,

 is a two-dimension spread in four-dimension space (in real terms): not only does this

 fact make the problem significantly more difficult to solve, but the very ekthesis - the
 laying out of the problem - is, in itself, thorny: how to refer to a locus that could be

 the zero locus of an entire function (without, of course, assuming it is the zero-locus
 for one such function, which would kill the problem before it is hatched5). Poincaré

 resorts to an ekthesis which exhibits a non-standard problem form :

 3 "1st / (дг) eine eindeutige Function von x mit der einen wesentlichen Singularitäten Stelle 00, so lässt sich
 in dem Falle, wo sie ausserdem beliebig viele (auch unendlich viele) ausserwesentliche singuläre Stellen
 hat, eine Function G2CO herstellen, für welche die Reihe der Null-Stellen identisch ist mit der Reihe der

 Null-Stellen der Function 1 //(*). Dann ist G2(*)./(jc) ebenfalls eine ganze Function von jc, und man hat,
 wenn diese mit Gi (дг) bezeichnet wird, /(jc) = Gi(jt)/G2(jc)" (Weierstrass 1876, p. 102). Free translation.

 4 Functions of this type (in one or more complex variables), Weierstrass and Poincaré call "entire". We
 will stick to this terminology.

 5 The twenty-first century mathematical reader may find this question to be rather rhetorical, since she

 can think of standard "obvious" and "elementary" ways to do that. We claim Poincaré's work played a
 significant part in the emergence of this "basic know-how", a point which can only be partly substantiated

 in this paper (for more, see (Chorlay 2007)). For now, it is sufficient to acknowledge that the passage from

 one to two variables significantly affects the laying out of the problem and not only the tackling of it.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 7

 Here is the problem:

 I consider a function of two variables, F(X , K), and assume that, in the neigh-
 bourhood of any point Xo, Yq it can be written in the form where N and D
 are two series (ordered according to the powers of X - Xo and Y - Уо) which
 converge for sufficiently small values of the modulus of these quantities. Fur-
 thermore, I assume that, when the moduli of X - Xo and Y - Yo remain small

 enough, the series N and D can vanish simultaneously but at isolated points.
 I claim this function can be written in the form where G and G' are

 everywhere converging series ordered according to the powers of X and Y.6

 So, instead of a pre-functional pair of sequences which served the purpose of setting

 out the problem exactly as in the one-variable case, Poincaré's setting is functional

 from the outset. The laying out exhibits the general problem form "passing from local

 data to global existence", though Poincaré neither uses any such meta- level description,

 nor points to the generality of this type of problem.

 At first sight, this ekthesis may seem to be void though: since the balls (" hyper-

 sphères ") over which the local representatives are given may overlap, it seems all the

 N functions are mere analytic continuations one from the other, and form just one big

 G function (as D functions do for G ' ). Poincaré explains that it is not so: in the overlap
 of two neighbouring balls N/D = F = N' /D' which does not imply N = Nf and
 D = D'' rather, it implies that N = ( D/D')N', i.e. N = (pNf where <p is a regular
 function defined in the overlap and which vanishes nowhere in it (since, by hypothesis,
 D and D' have the exact same zero-locus). Thus, the various N s (and Ds) that are to

 be patched up into one G (and one Gj) show some kind of global coherence indeed,
 but not a straightforward one: in the overlaps, they only coincide up to multiplication

 by non- vanishing regular functions (Poincaré 1883b, p. 147).

 2.2 Same problem, different tools

 The problem is to find an entire function К such that KF is also an entire function.
 Poincaré thoughtfully summed up his proof tactics for us (or rather, for the Paris

 Academy of Science). He first switched from a complex to a real setting by writing X =

 X + i y, Y = z + it (where x , y, z , and t are real numbers) and calls a real function of
 four variables (jc, y, z, Oapotential ("fonction potentielle") if its Laplacian A vanishes

 identically. A non-singular one-valued potential function, he calls holomorphic. The

 first two (out of four) steps of the proof are those of primary interest to us:

 6 "Voici quel est le problème:
 Je considère une fonction de deux variables F(X, Y) et je suppose que dans le voisinage ď un point quelconque

 Xo, Yo on puisse la mettre sous la forme ^, N et D étant deux séries ordonnées suivant les puissances de
 X - Xo et Y - Yq et convergeant lorsque les modules de ces quantités sont suffisamment petits. Je suppose
 de plus que, lorsque les modules de X - Xo et Y - Yo restent assez petits, les deux séries N et D ne peuvent

 s'annuler à la fois que pour des points isolés. Je dis que cette fonction peut se mettre sous la forme »

 G et Gj étant des séries ordonnées suivant les puissances de X et Y et toujours convergentes." (Poincaré
 1883b, p. 147) The page number refers to the Œuvres.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Io This being established, I construct an infinity of hyperspherical regions /?p

 8 R. Chorlay

 /?2>

 five of these regions. I assume these regions to be so chosen that inside Rf, for

 instance, function F can be written in the form

 I also consider those regions Rj consisting in the part that is common to two of

 the Rf regions, and regions R2, /??, Rf consisting in the part that is common to
 three, four or five of these.

 2° I shall construct a potential function jP with the following properties: it is holo-

 morphic outside Rf and tends to 0 as jc 2 + y2 + z2 + 1 2 increases indefinitely. The

 difference J? - log mod D is holomorphic inside jf' eventually, on the border

 of region Rf, jP is holomorphic where D does not vanish.7

 In order to tackle the problem of building up a potential function whose zero-locus is

 exactly the polar-locus of F, Poincaré first split it up in problems over a denumerable
 set of balls in four-dimensional space. In these balls, step 2 is tractable with tools
 from potential theory: Poincaré relied on explicit integral formulae (though without
 explicitly referring to single layer potentials (" potentiels simple couche ")) to solve

 " le problème de Dirichleť for the unit hypersphere (Poincaré 1883b, p. 150); then he

 proved a uniqueness theorem (for bounded, nearly singularity-free, potential functions

 in R4) (Poincaré 1883b, pp. 154-157). He also replaced the multiplicative problem:
 find a potential function that has the right zero-locus inside the ball and vanishes

 nowhere outside the ball; with the additive problem: to find a potential function which

 is regular outside the ball and has the same singularities as log | D | inside the ball. This

 makes the problem tractable, since the potential-theory methods give him control over
 singularities, but not over zeroes.

 Now, the ехр(УР) are singularity-free potential functions, and each of them has

 the right zeroes inside the Rf ball and none outside it. It would seem natural to

 consider Y[ exp (У?) = exp yP), deal with the thorny convergence problems, then
 recover a complex analytic function from its real part. Both of these play a part in the

 proof indeed, as steps 3 and 4, and rely on techniques that we need not go into. But

 before proceeding to steps 3 and 4, Poincaré had to deal with a multiplicity problem

 stemming from the fact that the Rf balls overlap: in the overlap of two such balls,

 Пехр(УР) has the right zero-locus, but its multiplicity is not right. To tackle this

 problem, Poincaré used a techniques of checks and balances: in Rj j = Rf П /?P,

 the potential theory techniques enabled him to build up a function У,1 which is

 7 "Io Cela posé, je construis une infinité de régions hypersphériques R®, R !>

 quelconque (*, y, z, 0 appartient au moins à une et au plus à cinq de ces régions. Je suppose que ces régions
 sont choisies de telles sortes qu'à l'intérieur de /??, par exemple, la fonction F peut se mettre sous la forme

 J'envisage également les régions Rj , formées de la partie commune à deux des régions Rf et les régions

 R2 , Rj , R* formées de la partie commune à trois, à quatre ou à cinq de ces régions.

 2° Je construirai une fonction potentielle jP jouissant des propriétés suivantes: elle est holomorphe à

 l'extérieur de Rf et tend vers 0 quand x2 -j- y2 + z2 + t2 croît indéfiniment. La différence J P - log mod

 D est holomorphe à l'intérieur de jP; enfin, sur la limite de la région Rf , jP est holomorphe quand D ne
 s'annule pas." (Poincaré 1883c, p. 145)

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 9

 singularity-free outside R¡ . and such that - log|D| is singularity-free inside Rj j.

 To get the right multiplicity in /?? U R 9, the sum j9 + jJ should be replaced by

 jf + J j - J ¡ but this, in turn, might fail to show the right multiplicity when three

 balls overlap

 though, since Poincaré stated (without proof) that he could start from an open covering

 in which no six balls overlap. Steps 1 and 2 thus lead to the (partial) conclusion:

 (...) if at whatever point inside one of the n R ? regions, function F can be written

 in the form then the function

 S Ji- X Ji + S Ji- X Jî+ X J¡ - los modD

 is holomorphic.8

 quite clear.

 This formula might look ambiguous, for lack of multiple indices, but the idea is

 2.3 Same problem, different research programmes

 In spite of the fact that the theorem proved in this paper comes directly from
 Weierstrass' work on one-valued analytic functions in one complex variable
 (Weierstrass 1876), Poincaré did not take on Weierstrass' research programme. The

 goal which Weierstrass set for his investigations on general (as opposed to special,
 e.g. elliptic, functions) one-valued functions in one complex variable is to assess the
 extent to which the "arithmetic nature" of the dependence between the function (seen

 as a dependent variable) and the free variable is determined by a few relevant pieces
 of information, the most important of which being the locus and nature of singular

 points. The paradigm is that of rational function: they, as a class, are characterised by

 the fact that they are regular for all values of the variable,9 except for a finite number of

 poles; the explicit formula (which exhibits the "arithmetic nature" of the dependence
 (Weierstrass 1876, p. 83)) for each function of this class is determined (up to a non-

 zero multiplicative constant) by the locus and orders of zeroes and poles. In order to

 deal with more general cases, Weierstrass relied on some topological notions which he
 defined in his lectures on the foundation of function theory (for instance (Weierstrass

 1988, p. 83 and fol.)): neighbourhood of a point, domain (i.e. open, strip-connected
 subsets of numerical spaces), boundary point and boundary of a domain. For an ana-

 lytic function, he first defined the domain of continuity А С Stetigkeitsbereich", our
 domain of holomorphy), whose boundary points he defined to be the singular points.
 He then distinguished between essential and inessential (polar) singular points and
 labelled A' the domain made up of A and the poles (our domain of meromorphy). The

 ® "(•••) si en un point quelconque intérieur à l'une des n régions /?9, la fonction F se met sous la forme

 la fonction Ji + Z Jf- Z ^/3+ Z Jt - loê modD est holomorphe." (Poincaré 1883b,

 p. 158)

 9 "All" meaning all "finite" values of variable z, and the infinite value z = oo.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 general goal is to classify analytic one-valued functions according to the properties
 of domain A' and nature of singular points; the 1876 paper deals with the cases in

 which A' is the domain of the independent variable (point at infinity included) save
 for at most a finite number of essential singular points, and promotes the study of

 essential singular points with the theorem on the density of the image of any of their
 neighbourhoods. The theorem which is Poincaré's starting point appears half way
 through Weierstrass' paper, when functions with at most one essential singular points
 are studied.10

 10 R. Chorlay

 This carefully laid out list of questions is not the only aspect that is not reflected

 in Poincaré's paper; Weierstrass' careful selections of tools is not either. Weierstrass

 avoided all "transcendental" methods, and admitted but a small range of expressions:
 power series as starting points; rational functions and the exponential function (one

 essential singular point, no zeroes) in the final expressions. Needless to say integral

 formulae (such as Poincaré's single layer potentials) and partial differential operators

 (such as the Laplacian, and other relevant operators with no counterparts in the one-

 variable case) are nowhere to be found in Weierstrass' paper.

 The fact that Poincaré changed settings altogether by working three of the four

 steps of his proof in the setting of real functions with identically vanishing Laplacian

 (i.e. potential functions), is not ascribable to a mere matter of taste. As he pointed out

 in the paper (Poincaré 1883b, p. 152), and again in 1901 in his general analysis of his

 mathematical work (Poincaré 1901, pp. 70-73), the chunking of the pole-locus into a
 denumerable infinity of loci contained in balls could not possibly have been achieved
 at the complex analytic level: in order for real function и of four real variables be

 the real part of a (possibly multi-valued) analytic function in two complex variables,
 и has to satisfy five independent partial differential equations, only one of which
 is the vanishing of the Laplacian; this is a striking difference with the one-variable
 case, in which the complete overlap of the two classes - potential functions in two

 real variables, real parts of (possibly multi-valued) analytic functions in one complex
 variable - was the starting point of Riemann 's theory of functions of one complex

 variable. In the two-variable case, the class of potential functions is much larger than
 that of real parts of analytic functions, hence much more tractable since it satisfies
 the Dirichlet principle (at least for balls). These tactics, of course, call for additional

 work later on, in order to recover analytic functions from potential functions (step 4
 of Poincaré's proof). The way this change of setting allowed Poincaré to overcome

 the specific difficulty of the two variable case is what he emphasised as the great idea
 and great success of this 1883 paper, when reflecting on it in his 1901 overview.

 2.4 What context for Poincaré's proof? "Site technique" points to potential theory

 Interestingly, though, what Poincaré did not emphasise is the topological part on which
 we concentrated: the link between spaces of four dimensions and coverings with at

 most five intersecting balls plays a fundamental role in the proof, yet it is used without

 10 This only essential singular point can be sent at infinity, hence the focus on entire functions.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 1 1

 proof or commentary. This specific engagement with topology and lack of comment

 on it call for a detailed analysis.

 Our main claim is that the technological context of Poincaré's (1883) proof is

 primarily that of German potential theory. There are several reasons why we wrote
 "technological" context and not "theoretical" context. As to the theoretical context,

 we cannot come up with something much more specific than "theory of functions".
 This is the section in which Poincaré placed this paper in his 1901 overview; to be

 more specific, he placed it in the paragraph on " Théorie générale des fonctions de
 deux variables " (Poincaré 1901, p. 70), as opposed to general results on functions
 of one variable, and to results on abelian functions. If we stick to the 1883 paper, an

 overview of the names of mathematicians Poincaré mentioned points to a twofold con-

 text: 1 1 first, a " théorie générale de s fonctions" context, with Weierstrass (for the origin

 of the question tackled and for techniques which help establish the convergence of
 some power-series in several variables), Mittag-Leffler (for convergence techniques),
 and Sonya Kowalevksy (for a theorem on analytic continuation in several variables
 (Poincaré 1883b, p. 154)); second, a potential theory context, with Klein, Kronecker
 (Poincaré 1883b, p. 148) and Schwarz (Poincaré 1883b, p. 152).

 A more specific lead is given by the technical way in which the problem is laid

 out and tackled. We shall use the term site techniques 12 to denote the various ways in
 which functions are studied in terms of their interaction with a site or domain;13 this

 notion does not call for a more technical definition, but we claim it is useful to study

 the growing awareness in nineteenth century mathematics of the importance of "where
 functions live", and to document the slow accumulation of techniques and vocabu-

 lary used by mathematicians to explore the interaction between functional objects and
 domains/sites. One may feel that there is no need to coin such an awkward term for
 what can be (and has been) studied as the rise of topology in late nineteenth century and

 early 20th century mathematics. This "rise of topology" description seems to be less fit

 for our purpose, however, for several reasons: one general methodological reason, is

 that "rise of topology" points to a specific body of knowledge that would emerge later,

 thus leaving us with the somewhat unattractive task of exploring "vague" or "naive"

 topological reasoning; this "topology before topology" description rests on the unil-
 luminating back projection of topology as a theory (a set of concepts, definitions and

 theorems), on specific forms of know-how (in problem solving) and awareness (as to

 the role of particular aspects in specific problems). Another important reason is that
 what we describe as late 19th century site techniques would not lead to topology in
 the strict sense, even if "topology" is thought of as encompassing both point-set and

 algebraic topology (which is already quite a stretch). Evolutions in site techniques
 would lead equally well to our very elementary notions of subset intersection and
 union;14 to set products also. When studied in context, these techniques cannot be thor-

 oughly separated from the non-topological context: it is common historical knowledge

 11 It is worth mentioning that no French mathematicians are mentioned.

 12 We originally used " techniques du lieu " in French.

 13 We shall use "site" rather than "domain", since the latter now has a standard, elementary yet technical

 meaning in set theory. "Site" is also used in topos theory of course, but confusion seems less likely.

 14 See Chap. 5 in Chorlay (2007).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 that the study of real or complex functions led 19th century mathematicians to very

 different site techniques, the real case roughly leading to point- set topology,15 the
 other one to combinatorial then algebraic topology; with its emphasis on know-how

 and awareness, the "site techniques" approach allows for a more fine-grained tracking

 of epistemic cultures and research fields (Goldstein and Schappacher 2007, p. 52 and
 fol.).

 12 R. Chorlay

 We will use this approach in the case of Poincaré's (1883) paper. It exemplifies
 a specific technique which can (loosely) be described this way: starting from "data"

 given in an open covering, try to "glue" them together by dealing with whatever may
 come up in the overlaps; or, in modern notation and when only two open subsets U

 and V are considered, study U П V in order to reach a conclusion about (J U V. For

 the 21st century reader, this may not sound very specific: the approach is standard
 in the definition of major classes of objects (manifolds of various types, sheaves
 etc.) and in the tackling of a great wealth of problems. But this technique was by
 no means "standard" in 1883; we can give here but general elements to back this
 claim.16 Another site technique was becoming standard in the theory of complex
 functions, which consisted in a coherent family of rationally linked site techniques.
 After Cauchy and Riemann, cutting techniques had become widely available for the
 study of multi-valued complex analytic functions. When the multi-valuedness is at
 most denumerable, the function can be used to "unfold" the cut domain into a new

 domain; on this unfolded domain, the reciprocal of the former function shows some

 kind of periodicity, or, more precisely, is left invariant under the action of a group.
 In this case, the unfolded domain is endowed with a tiling made up of elementary
 domains for the discrete group action. Considering the analytic continuation along a

 curve, cutting a domain, crossing a cut, unfolding a domain, tiling a domain ... those

 are techniques that were available to Poincaré in complex function theory and on which
 he relied on other occasions, in particular in his work on fuchsian functions (Scholz

 1980; Gray 1986). Within this set of techniques, the intersections of two adjacent
 elementary domains for the group action are of non-null codimension, which entails

 a completely different approach to that of open overlaps.

 "Adjacent but not overlapping" is also the case in a different, less common site

 technique, namely that of cellular decomposition. It can be found, in particular, in
 Poincaré's qualitative work on curves defined by an ordinary (non linear) differential
 equation (Poincaré 1881, 1885). Other less widespread site techniques can be doc-
 umented, for instance, in Schwarzas work on conformai equivalence, in which (in
 modern parlance) an open subset of the complex plane is approximated by a grow-
 ing sequence of compact unions of finitely many squares (Schwartz 1890, p. 1 14); a
 daring variant of this approximation method is used in Poincaré's first proof of his
 uniformisation theorem for analytic functions (Poincaré 1883a).

 To the best of our knowledge, the specific context of the "£/ П V, U, V, U U V"

 site technique, is that of potential theory; more precisely: that of the proof meth-
 ods which H.A. Schwarz and C. Neumann introduced in potential theory around

 15 Though, as we mentioned above, Weierstrass developed notions which would later build up the core of
 point-set topology in the context of complex analysis.

 16 See Chaps. 1 to 5 in Chorlay (2007).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 1 3

 1870. These methods were developed as alternatives to Dirichleťs and Riemann's
 minimising proof methods in potential theory, whose weakness had been exposed by
 Weierstrass (1870). We need not go here into a description of both Neumann's and
 Schwarz's methods, since the basic principle of what Neumann called his "combi-
 natorial methods" (Neumann 1884, vi) is the same as that of Schwarz's proof by the

 "alternating process" (" alternierendes Verfahren ", see, for instance (Schwartz 1890,
 pp. 133-143)). The problem to be solved is Dirichleťs problem in two real variables:
 to find a potential function defined inside a plane domain D (assumed to be bounded)
 whose limit values on the boundary of D coincide with those of a given function.
 Schwarz endeavoured to show that if the problem can be solved universally (i.e. for

 arbitrary boundary conditions) on two overlapping domains T' and 7*2, then it can also
 be solved for the domain "made up" (" zusammengesetzt " (Schwartz 1890, p. 136)) of

 the two. The ekthesis relies on the following figure:

 The boundary values are known for Lo and L3 and a potential function is to be
 defined over the domain which Schwarz denotes by T' + T2 - Г*.17 Let к denote

 the lower bound of the boundary values ( k is assumed to be finite). The outline of

 the "alternating process" is the following: start with potential function u', defined in
 T' with boundary conditions given by the original ones on Lo and k on L2; consider

 potential function 1/2, defined in T2 by the original conditions of L3 and u' values on

 L 1 ; consider potential function из, defined in T' by the original conditions of Lo and U2
 values on T2 etc. Schwarz establishes that sequence (w2n) tends to a potential function

 u' in T' , sequence (м2п) tends to a potential function u" in Г2, and that и' = и " in 7*.

 Thus, in spite of the fact that, after any finite number of steps, the potential functions
 defined over T' and T2 have a non-null difference in Г*, this difference vanishes after

 an infinite number of steps. Schwarz compares his proof schema to the mechanical

 principle of a two-cylinder vacuum pump: air is drawn out of a central compartment
 by the successive actions of two adjacent cylinders.18

 17 This testifies to the fact that, for Schwarz, T' 4- T2 would not denote the union but rather a "sum" in

 which T* would have multiplicity two.

 18 "In order to prove this proposition, a limiting process can be used which is very analogous to the
 one with which vacuum is created by a two-cylindre air pump". " Zum Beweise dieses Satzes капп ein

 Grenzübergang dienen, welcher mit dem bekannten, zur Herstellung eines luftverdünnten Raumes mittelst
 einer zweistiefeligen Luftpumpe dienenden Verfahren grosse Analogie hat" (Schwartz 1890, p. 136).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 14 R. Chorlay

 Poincaré's finite alternating sum associated with a covering of R4 by balls is only

 a variant of this site technique. There is more than a formal analogy: Schwarz's work
 on potential theory is one of the main body of results on which Poincaré drew in
 several papers he wrote in 1883 (we mentioned (Poincaré 1883a) above); in the one

 we are studying, he explicitly mentioned the fact that his proof of Dirichleťs princi-

 ple for balls in four-dimensional space could be used à la Schwarz in order to prove
 Dirichleťs principle for more general domains (Poincaré 1883a, p. 152). Poincaré
 would later devise his own general existence theorem for potential functions, with his

 sweeping-out method (" méthode de balayage "), which combines the use of a covering

 by denumerably many balls (as in his 1 883 paper) and a limiting process modelled after
 Schwarz's and Neumann's alternating processes. The 1883 paper is directly echoed
 in Poincaré's 1898 paper Sur les propriétés du potentiel et les fonctions abéliennes

 (Poincaré 1 898): the aim of the latter paper is to establish the analogous representation

 results for maximally periodic meromorphic functions in several complex variables
 (abelian functions). After an ekthesis which is exactly the same as that of the 1883
 paper (Poincaré 1 898, p. 228), and a proof that goes along the very same lines, the
 resulting theorem contains additional information, because of the periodicity of the

 meromorphic functions: for a given system of periods, maximally periodic meromor-

 phic functions in several complex variables can be written as quotients of generalised
 © function, i.e. entire functions such that 0(zi + a') = S(zi)cu (where, (a¡) is a
 period and U a linear function in (zi) (Poincaré 1898, p. 241)). As the title of the 1898

 paper indicates, this theorem is given as an application of potential theory methods.

 2.5 A standard technique when dealing with manifolds?

 Our claim about the specific link between this site technique and a coherent family

 of proof schemes in potential theory may seem questionable to a twenty-first century

 reader. Is it not, after all, the standard way to define geometric objects of the manifold
 type? Scholz's work on the emergence of the manifold concept from Riemann to
 Poincaré shows that dealing with (open) intersections and gluing patches were not

 standard site techniques in this context, whereas cutting, unfolding, gluing together
 edges of the fundamental domain of a group action etc. were (Scholz 1980). We claim

 that, from a historical viewpoint, things went the other way around: our standard site

 techniques for defining manifolds derive, to a large extent, from site techniques in
 potential theory, via uniformisation theory. Let us mention but two significant pieces
 of evidence.

 The first is given by Poincaré's 1908 paper Sur V uniformisation des fonctions

 analytiques (Poincaré 1908). Poincaré's main goal was to give a new and less sketchy
 proof of his general uniformisation theorem for arbitrary analytic functions in one
 complex variable; several aspects of the original 1883 proof had met with criticism
 from Hilbert and W.F. Osgood (Poincaré 1908, §1). The new and improved proof
 required two significant changes: one in the definition of the auxiliary surface (which
 would later be called a universal covering of a Riemann-uniformising surface over
 the plane domain of the multi-valued analytic function), and one in the existence

 proof of an analytic function mapping this abstract surface onto a plane domain in

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 1 5

 a one-to-one and unramified manner. The first part of the 1908 paper is dedicated
 to a general definition of analytic domains "over" the complex plane, generalising

 Riemann surfaces. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that a general theory

 of Riemann analytic surfaces over the complex plane (" domaines D") was expounded

 in terms of open coverings and gluing rules.19 On the basis of this definition, Poincaré

 defines the notion of equivalence of D-domains, the notion of sub-D-domain (Poincaré
 1908, §2) and, two paragraphs down, the notion of " multiple " of a D-domain (i.e.

 covering space (Poincaré 1 908, §4)). However, this general theory is not what Poincaré

 is after. In fact, it is completely ancillary to the series of results given in the second

 part of the text: these existence results for analytic functions are all obtained by the

 sweeping-out method, and the general theory of D-domains is thoroughly modelled

 by the requirements of this proof method.

 The second piece of evidence comes from Hellmut Kneser's 1926 report on the

 topology of manifolds ( Die Topologie der Mannigfaltigkeiten (Kneser 1926)20). In
 this paper, Kneser's goal was to compare the merits of the combinatorial approach
 and the purely topological ("rein topologisch " (Kneser 1926, p. 1)) approach in the
 definition and study of topological manifolds; also to build bridges between the two.
 On the purely topological side, he started from Hausdorff's axioms for a general
 topological space, then added the relevant axioms on the local topological equivalence
 with an open ball in numerical space (Kneser 1926, pp. 2-3). The main consequence
 he drew from this definition is a unified way of generating a topological manifold: for

 an object that satisfies the axioms, a complete description is given by a covering by
 open subsets U' (each of which is homeomorphic to a ball V'), and homeomorphisms

 between those parts in Vj and Vj which correspond to the open intersection of U' and

 Uy, Kneser claims it is clear that this analysis can also lead to synthesis - i.e. that a
 manifold can be defined from a family of open balls and partial homeomorphisms - ,

 though without using any "gluing" metaphor for this synthesis process (Kneser 1926,

 p. 4). This description has since become standard since it is the starting point in Veblen
 and Whitehead's 1932 Foundations of Differential Geometry (Veblen and Whitehead

 1932). But, in 1926 the description was by no means standard when dealing with the

 topology of manifolds, as Kneser's comment shows:

 This mode of presentation is none but the "roof-tile covering", which is well-

 known from function theory. However useful it may be there, it has a drawback

 with regard to our topological purpose, namely that the mapping between V&

 and Vki is, to a large extent, arbitrary. There is no such drawback in another mode

 of presentation, which can be referred to by the key- word "border pairing".21

 19 Of course, one could argue that Poincaré's presentation is a mere elaboration on Weierstrass' definition
 of analytic functions based on function elements and analytic continuation. This is undoubtedly a core
 background element, but ( 1 ) its relation to the technique we are documenting is only indirect (2) other
 techniques can be based (and were based) on the idea of analytic continuation.

 20 It evolved from a 1924 talk.

 21 "Diese Darstellungsweise ist nicht anders als die aus der Funktionentheorie bekannte "dachziegelartige
 Überdeckung". So brauchbar sie dort ist, für topologische Zwecke hat sie den Mangel, dass in sie die
 Abbildungen zwischen V¡k und Vk¡, also in weitem Masse willkürliche Funktionen eingehen. Frei von
 diesem Mangel ist eine andere Darstellungsweise, die durch das Schlagwort "Ränderzuordnung" bezeichnet

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 16 R. Chorlay

 Open coverings - which entails open intersections - are still referred to the context

 of uniformisation theory, whereas the more familiar (and, in 1926, efficient) combina-
 torial viewpoint relies on "cutting" ("zerlegen" (Kneser 1926, p. 4)) and identifying
 edges of generalised polyhedra according to non-"arbitrary" rules (usually derived

 from a group action).22

 2.6 Problem form and problem label

 To insert Poincaré's ( 1 883) paper on meromorphic functions in two complex variables

 into our long-term narrative, the questions of the identification of a general problem

 form, and of the use of a specific problem label remain. No such things are to be found

 in the 1883 paper itself, and we shall see that this is a general feature of Poincaré's
 work.

 It seems all the more surprising than it is difficult, for the 21st century reader, to

 study the young Poincaré's work (say, between 1 880 and 1 885) without using "global"

 or "from local to global" as core descriptive terms. Along with the paper we focused
 on, we should mention three other major contributions to global mathematics in this
 period; we will be brief, since these aspects of Poincaré's work have been studied
 in detail elsewhere.23 In 1883, we find Poincaré's paper Sur un théorème général
 de la théorie des fonctions (Poincaré 1883a) which we mentioned before. Consider

 two complex variables X , Y , linked by an analytic relation which implicitly defines
 К as a multi-valued function of X' Poincaré "proved" that there exists an auxiliary
 complex variable Z such that X and Y are single- valued analytic functions of Z. In a

 daring generalisation of Riemann 's ideas, Poincaré first built up an abstract analytic

 surface over the X plane, such that (1) Y is a uniform function of the surface generic
 point, and (2) the surface is simply connected.24 He then used variants of Schwarz's

 footnote 2 1 continued

 werden kann." (Kneser 1 926, p. 4) This arbitrariness element, which Kneser deplores, will be the cornerstone
 of Veblen and Whitehead's idea of manifold structures (plural): specify a pseudo-group (a notion which
 they introduced) and you get a specific structure on the manifold you build up (topological, differentiable,
 analytic, riemannian or pseudo-riemannian, conformai structures etc.).

 22 Our point is not that Kneser's description in terms of open coverings and gluing rules was a major,
 unprecedented and bewildering breakthrough; his comment helps us point to the fact that this type of
 description was by no means standard in the 1920s, and that it was still clear at the time that it comes from

 complex function theory. The fact that this site technique was not standard in topology in the 1920s does
 not prove, however, that it was not familiar in other theoretical contexts in which "spaces" or "manifolds"

 play a major part. In the context of differential geometry, it can be shown that this site technique cannot
 be found in Weyl's or Cartan's papers on differential geometry (cf. in Chorlay 2007, Chap. 11). In the

 early 1920s, there is one context in which it was standard when defining the differential manifolds, namely
 that of Birkhoff and Morse's works on dynamical systems and the calculus of variations in the large. This
 technique can be traced directly to Poincaré, via Hadamard's paper on geodesies on surfaces of negative
 curvature (cf. Chorlay 2007, Chaps. 8 and 10).

 23 See Gray (1986) and Scholz (1980).

 24 Poincaré gave only a sketch of how this surface is to be defined, but his idea was clearly that of considering
 classes of paths modulo equivalence relations (one depending on the behaviour of multi-valued function Y,
 then another one to ensure simple connectedness).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 1 7

 potential-theoretic methods (not the alternating method, however) to prove that the

 abstract analytic surface is equivalent to an open disc in a complex plane, the generic

 point of which will be denoted by Z. As we mentioned earlier, several points of this
 1 3-page paper seem questionable; the 1 908 paper on the same topic would be 70 pages

 long, and would rely on different techniques for the construction of the surface and

 the existence proofs in potential theory; the proof-scheme remains the same, however.

 A generation later, these uniformisation theorems would be listed among those of a
 clearly "global" (im Grossen) nature.25

 More precise uniformisation results are reached in the case of algebraic functions

 and solutions of linear differential equations with rational coefficients, in Poincaré's

 papers on fuchsian groups (e.g. Poincaré 1884). Not only is the problem of a global
 nature, but its solution led Poincaré and Klein to a new proof technique that would

 later become a standard tool when tackling global problems,26 namely the " méthode

 de continuité " (Klein's " Continuitätsbeweis "). To put it briefly:27 in order to establish

 that a natural one-to-one map between two (connected) parameter spaces is also onto,

 Poincaré and Klein attempted to show that its image is both open (using local inversion

 arguments) and closed (which led Poincaré to "compactify" of the first space, a point

 which Klein apparently missed).28

 The third group of works that should be mentioned to establish the fact that

 Poincaré's early work is epoch-making in the history of global mathematics, is that

 on the qualitative theory of curves defined by a differential equation.29 He engaged
 in 1881 in a series of studies on non-linear ordinary differential equations in two real

 variables F(;t, y, = 0 (F a polynomial). To give just one of the first results:
 starting from his (local) classification of singular points and his definition of their
 index, Poincaré established a numerical link between the number of singular points

 of the differential equation and the topological genus the surface defined by equa-
 tion F(j t, y,z) =0 (Poincaré 1885). This work would also later be considered as
 paradigmatic of what mathematics "in the large" is.30

 Yet, to the best of our knowledge, Poincaré never pointed to a general common

 form of these various problems and proof-schemes. Although he often stressed, from

 25 This description of uniformisation theory as tackling a general problem form (namely, to start from
 uniformisation theorems im Kleinen and strive for uniformisation theorems im Grossen) can be found in

 Osgood's Cambridge Colloquim Lectures (Osgood 1899, p. 70) and in Weyl's Idee der Riemann sehen
 Fläche (Weyl 1919, p. 141).

 26 For instance, when Weyl used the same kind of purely topological techniques in 1925, in the context of

 Lie groups theory, he still referred to the method as " Kontinuitätsmethode " (Weyl 1925, p. 629).

 27 See Scholz ( 1 980) and Gray ( 1 986).

 2^ This one-sentence summary uses topological vocabulary that was alien to Poincaré and Klein. A less
 anachronistic description of their proof scheme would be: they use a reductio ad absurdum , claiming that

 if the map was not onto, the boundary of the image subset would be both empty and non-empty.

 29 For a general study on this topic, see Gilain (1991).

 30 For instance, this work is the only example of differential geometry "in the large" that Struik gave in

 his 1933 MIT talks on the history of differential geometry from the 17th to the 19th century (Struik 1933b,
 p. 188).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 18 R. Chorlay

 his earliest works, that he would not restrict his study of the behaviour of functions to

 a neighbourhood of their singular points,31 he never coined a general term to describe

 a wide family of problems.

 In the period 1901-1912, Poincaré had many occasions to reflect on his scientific

 career (as in his 1901 overview of his mathematical work), on the nature of mathemat-

 ics, and on its future problems (as in his 1909 ICM talk on L'avenir des mathématiques
 (Poincaré 1909)). Lines such as:

 My time will not have been wasted (...) if this very fumbling eventually showed

 me the deep analogy between the problem I just dealt with, and a much more

 extended class of problems; if they showed me the likenesses and differences;

 if, in a word, they gave me a glimpse of possibilities for generalisation.32

 did not refer to global problems. When, in the same 1909 talk, he gave examples
 of concepts that would clearly play an important role in future mathematics, he first

 mentioned uniform convergence, then groups and invariants.

 As to his views on the nature and role of topology, they would prove stable, from

 his celebrated 1895 Analysis situs paper (Poincaré 1895) to his more epistemologi-
 ca! writings on the nature of mathematical knowledge. Analysis situs is consistently

 described as a form of hypergeometry (i.e. dealing with spaces and forms of dimension

 greater than three (Poincaré 1909, p. 181)); and as a qualitative geometry, meaning
 non quantitative (i.e. in which exact measurement is not of the essence) and stable

 by deformation (hence the idea of a geometry fit for poorly drawn figures) (Poincaré
 1901, p. 100).

 In 1 9 1 2, Hadamard would stress the fact that the will to go beyond local properties of

 functions is the main and central feature of Poincaré's mathematical work (Hadamard

 1912, p. 1922).33 To Hadamard, this central feature would, in turn, explain why analy-
 sis situs played such an important role in so many parts of Poincaré's work (Hadamard
 1912, p. 1864). However obvious all this might have appeared to Hadamard in 1912,
 it is nowhere to be found in Poincaré's writings.

 31 The non-local nature of the goal is stated in the clearest of ways in the introduction to the series of

 papers on the qualitative study of curves defined by a differential equation: " Rechercher quelles sont les
 propriétés des équations différentielles est donc une question du plus haut intérêt. On a déjà fait un premier
 pas dans cette voie en étudiant la fonction proposée dans un voisinage d'un des points du plan. Il s'agit
 aujourd'hui d'aller plus loin et d'étudier cette fonction dans toute l'étendue du plan." (Poincaré 1881,
 p. 3) (Poincaré's emphasis). Poincaré once explicitly used the term " problème 1осаГ in his 1907 paper
 Les fonctions analytiques de deux variables et la représentation conforme (Poincaré 1907), but did not go
 beyond this "local" use.

 32 "Je n'aurai pas perdu mon temps (...) si ces tâtonnements mêmes ont fini par me révéler l'analogie
 profonde du problème que je viens de traiter avec une classe beaucoup plus étendue de problèmes; s'ils
 m'en ont montré à la fois les différences et les ressemblances, si en un mot ils m'ont fait entrevoir les
 possibilités d'une généralisation." (Poincaré 1909, p. 169)

 33 For Hadamard, the page numbers refer to the collected works (Hadamard 1968).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 19

 3.1 A family of three

 3 The "Cousin problems", from Cousin (1895) to Oka (1938)

 In contrast with Poincaré, who singled out and generalised one theorem from
 Weierstrass' coherent list of results on the theory of single- valued functions defined

 over the complex plane, Cousin brought together three problems to make one coherent

 family. The first two - to find a regular function with given zero-locus, and to repre-

 sent a meromorphic function as a quotient of two regular function - had already been

 studied together, as it was clear that solving the first was the key to solving the second.

 Cousin added to the family Mittag-Leffler's famous theorem:

 Let there be given:

 Io An infinite sequence of distinct values а i , «2, «з» • • •> subject to the condition

 2° An infinite sequence of entire fractions, rational or transcendental, of variable y,

 all of which vanish for у = 0:

 lim tfy = oo,

 v = oo;

 GiOO^'V + ^V + c'aV-- - .

 Gz(y) = cf}y + c^y2 + 42У . . . ,

 Gv(y) = + 4v)y2 + 4"У . . .

 Then, it is always possible to form an analytic function F(x) with no other singular

 points than ¿z i , ¿Z2 > #3 * • • • > anc* such that, for every determinate value of v , the difference

 has,atjc = av, adeterminate finite value, so that in the neighbourhood of x = aVi F(x)

 can be expressed in the form

 F(x) - Gv (- - )
 'x -avJ

 Gv ( - î - ) + P(x - av)3

 'x-avJ

 In the introduction to his 1895 thesis Sur les fonctions de n variables complexes

 (Cousin 1895), Pierre Cousin comments:

 34 "Je suppose données:
 Io Une suite infinie de valeurs a' , 02, 03, . . toutes inégales et assujetties à la condition

 lim av = 00,

 v = 00;

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 20 R. Chorlay

 Two important theorems by Mr. Weierstrass can be regarded as successive

 consequences of Mr. Mittag-Leffler's theorem; the first one pertains to the exis-
 tence of an entire function whose zeroes are given in advance; the second one

 pertains to the expression as a quotient of two entire functions, of a function in

 one variable whose singular points are but poles. These three theorems make up

 a set of three propositions which are closely tied together. 35

 There are various ways in which the family of three can be tied together, and Cousin

 is by no means the first to consider that the first theorem (on singularities) implies the
 second (on zeroes). For instance, Paul Appell had given in 1883 a generalisation
 of Mittag-Leffler's theorem to the two complex variables case (Appell 1883): starting

 with a sequence f'(x, у), /2С*, y), . . ., fv(x, y). . . of analytic functions (defined over

 C2 but for singularities), whose singular locus goes to infinity,36 he defined a function

 /, over C2, with the same singular locus and such that / - fv is regular where fv is

 singular.37 Both the ekthesis - in terms of singular locus that goes to infinity - and one-

 page proof - add the fv and use Weierstrass' trick to deal with convergence problems -

 are direct offshoots of Mittag-Leffler's. Appell then formulated the analogous problem:

 starting from a sequence of entire functions g i(jt, ;y),g2(*> y)> • • •> 8v(x, у ), . . .whose

 footnote 34 continued

 pour y = 0:

 2° Une suite infinie de fractions entières, rationnelles ou transcendantes de la variable y, s' annulant toutes

 Cl (y) = Cj^y + c<V + с'з^у3 . . . ,
 G2(v) = cfv+4V+cfV....

 Cl,(v)=i;i,,.v + 4l',y2+c*",.v3...

 Il est alors toujours possible de former une fonction analytique F(x ), n'ayant d'autres points singuliers que

 a' , C12, «3, . . et telle que, pour chaque valeur déterminée de v , la différence F(x) - Gv ^ j^-^ait, en
 supposant X - fly, une valeur finie et déterminée, de telle sorte que, dans le voisinage de x = av, F(jc)

 puisse s'exprimer sous la forme Gv + P{x - fly)." (Mittag-Leffler 1882, p. 414). Mittag-Leffler

 had given a first proof of a slightly less general theorem in 1976. An overview of his work on one-valued

 analytic functions in one complex variable can be found in Sur la représentation analytique des fonctions
 monogenes uniformes d'une variable indépendante , Acta Math. 4 (1884), pp. 1-79.

 35 "Deux théorèmes importants de M. Weierstrass peuvent être considérés comme des conséquences succes-
 sives du théorème de M. Mittag-Leffler; le premier est relatif à l'existence d'une fonction entière admettant

 pour zéros des points donnés à l'avance; le second est relatif à l'expression sous forme d'un quotient de
 deux fonctions entières d'une fonction d'une variable n'admettant comme points singuliers que des pôles.
 Ces trois théorèmes forment un ensemble de trois propositions intimement reliées entre elles." (Cousin
 1895, p. 1)

 36 Appel expresses this condition in the following way: " (...) for all values of v greater than a positive
 integer /¿, a positive number av can be assigned so that function fv(x, y) remains holomorphic as long as
 the moduli of x and y remain less than av' moreover, number av increases indefinitely with v" " (...) pour
 toutes les valeurs de v supérieures à un entier positif д ,/ 'on peut assigner un nombre positif av tel que la
 fonction fv(x, y) reste holomorphe tant que les modules de x et y restent inférieurs à av;de plus ce nombre
 fly augmente indéfiniment avec v." (Appell 1883, p. 71)

 37 At least if /у is the only function in the sequence which is singular at this point (Appell 1883, p. 72).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 zero-locus goes to infinity, and a sequence k' , ki, . . . ,kv, ... of natural numbers, find

 From Problems to Structures 2 1

 an entire function G with the same zero-locus and such that G/fvv is regular and

 non-null where fv vanishes.38 As to the proof, one line is enough:

 To prove these propositions, it is enough to apply the theorem from § 1 to the function

 £

 with

 d'ogG(x,y)

 dx

 , , , , 9 logS>' (*.. V) 39

 /„(*, , , y) , = kv ,

 ax

 As we saw earlier, the idea of using logarithms to pass from theorems on singular-

 loci to theorems on zero-loci had been used by Poincaré (in a different technical

 context, however); it would be used by Cousin, who explicitly referred to both Poincaré

 and Appell.

 What unites the three theorems, in Cousin's thesis, though, is not that the second

 is a straightforward consequence of the first (on simple domains such as C2), but that
 both are consequences of a single fundamental theorem (" théorème fundamentar).

 3.2 A "fundamental theorem" with three corollaries

 The proof of this fundamental theorem would make up the first two of the four para-

 graphs of the thesis. Before we state it, let us make clear what functions and domains
 Cousin chose to deal with. The domains are what would later be called polycylinders:

 the n + 1 complex variables are independent; each of them varies its own complex

 plane, in domains bounded by n -f 1 "contours fermés, simples ou complexes " (Cousin
 1995, p. 4). As to functions, they do not have to be regular throughout the domain,
 but they are subject to two constraints: they are " monotropes ", which means their
 value at a point is left unchanged after analytic continuation around a loop in the
 domain;40 they are " sans espace lacunaire ":

 38 Again: at least if no other function in the sequence vanishes there.

 39 "pour démontrer ces propositions, il suffit d'appliquer le théorème du §1 à la fonction - - - en

 prenant fv(x, y) = kv д (Appell 1883, p. 74)

 The term « monotrope » comes from the standard French textbooks by Briot and Bouquet. For instance:

 "Let us assume that point z is bound to stay in a determinate part of the plane; if all paths from initial

 point zo to any point z (fig. 4), located in that part, lead to the same value for the function, we shall say
 that the function is monotropic in that part of the plane"; " Supposons que le point z soit astreint à rester

 dans une partie du plan déterminée; si tous les chemins qui vont du point initial zo à un point quelconque
 z (fig. 4) situé dans cette partie conduisent à la même valeur de la fonction, nous dirons que la fonction
 estmonotropedans cette partie du plan." (Briot and Bouquet 1875, p. 10)

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 22 R. Chorlay

 The later condition means precisely that, if M denotes any point in the region

 at hand, there exists a point which is as close to M as one wills, for which the

 function is regular.41

 The fundamental notion is that of equivalent functions:

 If two such functions are simultaneously defined inside the same partial area,
 and if their difference is regular at all points in this area, I shall say that the

 two functions are equivalent in this partial area; if their difference is regular at

 a point, the two functions are equivalent at this point.42

 Cousins considered functions in n + 1 variables; the first n variables *1, ..,jcn

 (collectively denoted by jc) have domain Г, which is the product of n plane domains
 bordered by closed curves y', . . ., yn. The last variable is denoted by y, its domain is

 denoted by S and is cut in a finite number of subdomains R', Rp, each of which
 being bordered by a simple (i.e. non self-intersecting) closed curve. 3

 To each region Rp I associate a function /p (x , y) of the (n -f 1 ) complex variables
 x',...txn,y9 defined for x interior to Г and for у interior to a boundary line

 enclosing Rp(. . .); one also assumes the following: if Rp and Rn are two

 contiguous regions, №p and Шп have in common a partial area where both func-
 tions /p(;t, y) and /n(jc, y) are defined; one assumes that these two functions
 are equivalent in the partial area where both are defined;44

 We are now ready to state the

 Fundamental theorem. There exists a function F(xf y), monotropic and without

 lacunary space, defined for x interior to Г and у interior to 5, and which, at every

 point interior to 5, is equivalent to the function associated with that point.45

 Although the theorems to be proved concern functions in several variables and

 open coverings, Cousin relies solely on single-variable techniques (which is possible

 41 "Cette dernière condition signifie d'une façon précise que si M désigne un point quelconque de la région
 considérée, il existe un point aussi voisin que l'on veut de M pour lequel la fonction est régulière." (Cousin
 1895, p. 10)

 42 "Si deux fonctions de cette nature se trouvent définies simultanément à l'intérieur d'une même portion
 d'aire et si leur différence est régulière en tout point de cette aire, je dirai que les deux fonctions sont

 équivalentes dans la portion d'aire considérée; si leur différence est régulière en un point, les deux fonctions
 seront équivalentes en ce point." (Cousin 1895, p. 10)

 43 The Rp domains are explicitly assumed to be simply connected (though Cousin never uses this term).

 44 "A chaque région Rp je fais correspondre une fonction des (n ■ f 1) variables complexes jq,

 *n, >' fp(x , y) définie pour x intérieur à Г et pour y intérieur à un contour fermé Mp enveloppant
 Rp (...); on fait de plus l'hypothèse suivante: si Rp et Rn sont deux régions contiguës, Mp et ÎHn ont une
 portion d'aire commune où les deux fonctions /p( jc, .y) et fn(x, y) sont simultanément définies; on sup-
 pose que ces deux fonctions sont équivalentes dans la portion d'aire où elles sont simultanément définies;"
 (Cousin 1895, p. 1 1)

 45 'Théorème fondamental. 11 existe une fonction F( x, y) monotrope sans espace lacunaire définie pour x

 intérieur à Г et y intérieur à S et qui, en chaque point intérieur à S, est équivalente à la fonction correspondant
 à ce point." (Cousin 1895, p. 1 1)

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 23

 in polycylinders), and on somewhat standard site techniques such as cuttings.46 The

 relative positions of the Rp subdomains in the y-plane is described in terms of common

 boundary curves, /np denoting the curve (or curve components) bordering Rn and Rp ;
 the standard situation is given by the following figure (Cousin 1895, p. 13):

 In a neighbourhood of /np, both /n and /p are defined and their difference /n - /p is

 regular. Cousin's tactics was to define, on what we would denote Г x 5, a multi-valued

 function Ф that is single- valued47 in each Г xRp and such that its analytic continuation

 when cut /np is crossed undergoes a jump of /р - /n. Adding this difference-balancing
 function Ф to the /p gives the required single-valued function F. Now, paragraph
 one is devoted to expounding the techniques for constructing difference-balancing
 functions of this type. Cousin used standard single- variable techniques by combining

 jump-functions defined by a parameterised line integral: first, the classic

 1 f dz

 <p(x,y) = T- 2in J / f

 2in J z-y

 fnp

 which undergoes a unit jump when the /np "cut" is "crossed", then

 ř , 1 [ fp(x,z) - fn(x,z)
 Inp(x,y) ř , = - luz / -

 luz J z-y

 'np

 Special attention is paid to the behaviour of such functions at vertices (such as point

 A in the above figure).

 After completing the proof of the fundamental theorem, Cousin showed how a

 slight change in the proof can lead to the solution of a different problem:

 ^ In his 1914 report on the theory of functions of several complex variables, Osgood wrote that Cousin's
 proof was «more elementary» than Poincaré's (Osgood 1914, p. 44).

 47 To be more precise: multi-valued but with separate branches.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 24 R. Chorlay

 The theorem we have just proved pertains to monotropic functions with no
 lacunary space; it can be extended to non-monotropic functions of a specific

 nature, namely these functions which are logarithms of regular functions.48

 If to each Rp subregion one ascribes a function mp(jc, y ), regular in Г x /?p, such

 that, in the overlaps, quotient up/un is regular and non-vanishing, the former proof

 applies to /p = logMp. Every step of the way (even in the definition of /p), one works
 up to additive constants of type 2ikn (where к is an integer). It does not matter since,

 in the last step, only the exponentials appear. Thus, it is established that:

 There exists a regular (J (x, y) which is regular at every point (jc, y) interior to

 (Г, 5), and such that at any point interior to S its quotient by the function wp(jt , y)
 associated with this point is regular and different from 0 at that point.49

 The correctness of this conclusion would be questioned by Gronwall, as we shall

 see below.

 Once the fundamental theorem and its logarithmic variant have been proved, Cousin

 moves on to establish the n-variable, polycylindral analogues of Mittag-Leffler's the-
 orem (on singularities), Weierstrass' theorem (on zeroes) and Poincaré's theorems (on

 the representation of meromorphic functions). Since - once the logarithmic variant of

 the fundamental theorem is granted - the proofs of theorems 2 and 3 are just variants of

 the first one,50 we need only to present the laying-out and the proving of the analogues
 of Mittag-Leffler's theorem.

 Just like Poincaré's, Cousin's ekthesis exhibits what would later be called the "from

 local to global" problem form; S denotes an open polycylinder, Га^

 product of disks centered on point (a,b,...,c,d,e) and interior to S :

 I intend to show that if [...], at every point (a,b,...,c,d,e) interior to 5, a func-

 tion fa,b,..,c,d,e(x> y,...*z,t, и) is given, which is monotropic and without lacunary

 space inside Г

 dition, then there exists a function F(x , y, . . ., z, t , w), monotropic and without

 lacunary space inside 5, which, at every point interior to 5, is equivalent to the
 function given at this point.51

 The condition being

 48 "Le théorème qui vient d'être démontré relativement à des fonctions monotropes et sans espaces lacu-
 naires , peut être étendu à des fonctions non monotropes d'une nature particulière: je veux parler des fonctions
 qui sont les logarithmes de fonctions régulières." (Cousin 1895, p. 16)

 9 "Il existe une fonction U(x, y) régulière en tout point (jc, y) intérieur à (Г, S) et telle que en un point
 quelconque intérieur à S son quotient par la fonction up(x, y) qui correspond à ce point est régulier et
 différent de 0 au point considéré." (Cousin 1895, p. 20).

 50 This does not mean they show no real extra content, quite the contrary. For instance, when dealing with
 the representation of meromorphic functions as quotient of regular functions, Cousin uses Weierstrass'

 Vorbereitungssatz and proves the existence of an irreducible representation (Cousin 1895, p. 32).

 "Je me propose de montrer que si (...) on se donne pour chaque point (a, b,..,c, d, e) intérieur à S, une
 fonction fa,b,..,c,d,e(x' y, ,z, t, u) monotrope et sans espace lacunaire à l'intérieur de Га ь c d e, et si
 les fonctions données satisfont à la condition qui vient d'être explicitée, il existe une fonction
 F(x,y, ...,z,t,u) monotrope et sans espace lacunaire, définie à l'intérieur de S, et qui, en chaque point
 intérieur à S est équivalente à la fonction donnée en ce point." (Cousin 1 895, p. 21 )

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 25

 If the point is close enough to (a, , d, e ) so as to be interior
 to circle ra¿,...,c,d,ei ^e two functions

 fa, b

 must be equivalent at the point (a',b',...,c'df,ef).52

 To prove this result and its variants, Cousin had to overcome the following diffi-

 culty: the fundamental theorem deals with domains whose components are compact,53

 but the results he aimed at should hold for domains whose components need be neither

 closed nor bounded. He proceeded in three steps: first, in two variables, he proved his

 existence theorems over bounded polycylinders interior to S' step two is a straightfor-

 ward generalisation to any number of variables; step three deals with the non-compact
 case and mainly relies on uniform approximation over compact subsets by rational
 functions (Cousin 1895, p. 38 and fol.).

 3.3 Gronwall finds fault with Cousin's reasoning

 In 1913, Т.Н. Gronwall presented to the American Mathematical Society a talk54
 on which he would base a later paper On the Expressibility of a Uniform Function
 of Several Complex Variables as the Quotient of Two Functions of Entire Character
 (Gronwall 1917). In this paper, he gave a critical presentation of Cousin's work (§ 1 and

 2) and presented some personal results (§3). For the first part, Gronwall had worked

 with W.F. Osgood - who was working on his general survey on the theory of functions

 of several complex variables (Osgood 1 9 1 4) - to locate the flaw in Cousin's reasoning:
 "The author wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Professor Osgood, to whom

 he communicated the example of §3 in June, 1913, for material assistance in locating

 the gap in Cousin's proof". (Gronwall 1917, p. 53).55 So it seems that Gronwall's work
 on functions of several complex variables first gave him an example that contradicted

 Cousin's theorem on the representation of meromorphic functions, then worked with

 Osgood to locate the flaw and devise a proof for a restricted theorem.

 Gronwall first summarised Cousin's results, labelling his theorems A, B, and С: A

 for the existence of an analytic function with given singularities, В for the existence of

 a holomorphic function with given zeroes, С for the representation of a meromorphic

 function as a quotient of relatively prime holomorphic functions.56 He acknowledged

 52 "Si (ar ,b' ,ď ,e') est un point assez voisin de ( a,b

 les deux fonctions faj,

 lentes au point (a' ,b' ,d! ,е')У (Cousin 1895, p. 21)

 53 "Compact" is of course not part of Cousin's terminology.

 54 Cf. (Cole 1914, pp. 173-174).

 55 The corrected version of Cousin's proof which Gronwall gave was devised in collaboration with Osgood
 (Gronwall 1917, p. 54).

 56 A conclusion which Gronwall formulated this way: "(...) this function may be expressed as a quotient of
 two uniform functions holomorphic in 5n and without common zero manifolds of higher dimension
 than In - 2." (Cole 1914, p. 73). The presentation is more algebraic in Gronwall (1917).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 26 R. Chorlay

 the fact that Cousin's proof of theorem A is perfectly rigorous. Since he had a counter-
 example to theorem C, and С is an easy consequence of B, there has to be a flaw in

 theorem B. He and Osgood eventually located it in the logarithmic variant of Cousin's

 "fundamental theorem". The proof they gave is exactly Cousin's proof. They simply

 pointed to the fact that, when starting with /p = lo gMp, the jump-balancing function
 Ф need not be uniform (i.e. single-valued) in every Г x Rn if Г is not assumed to be

 simply connected; they actually come up with an example (in the product of two ring-
 shaped domains 1/2 < 'z' < 2) where G = еф is multi-valued. Hence what Cousin's
 proof proves, according to Gronwall, is

 Let a function mp(jc, у ) be given for every region /?p, uniform and holomorphic

 in (5, RpX boundaries included, and such that for any two adjacent regions Rn

 and /?p, the quotient

 is holomorphic and different from zero in (S, Гпр).57 Then there exists a function
 G(x , y) holomorphic in (5, S '), uniform in (E, S'), where E is any simply

 connected part of 5, and such that in (5, Rp) (boundaries included except those
 y which are end points of an /np and lie on the boundary of Sf) the quotient

 Up(xty)
 -
 un(x,y)

 Gjx.y)

 Up{x,y)

 is holomorphic and different from zero. (Gronwall 1917, p. 53)

 Cousin thought he had established this fact for any polycy linders but he had proved it

 only for those polycylinders in which at most one of the components is not necessarily
 simply connected.58 Of course, this restriction as to what Cousin's proof actually
 proves does not imply that what he thought he had proved is not the case. This is

 where Gron wall's counter-example comes into play: in the product of two ring-shaped
 domains, he exhibited a meromorphic function that cannot be the quotient of two
 relatively prime (single-valued) holomorphic functions;59 if theorem С fails to hold
 for such domains, so does theorem B. The final conclusion is

 57 Tnp denotes an open neighbourhood of curve /np.

 58 Cousin's requirement that the functions be " sans espace lacunaire" does not mean he considered only
 simply connected components. He explicitly refers to "contours (...) à connexion multiple " (Cousin 1 895, p.
 38). He gets more precise a few pages down the paper, in the two- variable case: " S désigne une aire connexe

 prise sur le plan de la variable x et limitée par n + 1 contours fermés simples Cq , Cj, C2, . . Cn, dont le pre-

 mier Co enveloppe S et chacun des n autres est enveloppé par S Les notations S', C¿, Cj , . . ., C'm (. . .)
 ont une signification analogue relativement au plan de la variable y. " (Cousin 1 895, p. 50). See also (Cousin
 1895, pp. 55-56).

 ^ It can be written as the quotient of two, not relatively prime, one-valued holomorphic function, however.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 27

 Theorems В and С are valid when, and only when, n - 1 of the n regions
 Si, ^2, . . 5n are simply connected; the remaining region may be simply or
 multiply connected. (Gronwall 1895, p. 53)

 Cousin's proof relied on a patching argument that paid attention to only one of the

 components of the polycylinder, and it seems his "up to a harmless integer multiple

 of 2/ 7г" argument was flawed; however, Gronwall chose not to pinpoint exactly where

 the hitch lay in Cousin's proof, and formulated restrictive domain hypotheses which
 enabled him to avoid any sort of multi-valuedness at any step of the proof. This

 paper also clearly shows that topological properties play a part in theorems В and С
 which they do not play for theorem A (valid in any polycylinder): what part exactly ?
 Is the family-likeness of theorems A and В altogether misleading? That would be
 investigated later, as we shall see.

 3.4 Enduring problems, indirect use

 As to Cousin's family of three problems, there is a striking contrast between the
 difficulty of the problems and the ease of access to the questions. These questions
 are fairly straightforward (at least when put informally, the precise ekthesis takes a
 little more work, but not that much), clearly important, and have well-known one-

 dimensional analogues. They are part of the standard list of topics that the theory of
 functions of several complex variables addresses, as is shown by their integration in
 the classical monographs on the field: in Osgood's 1901 introductory overview on
 complex variables in Klein's Encyclopädie (Osgood 1901, p. 112), in Osgood's 1914
 AMS Colloquim Lecture (Osgood 1914, p. 44 and fol.), in Behnke and Thullen's 1934
 Theorie der Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderlichen (Behnke and Thullen

 1934, Chap. 5). Yet, no significant breakthrough took place in the period from 1895
 to 1934; the only event is of a restrictive nature, when Gronwall unexpectedly hit
 upon a counter-example to problem С and, for theorems В and C, made it clear
 what topological hypotheses should be imposed on the polycylinders for Cousin's
 conclusions to hold.

 Before expounding what would later be seen as Oka's breakthrough, let us mention

 two early 1930s papers that dealt with the topic.

 The first paper is Cartan's 1934 note to the French Académie des Sciences on
 Les problèmes de Poincaré et de Cousin pour les fonctions de plusieurs variables
 complexes (Cartan 1934). This three-page note does not include proofs, but it shows
 that the three problems can be used as tools to tackle another family of questions.
 Cartan first stated the problems in a way that has not significantly changed since
 Cousin,60 and used the following labels: what Gronwall called "theorem A", Cartan

 60 For instance: "First Cousin problem.- Let us assume that the domain under study, D, is covered by an

 infinity of partial domains D¡, interior to D, and that, in every D¡, a meromorphic function f' is defined;

 it is also assumed that, whenever two domains D¡ and Dj have a common part Dy, the difference f'- f]

 is holomorphic in Dy. We intend to find a function F, meromorphic in D, and such that in every D, the
 difference F - /, is holomorphic"; " Premier problème de Cousin.- On suppose que le domaine considère
 D est recouvert à l'aide d'une infinité dénombrable de domaines partiels D¡ intérieurs à D, et que, dans
 chaque D¡, on a défini une fonction méromorphe /,•; on suppose en outre que, chaque fois que deux

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 28 R. Chorlay

 calls "Cousin's first problem" (the additive problem, for meromorphic functions, later
 denoted as "Cousin I"); Gronwall's "theorem B" is "Cousin's second problem" (the
 multiplicative problem, "Cousin II"); Gronwall's "theorem C" is called "Poincaré's
 problem" (quotient representation of meromorphic functions). If, for a given domain

 D, Cousin's first problem has a solution whatever the data are, one says that Cousin's

 first theorem holds for D. In the list of results stated in this note, only one is a direct

 extension of Gronwall's results; by direct extension we mean the following: either a

 proof that Cousin I holds for a class of domains more general than that of polycylinders;
 or a proof that Cousin II and Poincaré's theorem hold for a class of domains more

 general than that of polycylinder with at most one not simply-connected component.

 All but one of Cartan's 1934 are indirect results, which shows a shift of emphasis: the
 Cousin and Poincaré problems are used as tools in order to help classify the various

 domains that the theory of functions of several complex variable has come to deal with

 since Hartogs' work. This indirect use is clear in the following two examples, in two
 complex variables:

 Theorem 1 . If the first Cousin theorem holds for D, D is a domain of holomorphy

 (that is, the total domain of existence for some holomorphic function).61
 Theorem 3. Let D be a domain in which the first Cousin theorem holds (...). If,

 moreover, D is star, or if D is a Hartogs domain, then the second Cousin theorem
 holds for D.62

 These theorems show no direct breakthrough, in the sense defined above, but show

 that the Cousin and Poincaré properties have tractable relations with those of impor-

 tant classes of domains: domains of holomorphy, domains of meromorphy, Hartogs
 domains, domains with convexity properties (with respect to polynomial functions,
 rational functions, holomorphic functions etc.), star domains, circle domains etc. This

 issue of domain classification is what is at the heart of Cartan's research programme
 in the 1930s, and it is not, as we shall see, a personal quirk. The background for
 the 1934 note to the Académie des Sciences is Cartan and Thullen's 1932 paper
 Zur Theorie des Singularitäten der Funktionen mehrerer komplexen Veränderlichen -
 Regularitäts - und Konvergenzbereiche (Cartan and Thullen 1932). It is devoted to the

 definition and study of the holomorphic hull of a domain ( Regularitätshulle ) and to its
 generalisation by the notion of convexity relative to a R-function class (such classes

 footnote 60 continued

 domaines D¡ et Dj ont une partie commune D¡j , la différence fi - /j est holomorphe dans Dl} . On se
 propose de trouver une fonction F, méromorphe dans D, et telle que dans chaque Di , la différence F - f¡
 soit holomorphe." (Cartàri 1934, p. 1285).

 61 Cartan showed in 1938 that the analogous theorem does not hold in three variables: he exhibited a

 domain that has the Cousin I property but is not a domain of holomorphy, namely tricylindre |zj| <
 Mz2l < 1*3 1 < 1 with Point z' - Z2 = 23 removed (Cartan 1938).

 62 "Théorème 1. Si le premier théorème de Cousin est vrai pour D, D est un domaine ďholomorphie
 (c'est-à-dire le domaine total d'existence d'une certaine fonction holomophe)." (Cartan 1934, p. 1286)
 "Théorème 3. Soit D un domaine pour lequel le premier théorème de Cousin est vrai (...). Si en outre D

 est étoilé, ou encore si D est un domaine de Hartogs, le deuxième théorème de Cousin est vrai pour D "
 (Cartan 1934, p. 1286)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 29

 being defined by stability under partial derivation and raising to an integer power)
 (Cartan and Thullen 1932, p. 627 and 629).

 A similar but more detailed overview is given in 1937, in Behnke and Stein's
 paper Analytischen Funktionen mehrerer Veränderlichen zu vorgegebene Null - und

 Pollstellenflächen (Behnke and Stein 1 937). Though this report to the Union of German
 Mathematicians (D.M.-V.) mentions two recent direct breakthroughs with Cousin's
 problems - one by Cartan and one by Oka - its greatest part is devoted to what we
 called an indirect use: theorems, examples and counter-examples are given in order

 to show how "Cousin properties" interact with various domain classifying properties.
 For instance, Behnke and Thullen give the example of a domain in which Cousin II
 holds but not Cousin I (Behnke and Stein 1937, p. 186). We saw in Cartan a link
 between Cousin I and domains of holomorphy; Behnke and Stein comment on a result

 by Thullen which exhibits a (subtler) link between Cousin II and holomorphy domains:

 (...) those domains in which the second Cousin statement holds, but which

 are not regularity domains, differ from regularity domains by parts of a lesser
 dimension.63

 What sums up Behnke and Stein's review is the following table:

 2 + +

 3 + - +

 4 + - - +

 5 - + + +

 6 +

 7 - + +

 9

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (Behnke and Stein 1937, p. 192)

 For instance: combination 1 is the case in polycylinders made up of discs; combi-

 nation 2 is impossible, since Cousin II implies "Poincaré" in any domain; Gronwall's
 example shows that 4 is the case for some domains.

 3.4.1 Cousin I holds for more general domains than polycylinders :

 the ( indispensable Weil integral

 The only direct result mentioned (but not proved) in Cartan's 1934 short note to the
 Paris Academy is

 Theorem 2. If some domain D is convex relative to polynomials or rational

 functions in je, y, the first Cousin theorem holds for D.64

 63 "(• • •) die Nicht-regularitätsbereiche, in denen die zweite Aussage von Cousin gilt, nur um niederdimen-
 sionale Stücke von Regularitätsbereiche unterscheiden." (Behnke and Stein 1937, p. 187)

 64 "Théorème 2.- Si un domaine D est convexe par rapport aux polynômes ou aux fonctions rationnelles

 en Jt, y y le premier théorème de Cousin est vrai pour D." (Cartan 1934, p. 1286)

 30 R. Chorlay

 Cartari gives a small hint as to his proof method:

 This result, which goes far beyond Cousin's, is attained by a method analogous
 to his; but André Weil's integral (for functions of several variables) needs be

 used, whereas Cousin only used the classical Cauchy integral (for functions of
 one variable).65

 It was clear that Cousin's proof depended essentially from the fact that his domain

 was a polycylinder, in which all variables could be studied (somewhat) independently

 with methods from the theory of functions of a single complex variable; in particular,

 the proof of the "fundamental theorem" relied on the properties of a function defined
 by a parameterised line integral along a cut in the plane of one of the variables.
 As a consequence, this proof-method was ill-suited for non polycylindral domains.
 However, in 1932, André Weil had devised an integral formula which generalised

 Cauchy 's integral formula for the representation of holomorphic functions. This paper
 was written while Cartan and Thullen were writing their 1932 paper, and Weil wrote

 that it was his contribution to the study of R-convex domains in which his friends had
 engaged. His theorem goes as follows:

 Let X', Хг, . . ., Xn be n polynomials in x, y, and let D be the domain (if it
 exists) defined by the inequalities

 'Xi(x,y)'<l (i = 1,2,..., n). (1)

 Let ay (if it exists) be the two-dimensional variety, lying on the boundary of D,
 which is defined by the equalities and inequalities

 №(*, y)' = |Xj(jc, y) | = 1, |Xk(jc, y)' < l(Jt ф /, j).

 One can then determine polynomials Ф;у (£, rj; jc, y) in £, rç, x, y, so that, for any
 f(x,y) holomorphic in closed domain D,

 1 Y í Í Ф'7 (*' *' у) /(*' пЩ0Г1

 (2i'jt)2 ffj ' 'JJ J [*,(?, i,) - X¡(x, y)] [Xj(Ç, г,) ~ Xj(x, у)] Л*' У)

 ' 'JJ a¡j

 if (х, у) is interior to D; _
 if (jc, у) is exterior to D.66 -

 65 "Ce résultat, qui dépasse de beaucoup celui de Cousin, s'obtient par une méthode analogue à la sienne;

 mais il faut se servir de Y intégrale d'André Weil (pour les fonctions de plusieurs variables) tandis que Cousin
 utilisait seulement l'intégrale classique de Cauchy (pour les fonctions d'une variable)." (Cartan 1934, p.
 1286)

 66 "Soient X' , Ã2, . . -, Xn n polynômes en jc, y , et soit D le domaine (s'il existe) qui est défini par les
 inégalités (1) |X/(x, y)| < 1(Z = 1,2,..., n). Soit <T'j (si elle existe) la variété à deux dimensions, située
 sur la frontière de D, qui est définie par les égalités et inégalités 'X'(x, y)' = |Xj(jc, y) | = 1, |Xk(jc, y)' <
 1(* ф i,j). On peut alors déterminer des polynômes Ф/у (£, rj; x, y) en t-,rj,x,y, de telle sorte

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 3 1

 However, Cartan did not publish the proof of his " théorème 2" based on Weil's

 integral, since it occurred to him that Weil's reasoning could not be directly extended

 to the general case of domains of holomorphy: there was no existence theorem for
 the generalised Ф functions. 67 Weil would acknowledge this fact in his 1935 paper
 on U intégrale de Cauchy et les fonctions de plusieurs variables (Weil 1935).68 We
 will see that this need for an existence theorem securing the generalised Weil integral

 formula would play an important part in Cartan's 1940 paper.

 Back to Japan after a sabbatical leave which took him to Paris in 1929 to work on

 the theory of complex function with Gaston Julia,69 Kyoshi Oka managed to devise a

 proof of what Cartan had called his " théorème 2", first for rationally convex domains,
 in 1936 (Oka 1936), then for bounded domains of holomorphy in 1937 (Oka 1937).

 The general result relies on the first: domains of holomorphy are approximated by
 analytically convex domains which contain it (Oka refers to Cartan and Thullen's
 1932 paper (Oka 1984, p. 2)), and analytically convex domains are approximated by
 rationally-convex domains (Oka 1984, p. 11). In order to tackle the rationally convex
 case, Oka devised a trick which enabled him to avoid using the yet loosely founded

 Weil integral, and to resort to standard Cauchy formulae in each component of a
 polycy linden The trick goes as follows: replace domain A, defined by conditions

 x' € X' and tfj(jti, . . jen) € Kj (where the R s denotes v rational functions in n
 variables, the X' and Yj denote bounded domains), by a rational variety E defined

 footnote 66 continued

 que l'on ait, pour toute fonction f(x, v) holomorphe dans le domaine fermé D , ^UJ)

 / kj = f(x' y) si (jc- v) est intérieur àD;=0si (x'yi est extérieur
 à D." (Weil 1932, p. 1304)

 Weil's paper was but a note to the Paris Academy, hence presented the results with a barely sketched

 proof. In this paper, he stated his theorem in the case of domains defined by a finite number of polynomial
 inequalities, but hinted at extensions to much more general cases (Weil 1932, p. 1305). In a 1973 overview
 of his mathematical work, Cartan wrote : "We now know that the additive problem can always be solved

 for a domain of holomorphy, and, more generally, for a "Stein manifold". This result was first proved by
 K. Oka. Before Oka, I had seen that the additive problem can be solved by using André Weil's integral, but

 at that time some techniques were lacking which allow the application of Weil' integral to the general case
 of domains of holomorphy; I thus forwent publishing my proof."; "Ол sait aujourd'hui que le problème

 additif est toujours résoluble pour un domaine d'holomorphie, et plus généralement pour une "variété de
 Stein ". Ce résultat a été prouvé pour la première fois par К. Oka. Avant Oka, j'avais vu que le problème

 additif pouvait se résoudre en utilisant l'intégrale d'André Weil, mais comme à cette époque il manquait
 certaines techniques permettant d 'appliquer l 'intégrale de Weil au cas général des domaines d 'holomorphie,
 je renonçai à publier ma démonstration." (Cartan 1979: XI)

 68 "(...) I will make the following assumption, which I could not free myself from: I will assume that to
 every function X/( jc, y), one can associate two functions P¡{x г, .v; Уо)> Qi(x, у; yo)» holomorphie
 in jc, y, *o, .vo when (. X , y) e D, (jco, yo) € D, in such a way that : X¡ (x , y) - X¡ (*o, yo) = (* - *0 )ñ +
 (У - yo)Qi holds identically."; "(...) Je ferai l'hypothèse suivante, dont je ne suis malheureusement pas
 arrivé à m' affranchir: Je supposerai qu'à chacune des fonctions X¡(x, y) l'on puisse faire correspondre
 deux fonctions /'/(jc, y; jco, yo), £/(*> y; *0> У0) holomorphes en x, y , xq, yo quand (x, y) e D, (xq, yo) €
 D, de façon que l'on ait identiquement : X¡(x, v) - X ¡ (лго , vo) = (x - xq)P¡ + (y - yo)öi •" (Weil 1935,
 p. 179)

 ^ As a consequence, many of his early papers would be published in French (or, occasionally, Oka's own
 brand of French), though in Japanese journals. We will quote from the English translation of his Collected
 Papers (Oka 1984).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 32 R. Chorlay

 in ( n H- v)-dimensional space by v equations yj = Rj(x', . . ., xn)' the variety E is
 studied in polycylinder (C) defined by X' , . . Xn and Y' , . . Yv. In order to use this

 trick to study the existence problem for meromorphic functions in A with given poles,

 one first has to show that the data can be transferred from the original setting to the

 new, polycylindrical, one. To warrant this smooth change of setting, Oka first solved

 (by induction on v) the following problem: starting from a holomorphic function /
 in A,

 (...) construct a holomorphic function defined on (С') having the value f(M)
 for any point M on the portion of E lying inside (С'), (C) being a given domain
 in the interior of (C). (Oka 1984, p. 2)

 The successful change of setting allows for a direct extension of Cousin's method:

 "But now, the classical methods being applicable almost literally, we shall content
 ourselves with referring the reader to this". (Oka 1984, p. 6).

 3.4.2 Cousin II is purely topological (for domains of holomorphy)

 After, from Gronwall's paper it had constantly been remarked that, contrary to Cousin

 I, Cousin II had a topological side to it. Yet, this fact had not been explored in the 1 9 1 7-

 1937 period, partly because mathematicians focused on non-topological properties of
 domains (R-convex domains, star or circle domains etc.). To some extent, it could

 be argued that neither Gronwall nor his successors had any real tools to tackle the

 topological side of the question, and that Gronwall's restriction to simply connected

 polycylinders (save for maybe one component) was the simplest way to set topological
 questions aside.

 After his success with Cousin I, Oka published in 1938 a paper Sur les fonctions
 analytiques de plusieurs variables- III Deuxième problème de Cousin (Oka 1938).
 This paper plays an important part in our historical narrative, for at least two reasons.

 First, Oka would establish that for Cousin II (in domains of holomorphy), topology
 does not play only some part, but that the problem is of a purely topological nature.
 Second, his main proof technique would rely on what we called the " U ПК, í/, V,ř/U

 V" site technique, after the 1917-1937 period in which approximation techniques
 prevailed; this change of focus in terms of site technique is a fundamental background
 element to Cartan's (1940) structural paper, as we shall see.

 To study the role of the topological element in Cousin II, Oka defined its purely
 topological analogue, which he called the "generalised Problem" (" problème général-
 isé " (Oka 1984, p. 27)): "We shall extend the second Cousin problem to the domain
 of non-analytic functions" (Oka 1984, p. 25). Consider a domain D in a real space;
 two continuous functions f' and /2 are said to be equivalent on a subdomain D' if

 throughout Df we have f' = À/2, where A. is continuous and non-vanishing in D''
 associate to every point of D an open ball on which a continuous function / is given,
 so that equivalence holds in the overlaps:

 Under these conditions we ask to find a continuous function F on D equivalent
 at every point P of the domain to the function attached to P. We shall say that
 the function F , if it exists, has the given zeros. (Oka 1984, p. 25)

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 33

 In order for the topological problem to be the analogue of the analytical one, it is

 also assumed that the zero-locus defined by the zeroes of the / functions is of empty

 interior: "we abandon, once for all, all cases in which the given zeros fill out a whole

 portion of the space of the variables" (Oka 1984, p. 26). The three main results of Oka's

 paper are the following: first, in complex polycylinders, the generalised problem is
 solvable (for any continuous data) if and only if all components (except at most one)

 are simply connected. Second, in a domain of holomorphy, if the generalised problem
 is solvable70 then so is the analytic problem. Third, an explicit topological condition
 on the zero-locus is given for the problem to be solvable (Oka 1984, pp. 33-34).

 The fact that the topological problem cannot always be solved in a polycylinder
 with more than one non simply connected component is proved by exhibiting an

 example, with a complex function defined in the product of two ring-shaped domains.
 The proof of the topological existence theorem - when at most one component is
 not simply-connected - depends on a fundamental lemma: let (x' , *2, • . - , xn) be n
 complex variables,

 On the plane x', we draw a rectangle R which we decompose into equal small

 rectangles (<w/) by two systems of straight lines parallel to the sides of R. Let A'
 be a closed domain consisting of one or more of the (o)j) and their boundaries,

 and A 2 a closed domain consisting of one of the (cy/), contiguous to Aj, and its

 boundary. We shall denote the common part of the boundaries of A' and A 2 by
 L, and the closed domain consisting of A' and A 2 by A. Let us take a domain
 В in the space (*2, . xn). (Oka 1984, p. 27)

 With its work in the plane of one of the first variables and its simplicial decomposi-

 tion of a compact subset, this is reminiscent of Cousin's "fundamental theorem". What

 follows, however, is a patching-up argument with no analogue in Cousin: given two
 continuous functions /1 and /2, defined over neighbourhoods of (Aj , B) and (A2, B)

 (respectively), and globally equivalent in a neighbourhood of L'

 Under these conditions, one can find a continuous function of the n variables

 jt/, defined in a neighbourhood of A, and equivalent to at least one of the two

 given functions /1, /2 at any point of A, if L does not coincide with the entire
 boundary of the rectangle A2 and if В is simply connected. (Oka 1984, p. 27)

 These topological conditions are necessary and sufficient for a non-vanishing к =

 f' I fly defined over a neighbourhood of L, to be continuously extended ove£ A2 without
 vanishing; if X denotes the extended function, f' (defined over Aj) and À /2 (defined
 over A2) coincide over a neighbourhood of L, hence a continuous function with the
 right zero-locus can be defined over A = A' U A2. Though purely topological in
 nature, the key step is still expressed by Oka in terms of single- valuedness of logA. in

 the neighbourhood of L.

 As to the analytic part, the existence results derive from Oka's proof of Cousin I

 for domains of holomorphy; he simply uses the traditional logarithmic transformation

 to pass from a multiplicative problem to an additive problem. The fact that Cousin II

 70 That is: if for some analytic data, the continuous problem has a continuous solution.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 is not solvable for all zero-loci in general domains was clear as from Gronwall. Now

 Oka started investigating the conditions on the zero-locus for Cousin II to be solvable

 in this particular case. He proves that, in domains of holomorphy, the solvability of
 Cousin II depends only on a topological property of the zero-locus: if D denotes a
 such domain, Cousin II is solvable for a given zero-locus E if and only if this locus
 can be "swept out" (" balay able " (Oka 1984, p. 29)), that is (in modern parlance),71 if
 there is a continuous zero-locus in D x [0, 1 ] such that D x {0} = E and D x { 1 } = 0.

 34 R. Chorlay

 4 Carton's structural transition

 The pivotal point in our narrative is Cartan's pair of papers: Sur les matrices holo-
 morphes de n variables complexes in 1940 (Cartan 1940) and Idéaux de fonctions

 analytiques de n variables complexes in 1944 (Cartan 1944). These are actually the
 two parts of a single work, the delay being ascribable to the prevailing adverse cir-
 cumstances. The first paper is devoted to the proof of a patching-up theorem that is a
 direct generalisation of Cousin's "fundamental theorem", which, as we have seen, was

 also an essential part of Gronwall and Oka's contributions. In 1940, Cartan clearly
 inserted his generalised theorem in a new research programme, which would be laid
 out in detail in 1944:

 It seems that our theorem can play an important part in the global study of ideals of

 holomorphic functions. In this regard, it should be noted that the "second Cousin

 problem" pertains to the global study of ideals which have, in the neighbourhood

 of every point, a base made up of only one function. Apart from this particular
 case, it seems to me that the global study of ideals has not been tackled. That we

 will do systematically, in a forthcoming Memoir.72

 4. 1 An "ideal" generalisation of Cousin data and Oka lemma

 The key to the generalisation of Cousin II lies in recasting it in terms of ideals:

 (...) To construct a holomorphic function with given zeroes in a given domain.
 It is, of course, necessary to clarify what "given zeroes" means. We shall call

 "Cousin datum" in a domain D, the following datum: for each point x in D a
 function fx is given, which is holomorphic at x' these functions must meet the

 following requirement: each point a of D has a neighbourhood V where fa is
 holomorphic, and at every point of which the quotient fx/fa is holomorphic
 and ф 0. The later condition expresses the fact that, in the ring of holomorphic
 functions at Xy fx and /a generate the same ideal . Thus, Cousin's problem is

 71 This is Cartan 's rephrasing, cf. (Oka 1984, p. 35)

 72 "Notre théorème semble susceptible de jouer un rôle important dans Y étude globale des idéaux de
 fonctions holomorphes . Remarquons à ce propos que le "deuxième problème de Cousin" se rapporte à
 l'étude globale des idéaux qui ont, au voisinage de chaque point, une base formée d'une seule fonction. En

 dehors de ce cas particulier, on n'a pas encore abordé, me semble-t-il, l'étude globale des idéaux. C'est ce
 que nous ferons systématiquement dans un Mémoire ultérieur." (Cartan 1940, p. 2)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 35

 as follows: for any Cousin datum in domain D, is there a function / which is
 holomorphic in D, and such that for every point x of D, the quotient f/fx is

 holomorphic and Ф 0.73

 At any point x, the formula fx = gxk, with À(*) Ф 0, is now read in terms of

 ideals: in the ring of analytic regular functions at x (the precise definition would be

 given in 1944), к is an invertible element; hence functions fx and gx generate the same

 principal ideal; exhibiting the function fx gives only an extrinsic representation of an
 intrinsic objet, which is an ideal. But ideals with more than one generator (at each

 point) can be considered just as well, Cartan argued. If two sets of p functions at point

 x are given by f', . . ., /р, and g' , . . ., gp, the fact that they generate the same ideal
 at x can be expressed by the existence of a invertible square matrix of holomorphic
 functions at x expressing the change of basis.74 In the Cousin II case, which is now

 seen as the principal ideal case, the fundamental step of Oka's proof was the extension

 of non- vanishing function к (defined in the neighbourhood of L = A ' П Л2) over Л2,
 so that the continuous function with the right zero locus could be extended from A' to

 Ai U Ai. Cartan first reminded the reader of this " opération élémentaire ", in a more

 symmetrical formulation:

 (...) the principle of the proof is the following: to pass from local data to a global

 existence , parts are assembled in turn. Each assembling step consists in what we
 will call an elementary operation . For instance, here is the elementary operation
 that leads to Cousin's theorem:

 Let two compact polycylinders A', A" be given, whose components in the planes
 of the n - 1 last complex variables are the same, and whose intersection А' П A"

 is simply connected ; let a function f(x) be given, holomorphic and ф 0 at all
 points of A' H A"; the point is to write function / as a quotient /7/"» where
 f is holomorphic and ф 0 at every point of A', and f" is holomorphic and ф

 0 at every point of A".75

 73 "(•••) Construire une fonction holomorphe ayant des zéros donnés dans un domaine donné. Il faut, bien

 entendu, préciser ce qu'on entend par « zéros donnés ». Nous appellerons donnée de Cousin dans un domaine
 D la donnée, en chaque point x de D, d'une fonction fx holomorphe au point *, ces fonctions satisfaisant
 à la condition suivante: tout point a de D possède un voisinage V dans lequel fa est holomorphe et en
 tout point x duquel le quotient fx! fa est holomorphe et ф 0. Cette dernière condition exprime que, dans
 l'anneau des fonctions holomorphes au point x, fx et fa engendrent le même idéal. Le problème posé par

 Cousin est alors: pour toute donnée de Cousin dans le domaine D, existe-t-il une fonction / , holomorphe
 dansDy telle que, pour tout point x de D, le quotient // fx soit holomorphe et Ф 0." (Cartan 1944, p. 149)

 74 Cartan uses «base» of an ideal or a module to denote any (finite) set of generators.

 75 "(•••) le principe de la démonstration est le suivant: pour passer de données locales à une existence
 globale, on procède par assemblages successifs de morceaux. Chaque stade d'assemblage consiste en ce que
 nous appellerons une opération élémentaire. Voici par exemple en quoi consiste l'opération élémentaire qui
 conduit au théorème de Cousin: Etant donnés deux polycylindres compacts A' et A" qui ont respectivement

 mêmes composantes dans les plans des n - 1 dernières variables complexes, et dont l'intersection A' П A "
 est simplement connexe, étant donnée d'autre part une fonction f(x) holomorphe et ф 0 en tout point de
 A' H Ar/, il s'agit de mettre cette fonction / sous la forme d'un quotient f'/f", f' étant holomorphe et Ф
 0 en tout point de A' et f" étant holomorphe et Ф 0 en tout point de A"." (Cartan 1944, p. 152)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 36 R. Chorlay

 matrices:

 The main theorem of the 1940 paper gives the analogous result for invertible

 Theorem I. In the space of n complex variables, let A' and A" be two compact
 polycylinders whose components are the same in the planes of all the variable
 but one, and whose intersection А' П A" = A is simply connected. Every

 holomorphic and invertible matrix on A can be written, on A, as A = A'-1 A",
 where A' is a holomorphic and invertible matrix on A', and A" is a holomorphic
 and invertible matrix on A".76

 In 1944, Cartan would refer to theorem I as the " généralisation du Lemme de

 Cousin "; as we saw, this direct generalisation of Oka's proof for Cousin II is rem-
 iniscent of the form of Cousin's fundamental theorem, but not of Cousin's proof
 techniques.

 What this theorem warrants is the patching-up of ideals rather than the extension

 of functions:

 Theorem II. A', A " and A denoting the same as in theorem I, let us consider,
 on A' and A", respectively, two ideals I' and I" with finite bases. For V and

 V to have a common holomorphic basis on union A' U A", it is necessary and
 sufficient that V and I" generate the same ideal on the intersection A.77

 It should be noted that even in the case of principal ideals, this type of theorems

 would not necessarily lead to a solution to the classical Cousin II problem. In the
 classical problem, a global function was aimed at, whereas Cartan's new theorems

 can, at best, prove the existence of a global function ideal (with, hopefully, a finite set

 of generators). Among other things, the new setting thus affects the meaning of what

 is to be called a solution to Cousin II; the new theory may strive for a solution only in a
 weak sense, but Cartan's successful generalisation of Cousin and Oka's lemma shows
 that the ideal variant is more tractable. This distinction between a classical Cousin

 II problem and an ideal Cousin II problem is not stressed in Cartan's 1940-1944
 problems, but it will be later (Cartan 1950b).

 4.2 Mixed structure, inner concepts, and problems

 Some aspects are only hinted at in 1940 that would be tackled explicitly in 1944; for
 instance, the following was only a footnote in 1940:

 76 "Théorème I.- Soient, dans l'espace de n variables complexes, deux polycylindres compacts A' et A" qui
 ont mêmes composantes dans les plans de toutes les variables sauf une, et dont l'intersection A' П A" = A

 est simplement connexe. Toute matrice holomorphe et inversible sur A peut être mise, sur A, sous la forme

 A = A' 1 A", A' étant une matrice holomorphe et inversible sur A', et A" une matrice holomorphe et
 inversible sur A"." (Cartan 1940, p. 9)

 77 "Théorème II.- A', A" et A ayant la même signification qu'au théorème I, considérons sur A ' et A"

 respectivement, deux idéaux I' et I " de bases finies. Pour que I' et I " admettent une même base holomorphe
 sur la réunion A' U A", il faut et il suffit que '' et '" engendrent le même idéal sur l'intersection A." (Cartan
 1940, p. 15)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The ideal "generated" on set A by an ideal Г on A' (when А с A') is made up

 of finite linear combinations of functions off, with coefficients holomorphic on
 A.78

 From Problems to Structures 37

 Considering that the right objects to patch together are ideals (or, in 1944, mod-

 ules) is one thing, but in this case, the algebraic vocabulary fails to capture an essential

 feature. The new structure is not just an algebraic structure (whose elements are func-

 tions); the objects are rings, ideals or modules on domains or polycylinders. It is the
 interconnections between ideals and domains that are to be explored; to characterise
 and investigate this situation, new concepts are to be defined, and a wealth of new
 terms is to be coined. This laying out of the basic notions for the theory of this new

 structure makes up the bulk of the 1944 paper. In a very pedagogical style, Cartan
 first reminds his reader of the (purely algebraic) definition of an ideal in a ring, then
 remarks:

 But the aforegoing definition remains vague if one fails to specify in what regions
 the functions are considered. The notion of an ideal will always be relative to
 a determinate set E in the space of n complex dimension. By definition, an
 ideal on E will be an ideal of the ring Oe of holomorphic functions on E; I
 call a holomorphic function on E any function defined and holomorphic in a

 neighbourhood of E (this neighbourhood is not fixed beforehand, it is relative to

 the function); two functions are regarded as identical if there is a neighbourhood

 of E on which they coincide.79

 An ideal is said to be " ponctuel "80 if E is just a point. As we can see, no fancy

 notion of direct limit was used by Cartan in 1944.

 It must be mentioned that Oka defined the same structure in a paper that was

 published in 1950 but written in 1948, without Oka knowing Cartan's 1944 paper.
 Oka had read the 1940 paper, however, in which the research programme of "global

 theory of function ideals" was stated very clearly, and the major notions hinted at.
 Oka's definition is slightly more precise, and uses what he calls the "arithmetic"
 notions of congruence: he writes (p = 0 (mod /¡) to express the fact that (p belongs

 to the ideal generated by the f'. The new structure is that of "holomorphic ideal with
 indeterminate domains" ("idéal holomorphe de domaines indéterminés " (Oka 1 984,

 p. 85):

 Consider domains (5) (connected or not) and holomorphic functions f(x) on
 (<5); we consider a set (/) of pairs (/, 6). Instead of saying that (/, 8) e (/), we

 78 "L'idéal «engendré» sur un ensemble Д par un idéal I' sur Д' (lorsque Д С A') se compose des
 combinaisons linéaires finies de fonctions de I' à coefficients holomorphes sur A." (Cartan 1940, p. 15)

 79 "Mais la définition précédente reste vague si l'on ne précise pas dans quelles régions sont envisagées les
 fonctions. La notion d'idéal sera toujours relative à un ensemble E déterminé de l'espace à n dimensions
 complexes. Un idéal sur E sera, par définition, un idéal de l'anneau Oe des fonctions holomorphe s^ux
 E; j'appelle fonction holomorphe sur E toute fonction définie et holomorphe dans un voisinage de E (ce
 voisinage n'étant pas fixé à l'avance mais dépendant de la fonction); deux fonctions sont considérées comme
 identiques s'il existe un voisinage de E dans lequel elles coïncident." (Cartan 1944, p. 153)

 80 We will translate the French "ponctuel" by "punctual", i.e. attached to a point. It sounds slightly odd in
 French as well, but the meaning is unambiguous.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 38 R. Chorlay

 shall sometimes say that / € (/) on 8. Suppose that this set has the following

 two properties:
 Io If (/, 8) € (/) and a(jt) is a holomorphic function of the domain 8' (con-

 nected or not), then, we have, af € (/) on 8 П 8

 2° If (/, 8) e (/) and (/', 8') e (/), then / + /'€(/) on 8 n 8'.

 We shall call (/) a holomorphic ideal with indeterminate domains . (Oka
 1984, p. 84)

 In the 1944 paper, once the basic notion is laid out, Cartan presented the central

 problem for the theory of this new structure:

 Any holomorphic function on E can be regarded as a holomorphic function on
 any set E' included in E. As a consequence, every ideal on E generates an ideal
 on E', when E' с E; it is important not to confuse these two ideals: the second one

 is made up of all finite linear combinations with coefficients holomorphic on E',

 of functions from the first ideal. Thus, one ideal potentially carries a multitude
 of ideals, one on every subset of E.81

 More generally, to any module M defined over domain E, an infinity of punctual
 modules Mx is associated, one at each point x of E. Now, things can also be done
 the other way around: given a family of punctual ideals Mx on E, Cartan defined the

 "associated module" M to be the module of functions defined on E "which belong to

 Mx at every point x of E" (" qui appartiennent à M* en tout point x de E" (Cartan 1 944,
 p. 157)). The main problem is to characterise associated modules, and to some extent,

 the 1944 formulation of the generalised Cousin problem is as follows: on a compact
 polycy linder, does any module coincide with its associated module?82 (Cartan 1944,

 p. 158). As Cartan pointed out very clearly, the difficulty lies in the fact that the module

 associated with a subset of the domain is made not only of restrictions of functions,

 but also of linear combinations of those restrictions with a larger coefficient ring. To
 show the relevance of this fact, he relied in 1944 on a case he had studied in 1940:

 consider a family f' , . . ., fq with no common zero in E; at every point x of E, they
 generate the unit ideal (i.e. the whole ring), since at least one of them does not vanish
 (hence is invertible at *). However, it is not clear at all that the associated ideal over

 E is that defined by //,..., /q; or, to put it in terms of functions, it is not clear at all

 that there is a family c' , . . ., cq of holomorphic functions on E, such that Hc'f' = 1
 identically on E (Cartan 1944, p. 158).

 Tackling the question of associated modules requires that a new concept be intro-

 duced. Again, Cartan made its origin clear by his rewording of Cousin II: as we saw

 earlier, he stressed the fact that the generators /x of the principal punctual ideals were
 such that every point a has a neighbourhood V and a generator /a, defined over V,

 81 'Toute fonction holomorphe sur E peut être considérée comme une fonction holomorphe sur n'importe
 quel ensemble E' contenu dans E. Il en résulte que tout idéal sur E engendre un idéal sur E', lorsque E'c E;
 il importe de ne pas confondre ces deux idéaux: le second se compose de toutes les combinaisons linéaires

 finies, à coefficients holomorphes sur E', des fonctions du premier idéal. Ainsi, un idéal porte en puissance
 une foule ď idéaux, un sur chaque sous-ensemble de E." (Cartan 1944, p. 153)

 82 Or rather, to be precise: does any module M on coincide with the module associated with the system of
 punctual modules Mx .

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 39

 such that /a also generates the ideal at every point x of V. This concrete property of

 "Cousin data" is turned into an abstract property which particular instances of the new

 structure may or may not have:

 Definition. Let E be any set of the space of n complex dimensions, and q an
 integer > 1, given once for all. Let us assume that to every point x of E a
 <7 -dimensional module of holomorphic functions (at x) has been associated. We

 shall say that the punctual modules Mx make up a coherent system if every point a

 of E has a neighbourhood V on which there exists a <7 -dimensional module which

 generates the punctual module Mx at every point of the intersection V П E.83

 Oka defined a similar notion in his 1950 paper, coining the term "local pseudo-

 basis". Cartan would describe the general role of this concept in 1950 in these terms:

 "(...) before we pass from local to global, we need to go into local properties in depth,

 that is, to see how point-wise properties are locally organised".84

 Both the concepts of a coherent system of punctual modules (there is no "sheaf'

 word yet!) and that of module over E associated with such a system, are central concepts

 for the study of the new structure. The second one expresses the globalisation problem

 and, as such, was clearly there from the beginning: this is what the "global theory of

 ideals of holomorphic functions" is about. As to the first one, it seems that it took

 some time to Cartan to grasp its problematic nature fully, maybe due to the fact that it

 is not problematic in the Cousin case. In 1944, he had to confess that, in order to prove
 his main theorem (theorem IV, dealing with modules over A = А' П A", A', A", and
 A' U A"), he had to assume something he has not been able to prove:

 (...) problem IV raises a preliminary question: the /к being holomorphic func-
 tions on A, let us associate to every point x of A the punctual module M(/k, x)
 made up of systems of p functions Ck (holomorphic at x) such that q fk = 0;
 do these punctual modules form a coherent system ? Now that is a question which

 I have not yet managed to settle.85

 The question became all the more pressing when Cartan showed that regardless

 of whether this module of relations coincides with its associated modules is essential

 for the whole theory (Cartan 1944, 1959). This problem of coherence for the sheaf of
 relations would be solved by Oka in 1950. In the 1944 paper, Cartan also stated the

 problem of coherence for the ideal of an analytic subvariety (Cartan 1944, p. 187), a
 problem which he would solve in his 1950 Idéaux et modules de fonctions analytiques

 83 "Définition.- Soit E un ensemble quelconque de l'espace à n dimensions complexes, et soit q un entier
 > 1 donné une fois pour toute. Supposons qu'à chaque point x de E ait été attaché un module Mx (à q
 dimensions) de fonctions holomorphes au point x. Nous disons que les modules ponctuels Mx forment un

 système cohérent, si tout point a de E possède un voisinage V sur lequel existe un module (à q dimensions)
 qui, en tout point x de l'intersection V П E, engendre le module ponctuel Mx." (Cartan 1944, p. 156)

 84 "(•••) avant de pouvoir faire le passage du local au global, il faut approfondir les propriétés locales,
 c'est-à-dire voir comment les propriétés ponctuelles s'organisent localement" (Cartan 1950a, p. 30).

 85 "(...) le problème IV soulève une question préliminaire : les Д étant holomorphes sur A, associons à
 chaque point x de A le module ponctuel М(Д, Jt) formé des systèmes de p fonctions c* (holomorphes au

 point jc) telles que X* ckfk = 0; ces modules ponctuels forment-ils un système cohérentl Or c'est là une
 question queje ne suis pas encore parvenu à résoudre." (Cartan 1944, p. 160)

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 40 R. Chorlay

 de variables complexes (Cartan 1950a). The very same year, Oka gave the example
 of a non-coherent "ideal" (Oka 1984, p. 86). In 1950, Cartan admitted that in 1944 he

 had not noticed that the following fact needed to be proved: if M is a module on E,

 the system of punctual modules Mx it generates is coherent (Cartan 1950a, p. 30).

 4.3 Algebraic transition or structural transition?

 At first sight, one could argue that very few algebraic concepts are actually imported

 into the new framework. There is not much beyond the definitions: ring (Cartan denotes

 by 0E the ring of holomorphic functions of E), ideal, module; in the case of modules,

 only submodules of finîtes powers О Ц of the ring are concerned. For the module of
 relations, Cartan coined the term "derived module" (" module dérive " (Cartan 1944,

 p. 167)) and no notion of kernel appears. In fact, no notion of homomorphism between

 modules is ever used or even alluded to. Needless to say, no idea of a quotient structure

 is present in 1 944: the fact that Cousin data, being defined "up to something" (additively

 in Cousin I, multiplicatively in Cousin II) "clearly" indicates that they are quotients

 of more elementary structures, would not strike Cartan until a few years later, as we
 shall see. In fact, the ideals and modules that Cartan considers are not abstract ideals

 and modules, in so far as their elements are always complex functions in the classical
 sense; the elements of a quotient would be of a different nature, a nature that would

 not be considered seriously until 1952.

 In terms of ring and module properties, Cartan did not go beyond finiteness prop-

 erties (specifically, the noetherian property); no "fancy" notion such as that of a local

 ring is ever used, despite the fact that this notion had been defined and studied by
 Krull: his 1938 Dimensionstheorie in Stellenringe was already a survey paper (Krull
 1938). As far as algebraic theorems are concerned, only two play a part in Cartan's

 1944 paper. In a footnote (Cartan 1944, p. 1 66) Cartan made use of the decomposition
 of an ideal as intersection of primary ideals, and refers the reader to the second edition

 of van der Waerden's Moderne Algebra. The other theorem plays a more visible part,
 since it is mentioned in the introduction and a proof is given in an Appendix to the
 paper: "any punctual ideal has a base" ("wn idéal ponctuel possède toujours une base "
 (Cartan 1944, p. 153)), i.e. the ring of convergent power series in several complex

 variables is noetherian. In this regard, Cartan refers his reader to Rückert's 1933 paper
 Zur Eliminationsproblem der Potenzreihenideale (Rückert 1933).

 Not much algebra, maybe, but a recasting of enduring problems in a new and

 algebraically flavoured setting. But if algebra does not actually play a major part, why
 bother? It seems that an answer was given earlier: the notion of "ideal" enabled Cartan

 to come up with a new interpretation of what the second Cousin problem was about,
 and the class of ideal problems proves both larger and more tractable than the classical

 one. However, this shows how the algebraic import proved seminal, but it gives no
 clue as to why Cartan turned to algebra in the first place.

 Part of the answer lies in the type of problems which Cartan set out to tackle, rather

 than in any specific algebraic result or concept. These problems are exemplified in the
 introduction of the 1 944 paper:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 4 1

 As we mentioned earlier, Cousin's results allow for the global study of complex
 analytic varieties of n - 1 dimensions in the space of n dimensions, as well as
 for the global study of holomorphic functions on these varieties. But it seems
 no attempt was ever made at a global study of complex analytic varieties in
 arbitrary dimensions. In this work, we intend to partially fill this gap. Let us
 analyse the problem more closely: we shall say that, in a domain D, a set E is
 a complex analytic variety (...) if every point a of D has a neighbourhood in
 which set E can be defined as the set of zeroes that are common to a finite number

 of holomorphic functions. Can such a variety be defined globally as the set of

 zeroes that are common to a finite (or even infinite) family of functions which
 are holomorphic in D? (...) Here is another problem: given an analytic variety
 E in D, and, at every point ;c of E, a function /x which is holomorphic at that

 point, in such a way that every point a in E has a neighbourhood V such that,

 for every x on the intersection V П E, /x and /a are equal at every point of E
 sufficiently near x ; is there a function /, holomorphic in D, which coincides in

 the neighbourhood of any point x of E with the function /x associated with that

 point?86

 The first problem is a generalisation of Cousin II for varieties of (complex) codimen-

 sion different from one. The case in which the function of a finite family (f' , . . ., /p)
 have no common zeroes is now seen as a particular case of this generalised Cousin II

 problem! Its solution, namely that (in the right domains) there are functions c' , . . cp
 such that

 Y,c'f' = 1 (formula a)

 is all the more important in that a slightly modified version provides an existence
 theorem that warrants the Weil integral formula (Cartan 1944, p. 186). As to the
 second problem that Cartan mentioned in this passage, it is not a Cousin problem,
 but we came across it earlier, namely in Oka's proof of Cousin I: to implement his

 trick (replace a rational domain by a rational subvariety in a polycylinder), Oka had

 to tackle the question of prolongation to a polycylinder of holomorphic functions that
 are defined on a subvariety; Cartan wrote:

 86 "Les résultats de Cousin, nous l'avons rappelé, permettent l'étude globale des variétés analytiques
 complexes à n - 1 dimensions de l'espace à n dimensions, ainsi que l'étude globale des fonctions
 holomorphes sur ces variétés. Mais rien ne semble avoir été tenté pour l'étude globale des variétés
 analytiques complexes ci un nombre quelconque de dimensions. Nous nous proposons, dans ce tra-
 vail, de combler partiellement cette lacune. Analysons de plus près le problème: nous dirons que,
 dans un domaine D, une ensemble E est une variété analytique complexe (...) si chaque point a de
 D possède un voisinage dans lequel l'ensemble E peut être défini comme l'ensemble des zéros com-
 muns à un nombre fini de fonctions holomorphes. Une telle variété peut-elle être définie globalement
 comme l'ensemble des zéros communs à un nombre fini, ou même infini, de fonctions holomorphes
 dans D? (...) Voici un autre problème: étant donnée une variété analytique E dans D, et, en chaque
 point x de E, une fonction fx holomorphe en ce point, de manière que tout point a de E possède
 un voisinage V tel que, pour tout point x de l'intersection V П E, fx et fa soient égales en tout
 point de E suffisamment voisin de x, existe-t-il une fonction f holomorphe dans D et qui, au voisi-
 nage de tout point x de E, coïncide sur E avec la fonction fx relative à ce point ?" (Cartan 1944,
 p. 152)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42 R. Chorlay

 Besides, this is the very goal which led me, a few years ago, to undertake in a

 systematic fashion the global study of ideals of holomorphic functions*1

 Here, the link with algebra is one of analogy: in "modern algebra", the theory

 of polynomial ideals deals with these very questions, but with polynomials instead of

 analytic functions. In particular, this theory is the new setting for classical results of

 elimination theory, such as Hilberts Nullstellensatz ; quoting from van der Waerden 's
 Moderne Algebra

 If / is a polynomial in K[x' , . . xn ] which vanishes at all common zeroes of

 polynomials /1, . . . , /r, then the following congruence holds

 /^ = 0 (/b . . fr)

 for some natural number p (and conversely).88

 In particular, when the polynomials have no common zeroes, the classical algebraic

 analogue of formula a goes:

 If the polynomials f' , . . ., fr of K[x' , . . ., *2] have no common zeroes in any

 algebraic field over K, then the following relation holds in K[x' , . . ., jcn]

 1 = A'f' H

 89

 Some more specific questions which Cartan tackled as from 1940 are also direct
 analogues of standard questions in the theory of polynomial ideals (in its Elimina-
 tionstheorie part): the actual transformation of a given basis into another one (Cartan

 1940, p. 18 and fol.), the representation of subvarieties of codimension q by exactly
 q equations (Cartan 1944, §8).

 There is no textual indication that Cartan also considered that there was some

 kind of analogy between changes of base rings in his theory (where they result from
 changes of domains) and changes of base fields in algebra. What is clear, is that Cartan

 saw that several problems (or tricks, or proof methods, or loosely-founded formulae)
 in the theory of several complex variables called for a general theory of analytic
 submanifolds, and that a significant change of setting had occurred a few years earlier

 in the theory of algebraic manifolds. Cartan's introduction of the language of ideal
 theory in complex function theory echoes the opening claim of van der Waerden's
 1927 Zur Nullstellentheorie der Polynomideale:

 87 "C'est d'ailleurs dans ce but que j'ai été amené, il y a quelques années, à entreprendre systématiquement
 Y étude globale des idéaux de fonctions holomorphes (Cartan 1944, p. 152)

 88 "Ist / ein Polynom in K[*i , . . *n], das in allen gemeinsamen Nullstellen der Polynome /1 , . . . , fr
 verschwindet, so gilt eine Kongruenz fp = 0 (/1 , . . . , fr) für eine natürliche Zahl p (und umgekehrt)."
 (van der Waerden 1931, p. 11)

 89 "Wenn die Polynome f' , . . .,/r aus К[л:| , . . jcn] in keinem algebraischen Körper über К eine gemein-
 same Nullstelle haben, so gilt in K[x' , . . jcn] eine Relation 1 = Aj /1 + • • • + Аг/г (van der Waerden
 1931, p. 10)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 43

 The exact foundation of the theory of algebraic manifold in л -dimensional space

 can only be reached with the help of the theory of ideals, for even the definition

 of an algebraic manifold leads directly to a polynomial ideal.90

 Van der Waerden saw his work as an import, into algebraic geometry, of the abstract

 methods that Emmy Noether had developed.91 A similar import and a similar claim
 is to be found in Riickerťs theory of rings of convergent power series (with complex
 coefficient):

 In the elimination theory for convergent power series of several complex vari-
 ables, the common zeroes of a system a functions vanishing at point zero is

 investigated. The main result of the theory is the following theorem of Weier-

 strass [the preparation theorem] (...). Up to now, all proofs of this fundamental
 result rely mainly on tools from function theory. (...) In this work, we will

 show that a proper treatment of the elimination problem (up to formulae (2) and

 (3)) requires but formal methods, hence no function-theoretic tool. The general

 theory of ideals and the general theory of fields prove to be such methods.92

 The analogy of problems does not entail one of methods: Cartan's methods are

 purely " 'funktionentheoretisch ", however, and his change of setting looks nothing
 like van der Waerden' s idealtheoretisch foundation of (affine) algebraic geometry, or

 Riickerťs work on local analytic geometry. It can also be even argued that Cartan had

 always considered possible parallel developments in algebra and in complex analysis,
 and that he had already imported questions from the theory of polynomials to com-

 plex analysis before he was even aware of ideal-theoretic formulations. For instance,
 in his 1931 paper Sur les variétés définies par une relation entière (Cartan 1931), he
 sketched the following research programme: to study analytic manifolds defined by
 one regular equation in two variables "par analogie avec les courbes algébriques "

 (Cartan 1931, p. 25). In particular, in the first paragraph of this paper, he relied on the
 two Cousin theorems (in the product of two planes or two discs) to study whether,

 given two "entire" functions F, G with no common zeroes, some UF+VG = 1 relation

 90 "Die exacte Begründung der Theorie des algebraischen Mannigfaltigkeiten in л-dimensionalen
 Räumen kann nur mit Hilfsmitteln der Idealtheorie geschehen, weil schon die Definition einer algebraischen

 Manigfaltigkeit unmittelbar auf Polynomideale führt." (van der Waerden 1927, p. 183)

 " The only way to reach the greater ease and (at the same time) greater generality which the theory we
 are presenting - a theory which was first vividly expounded by E. Noether (Math. Ann. 99) - enjoys when
 compared to older theories, is to arithmeticise completely all concepts and all operations."; " Die größere
 Einfachheit und zugleich größere Allgemeineheit der vorliegenden, stark an E. Noether (Math. Ann. 99,
 s.o.) anlehnenden Theorie gegenüber den älteren Theorien konnte nur erreicht werden durch äußereste
 Arithmetisierung aller Begriffe und Operationen ." (van der Waerden 1927, p. 185).

 92 "In der Eliminationstheorie der konvergenten Potenzreihen mehrerer komplexen Veränderlichen werden

 die gemeinsamen Nullstellen eines Systems im Nullpunkt verschindender Potenzreihen (.. .) untersucht. Das
 Hauptergebnis der Theorie ist das folgende Theorem von Weierstrass (Weierstrass' preparation theorem)
 (...). Die bisherige Beweise dieses grundlegenden Ergebnisse stützen sich vorwiegend auf Hilfsmittel
 aus der Funktionentheorie. (...) In dieser Arbeit wird gezeigt, dass eine sachgemässe Behandlung des

 Eliminationsproblems bis zu der algebraischen Darstellungen (2) und (3) der Gebilde nur formale Methoden,
 also keine funktionentheoretischen Hilfsmittel benötigt. Als solche Methode erweisen sich die allgemeine

 Idealtheorie und die allgemeine Körpertheorie." (Rückert 1933, pp. 259-260)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44 R. Chorlay

 could be proved.93 The analogy, again, was one of questions rather than methods, and

 the end of Cartan's introduction stressed this point:

 (...) can a theory of entire curves be fruitful? Will it be possible to approach it
 in some other way, more algebraic (so to speak) than transcendental (as in this

 work)? Will this theory, on the contrary, deal with but general points; the latter,

 however interesting they may be, are more often than not of no help when it
 comes to solving a specific problem.94

 The outlook would be brighter in 1940, and the research programme much wider

 (only plane curves had been considered in 1931). But the new theory would still be

 based on transcendental methods, and Cartan's "global theory of ideal of holomorphic
 functions" would be nothing like the purely algebraic Dedekind- Weber theory of
 algebraic curves.

 It may be that Cartan's new theory imported from modern algebra little more than

 definitions; also, that Cartan had always been aware of strong analogies between

 standard questions in the theory of polynomials and important questions in complex
 analysis. It does not mean, however, that nothing significant changed in 1940, or that

 the model of modern algebra played but a cosmetic part. The 1940-1944 theory is not

 algebraic (not even " 'en quelque sorte algébrique "), but it displays a structural practice

 for which modern algebra - among others - provided a model; a practice resulting in

 papers which look nothing like what Cartan had written prior to 1940.

 Let us give an overview some of the elements that make up this practice, while

 paying special heed to the use of problems. First, the use of Cousin problems changes.
 In the 1930s, we identified two different uses: a direct use, in which Cousin I, Cousin

 II and "Poincaré" were proved to hold for ever more general domains; an indirect use,
 in which "Cousin" and "Poincaré" were treated as properties whose interactions with

 other relevant properties contributed to the charting the fast-growing world of domain-

 types being investigated in the theory of functions of several complex variables. None

 of these uses lies at the heart of Cartan's 1 940-1 944 papers, although direct results may
 appear among the outcomes. Rather, the Cousin problems have their specific content

 hollowed out so that a general form may appear. Two general forms actually: first, the
 notion of "Cousin data" - which appeared in Poincaré and Cousin's ekthesis - would

 serve as a model to define the notion of coherent ideal of holomorphic functions, a

 new and abstract structure ; second, the Cousin problems are samples 95 of the problem
 form " passerde données locales à une existence globale " (Cartan 1944, p. 152). The
 other problems that Cartan's research programme covers are not "generalised" Cousin

 93 In this case, symbol = denotes the fact that the equality holds at every point of the domain, not congruence !

 94 "(...) une théorie des courbes entières peut-elle être féconde? Pourra-t-on l'aborder par une autre voie
 en quelque sorte algébrique, et non transcendante comme dans ce travail? Restera-t-elle au contraire dans

 des généralités qui, pour intéressantes qu'elles soient, ne sont souvent d'aucun secours lorsqu'il s'agit de
 résoudre en particulier un problème précis?" (Cartan 1931, p. 25)

 95 The word "sample" is here used in the (somewhat) technical meaning it has in Goodman's Languages
 of Art : an object is exhibited as a sample of a property is it both has and denotes this property (Goodman
 1976, p. 53).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 problems, at least not direct generalisations; yet, they are problems which share this
 form.

 From Problems to Structures 45

 A second aspect of this structural practice lies in the interlacing of several types
 of problem; to be precise, what we are discussing here is problem functions rather

 than problem types. There are problems which exhibit the general Cousin form, which
 Cartan describes as those for which he engaged in the study of ideals of holomor-

 phic functions: representation of zero-loci in any codimension as loci of zeroes for
 finite families of globally defined functions; prolongation of holomorphic functions

 defined over such a locus to globally defined functions (on a polycylinder, for instance).

 We shall call these problems target problems , as opposed to template problems such
 as Cousin II. In the 1944 paper, these target problems are those that are stated in
 the introduction, and for which some important results are proved at the very end

 of the paper. A significantly longer list of target problems would be presented in
 1950, in Cartan's Problèmes globaux en théorie des fonctions analytiques de plusieurs

 variables complexes (Cartan 1950b). The bulk of the 1944 paper, however, is devoted

 to the careful stating and interconnecting of a web of inner problem , which appear
 when the new abstract structure starts to be investigated as such. The main problems

 of this type, as we saw earlier, are problems of coherence for various types of modules
 on the one hand; and, on the other hand, problems of "associated modules": what

 can you say about a module defined over a given domain from the modules it gen-
 erates over sub-domains, be they points, open subdomains or compact polycylinders.

 The emergence of these inner problems constitutes an element that is specific to the
 structural transition: nothing of the kind had been encountered in the long-term his-

 tory of the Cousin problems. They go hand in hand with the definition of a new and
 abstract structure; also with the coining of a wealth of new terms. The latter element

 of practice is very well documented by the 1944 paper, which ends with an index of
 26 terms, most of which were coined by Cartan: donnée de Cousin , idéal de fonctions

 holomorphes , idéal ponctuel , système cohérent d'idéaux (ou de modules) ponctuels ,
 module associé à un module, module parfait , module pur, module dérivable, module

 faiblement dé rivable ... (Cartan 1944, p. 197).

 5 The Cousin problems in the setting of sheaf theory

 The years from 1945 to 1953 can be divided into two clearly distinct periods, as
 far as the interactions between Cousin-like problems and the development of sheaf

 theory are concerned. Year 1951 can serve as dividing line, as two important texts
 indicate: the 1950-51 volume of talks given at the Cartan topology seminar at the

 Ecole Normal Supérieure , in which an initial standard form is given to sheaf theory;
 then Cartan's 1 950 Idéaux et modules de fonctions analytiques de variables complexes

 (Cartan 1950a), which we mentioned earlier. In the first document, many elements that

 had emerged in the 1945-1951 period are combined into a new major cohomology

 theory in topology ; in the second text, several important questions left pending in the

 1944 paper are answered. But in 1951, the two contexts were still clearly distinct; in
 1951, topological sheaf cohomology played no part in the furthering of the " théorie

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 46 R. Chorlay

 globale des idéaux de fonctions holomorphes ". The two contexts merged in 1952, and

 this resulted in a second complete change of setting for the Cousin problems.

 In this part we shall change the form of our narrative, for at least three reasons.

 The first and obvious one is that we temporarily have to do without the guiding thread
 of the Cousin problems, since we claim the emergence of sheaf cohomology in the
 1945-1950 period is independent of them. The second reason is that we feel the
 standard focus on Leray 's work leaves out of the picture a great wealth of elements

 that played a significant part in the formulation of the 1950 sheaf cohomology theory:
 it may be that important ideas (and the term "faisceau") came from Leray, and that

 Cartan's rewriting, simplifying and generalising of Leray 's concepts provided the core

 elements of the new theory; but core elements are not always all there is to it, and the

 1945-1950 period is one of intense exchanges of ideas, particularly among Bourbaki

 members. The 1950 sheaf concept emerged from a period of the design of structures in

 which concepts, techniques, formulations, theorems, tool-boxes and mottoes quickly
 passed from one field to another. Hence we opted for a non-linear narrative, in which

 a variety of elements will be commented upon, all of which played more or less direct

 parts in the emergence of sheaf cohomology; a bundle of ideas, so to speak. The third

 reason for our change of pace lies in the fact that for many of the points we will be
 touching upon, historical work is already available, be it on the general history of
 algebraic topology, on the development of cohomological methods in topology and

 group theory, on the first notions of category theory, or on the Bourbaki group; as
 far as Bourbaki is concerned, it should be stressed that the emphasis is usually laid
 on Bourbaki as collective author of the Elements de mathématiques rather than on
 Bourbaki as a connected group of researchers.

 5.1 "Modern methods" in topology

 In 1 945, Cartan published a paper which marked the beginning of the topological phase

 of his work. The very title is interesting: Méthodes modernes en topologie algébrique

 (Cartan 1945): modern methods, not recent developments. This short paper presents no

 new results, but spells out in a clear and pedagogical style some notions and techniques
 which, for Cartan, show how topology should be done. The notions and techniques
 would soon be part and parcel of the topology toolbox on the base of which sheaf
 cohomology would be designed.

 First, there are new methods for the definition of homology (or, rather, cohomology)

 groups.96 The first part of Cartan's 1945 paper directly echoes Steenrod's 1936 paper
 Universal homology groups (Steenrod 1936), which, in turn, relied on Čech 1933

 Théorie générale de Vhomologie dans un espace quelconque (Čech 1933). Steenrod

 made it clear that, in order to obtain all possible homological invariants for topological
 spaces, it was not necessary to consider all possible groups as coefficient groups. If
 the space can be described as a complex, the additive group of integers is universal,

 96 The clear distinction between homology and cohomology emerged in the 1940s, and Cartan relied on

 1930s papers in which everything is called homology. When directly commenting on such a paper, we will
 stick to the author's vocabulary.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 47

 meaning all homological information can be derived from it; Steenrod shows that

 for locally compact topological spaces, the multiplicative group T of complex num-
 bers of modulo 1 is universal. For these general topological spaces, Steenrod used the
 (co)homology groups introduced by Čech. Starting from Alexandrov's notion of nerve

 of an open covering as bridge-building device between general topology and combi-

 natorial topology, Čech defined homology and relative homology groups for compact
 topological spaces by considering cycles that remain stable through chains of projec-

 tions associated with covering refinements. Steenrod made it slightly more formal by

 introducing " mapping systems and homomorphism systems " (Steenrod 1936, p. 662).
 In 1945, Cartan expounded Steenroďs 1936 theory for the homology of compact
 spaces, and used the following trick for locally compact spaces: the homology groups
 ГГ(Е) of space E are defined as relative homology groups, the main space being the
 Alexandrov compactification of E and the subspace being the point at infinity. What

 struck Cartan as specially "modern" in these methods is the fact that they deal directly
 with topological spaces and open coverings, and do not rely on cellular decomposi-
 tions and combinatorial structures; he stressed this feature on several occasions, for

 instance: "it should be noted that our proof (...) never relies on any considerations of

 triangulation or paving".97

 Another modern feature is that all results derive from the one and only core theorem

 ("théorème fondamental"), which deals with a long exact sequence of groups. Namely,

 if E is a locally compact space, F a closed subspace, and U = E - F,

 Thus we have a cascade of so-called canonical representations, from each group

 in the sequence

 . . .rr(F), ГГ(Е), rr(U), Г1"-1 (F), Гг_|(Е), Гг-1 (U), . . .

 to the next; and these representations have the following fundamental property:

 Theorem 5.1 (fundamental theorem) If Г^Гг, Г3 denote any three consecutive
 groups in the latter sequence, <p denoting the canonical representation from Г i to
 Г2, and '¡s the canonical representation from Г 2 to Г3, the composite representation

 y¡fO(p is null. Moreover, when the base group g is T, the subgroup of Г2 made up of

 the elements whose image by x// is null is exactly the image <р(Г i).98

 It is clear that our use of the term "exact sequence" was anachronistic; Cartan's

 formulation is exactly the same as that of Hurewicz and Steenrod ( 1 94 1 ) or Ehresmann

 and Feldbau ( 1 94 1 ), when dealing with the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for

 97 "on remarquera que notre démonstration (...) ne fait à aucun moment intervenir de considérations de
 triangulation ou de pavage" (Cartan 1945, p. 13)

 98 "On a ainsi une cascade de représentations, dites canoniques, de chacun des groupes de la suite . . .
 rr(F), ГГ(Е), rr(U), rr-1(F), Г1"-1 (E), rr-1(U), . . . dans le suivant; et ces représentations jouissent de
 la propriété fondamentale suivante: Théorème 5.1 (Théorème fondamental). Г j , Г2, Г3 désignant trois
 groupes consécutifs quelconques de la suite précédente, (p désignant la représentation canonique de Г i
 dans Г2, et '¡/ la représentation canonique de Г2 dans Г3, la représentation composée ýo(p est nulle. En
 outre, lorsque le groupe de base g est T, le sous-groupe de Г2 formé des éléments dont l'image par 'fr est
 nulle, est précisément l'image ^(Г i )." (Cartan 1945, p. 6)

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 fibre-bundles. The goal of Cartan's paper is to show how a great wealth of topological

 results can be established in a uniform and straightforward way by applying this one
 fundamental theorem to different situations.

 48 R. Chorlay

 After a proof of the theorem of invariance of domain, Cartan gives another example

 which may strike a bell for us. He shows how the orientation problem for connected

 topological manifolds of dimension n is to be laid out and tackled. As to the laying
 out

 An /г-dimensional open ball Bn is an «-dimensional manifold. By definition,

 to orient Bn is to pick one of the two isomorphisms from the group Г£(ВП) to
 the base group T. An orientation on Bn induces an orientation on every open
 subset U of Bn which is homeomorphic to Bn (...). By definition, to orient an

 n-dimensional manifold E is to orient all subsets of E which are homeomorphic
 to Bn, so that if U and V are to such subsets, with U С V, the orientation of U is

 induced by that of V."

 After setting out the concepts of open covering and induced orientation on subdo-

 mains, Cartan used the fundamental theorem to study the patching-up of structures
 along the "£/ П V, U, V, U U V" scheme:

 Theorem 8.2 Let E be a locally compact , union of two open subsets U', and Ui,
 with intersection V. The subgroup ГТ(Е) made up of the elements whose traces in

 rr(ř/i) and Vх (Ui) are null is isomorphic to the quotient of Гг +1 (V) by the subgroup
 generated by the traces (in ГГ+1(У)) of elements ofrr+l(U') and Гг+,(^2)100

 The final result is, of course, that Г" is isomorphic to Z is E is orientable, to Z/2Z

 if it is not. Again, this result is by no means a breakthrough in topology; the purpose

 was to show that the question of orientation can be laid out in terms of open coverings,

 and tackled algebraically with a long exact sequence of groups. Although this laying
 out clearly echoes what Cartan did in the theory of complex functions, no connection
 would explicitly be made until 1951/52.

 The role of Leray is rather well known, and we refer the reader to Houzel ( 1 990) and

 Houzel ( 1 998) for detailed analyses on the cohomological aspects. We will concentrate
 on a few elements which would play a direct part in Cartan's 1950 creation of sheaf

 cohomology, thus paying little attention to Leray's striking results or to the evolution
 of his ideas in the 1945-1950 period.

 To sum things up, Leray developed his notion of " faisceau " in order to get a long

 exact cohomology sequence associated with a continuous map between topological

 99 "Une boule ouverte Bn de dimension n est une variété de dimension n. Par définition, orienter Bn, c'est

 choisir l'un des deux isomorphismes du groupe Гу(Вп) sur le groupe de base T. Une orientation de Bn
 induit une orientation pour tout sous-ensemble ouvert U de Bn homéomorphe à Bn(. . .). Par définition,

 orienter une variété E de dimension n, c'est orienter chacun des sous-ensembles de E homéomorphe à Bn,
 de manière que si U et V sont deux tels sous-ensembles satisfaisant à U С V, l'orientation de U soit induite
 par celle de V." (Cartan 1945, p. 9)

 100 "jhéorème 8.2. Soit E localement compact, réunion de deux sous-ensembles ouverts U) et U2,
 d'intersection V. Le sous-groupe ГГ(Е) formé des éléments dont la trace dans rr(Ui) et la trace dans
 rr(U2) sont nulles, est isomorphe au quotient de Гг+1 (V) par le sous-groupe engendré par les traces (dans
 rr+1 (V)) des éléments de Гг+| (Uj ) et de Гг+1 (U2)." (Cartan 1945, p. 10)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 49

 spaces 7Г : E - > E', at least when the map is a fibration. He drew on two tools developed

 by Steenrod in the early 1940s, namely the long exact homotopy sequence associated
 with a fibre bundle (Hurewicz and Steenrod 1941), and the notion of cohomology
 with local coefficients (Steenrod 1943). The latter had been introduced in Steenrod's

 1942 Topological Methods for the Construction of Tensor Functions (Steenrod 1942),

 in which Steenrod defined the general notion of a tensor bundle,101 then studied the

 existence problem for continuous sections in terms of characteristic classes (as Stiefel

 (1935) and Whitney (1935) had done before).102 The problem is that, to define these
 characteristic classes associated with a fibre bundle, the standard (co)homology theo-

 ries would not usually do. The reason is the following: the chains are defined as formal

 combinations of simplices with coefficients in the homotopy groups of the fibres. On

 a simplex, the bundle is trivial so a generic fibre can be used, but there is no natural

 way to identify the fibres throughout the whole base manifold. Thus the coefficients

 that appear in the cycle sums belong to different groups; these groups are isomorphic,
 since all fibres are homeomorphic, but not naturally isomorphic, so this homology

 theory does not boil down to the standard one, in which there is only one group of
 coefficients (Steenrod 1942, p. 122). Fortunately, there is a natural group morphism

 between the group associated with a simplex and those associated with its edges,

 which is enough to define a boundary operator between chain groups. One year later,

 Steenrod would present a more general theory of this type of cohomology theories, in

 his paper on Homology with local coefficients (Steenrod 1943). The starting point is
 a direct generalisation of the 1942 particular case:

 We shall say that we have a system of local groups (rings) in the space R if (1)

 for each point jc, there is given a group (ring) Gx , (2) for each class of paths

 axy , there is a given group (ring) isomorphism Gx -> Gy (denoted by axy ),
 and (3) the result of the isomorphism axy followed by ßxy is the isomorphism

 corresponding to the path axyßxy. (Steenrod 1943, p. 61 1)

 Leray's 1946 notion oï 'faisceau" relies on Steenrod's ideas from 1942 and 1943,

 although homotopy classes of paths play no part in his version of homology with local

 coefficients. Modules (or rings) are attached not only to points, but to any closed subset
 as well:

 A sheaf of modules (or rings) on a topological space will be defined by the

 following data: Io to each closed subset F of points of E, a module (or ring) Bp
 is associated, which is null when F is empty ; 2° to each couple of closed subsets

 of points of E, say f and F, such that f С F, a homomorphism from Bp to Bf is
 associated, which transforms an element bF of Bf in its intersection bp.f with f;
 if f' С f С F and if bp € BF, we must have (bF.f).f' = bp.f'.103

 As well as that of subbundle of a vector fibre-bundle, as in the case of unit-sphere bundles on a

 riemannian manifold.

 102 De Rham had also done it in his dissertation, but in a particular case.

 103 «un faisceau de modules (ou d'anneaux) sera défini sur un espace topologique E par les données que

 voici: Io à chaque ensemble fermé F de points de E est associé un module (ou un anneau) Bp, qui est
 nul quand F est vide; 2° à chaque couple d'ensembles fermés, f et F, de points de E, tels que f С F, est associé

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 50 R. Chorlay

 A "faisceau" is called normal if, to put it anachronistically, the module associated

 with a given closed set is the direct limit of those associated with its closed neigh-
 bourhoods. Chains are defined à la Steenrod, and a border operator can be derived
 from the " intersection " morphisms. The aim is to define (co)homological invariants

 for a map тс: E -» E' and not only for spaces E and E'. For any integer /?, a " p-ième
 faisceau ďhomologie " can be defined on E', by associating with every closed subset
 F' the (standard) p- th homology group of 7r_1(F') (Leray 1946, p. 1366). The q-th
 homology of E' groups with coefficients in that p-th faisceau make up the (p, <7)-th
 cohomology group of map n. Needless to say this is also the starting point of the
 theory of spectral sequences.

 A slightly altered theory appeared in print in the proceedings of a 1947 confer-

 ence on algebraic topology (Leray 1949). 104 It includes a new element that would

 also play a key role for Cartan, namely fine resolutions.105 To define more general

 sheaf cohomologies than those he associated with continuous maps, Leray starts from
 the same notion of faisceau , usually of complexes of modules. After the definition

 of the " support " S of a complex automorphism, the notion of fine complex is intro-
 duced:

 We shall say that К is fine when, given a finite open covering of X, |Ja Va =
 X(. . .), maps Àx from К to itself can be found, such that

 ka(k - к') = как - как'' как = к ; %)cV„.1116

 a

 Sheaves of module complexes with a differential (i.e. square-null) operator are

 called differential modules, and the ring cohomology is defined from the tensor product
 О with a " couverture fine":

 Definition.- Given a locally compact space X, and В a differential sheaf on X,
 we shall call the homology ring of X relative to В (denoted by H (XOB)), the
 ring which is defined up to isomorphism by H (XOB), where X denotes a fine
 covering of X. 107

 footnote 103 continued

 un homomorphisme de Bp dans Bf , qui transforme un élément bp de Bp en son intersection bp.f par f; si
 f С f С F et si bp € Bp, on doit avoir (bp.fj.f' = bp.ť." (Leray 1946, p. 1366)

 104 As Leray make it clear in the introduction, the 1949 paper differs significantly from the 1947 talk, due
 to work with Cartan between 1947 and 1949.

 105 The term " resolutions" is anachronistic.

 106 "Nous dirons que К est fin quand, étant donné un recouvrement fini, ouvert de X, (J<* Va = X(. . .)
 on peut trouver des applications A.x de К en lui-même, telles que Xa(k - k') = A.ak - A.ak'; kak =
 *; S(ka) С VV" (Leray 1949, p. 73)

 107 "Définition. Etant donné un espace localement compact X et un faisceau différentiel В sur X, nous
 nommerons anneau ďhomologie de X relatif à В et nous noterons H (XOB) l'anneau, défini à une
 isomorphic près, par H (XOB) où X désigne une couverture fine de X." (Leray 1949, p. 77)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 5 1

 5.2 The tool and the theme: beyond topology

 There is no denying that the new cohomological techniques in topology - Čech coho-
 mology, long exact sequences, local coefficients - play a major part in the making of
 Cartan's 1950 sheaf concept: they provide the basic tools and the theoretical context.

 Yet, it can be shown that fields other than topology, and techniques other than cohomol-

 ogy also play a part. Other specific tools and specific ways of laying out and tackling
 problems circulated in the Bourbaki milieu and across disciplinary boundaries. We
 should like to briefly present the case of one of these tools - namely partitions of

 unity - and the way it helped shape the laying out of problems in very different fields,

 with a particular emphasis on functional analysis.

 To the best of our knowledge, 108 the first paper devoted to the introduction of

 smooth partitions of unity as a new tool in differential geometry is Bochner's 1937
 Remark on a theorem of Green (Bochner 1937). The goal of this very short paper is
 not to prove any new results. Rather, Bochner criticises the standard proof of a well-

 known theorem - a particular case of our Stokes formula (the Green formula) - and
 presents a more elegant proof based on a new trick. The standard proof, Bochner
 writes, "requires a cellular subdivision of R into sufficiently small subregions whose

 boundary is sufficiently smooth, an application of the local theorem to each subregion,

 and finally a justification of the mutual cancellation of the boundary terms arising from

 the artificial cellular partition" (Bochner 1937, p. 334). The introduction of an auxiliary

 family of function (the supports of which are compatible with a well-behaved open
 covering) helps devise a less awkward proof. Bochner did not coin a name for this
 auxiliary set of functions, and actually, a similar trick was used by Whitney in his

 1936 paper on Differentiable Manifolds (Whitney 1936, p. 67).

 It seems that Bourbaki members were not aware of Bochner's handy (and smooth)

 functions; they had their own brand, however. Topological partitions of unity had
 been introduced in a very different context by Dieudonné, in a 1937 note Sur les
 fonctions numériques continues définies dans un produit de deux espaces compacts
 (Dieudonné 1937). As in Bochner's case - and to some extent, as in the case of Cartan's

 paper on new methods in algebraic topology - the goal was to give a better (more
 straightforward, more elegant) proof of a well-known theorem. When presenting the
 theory of integration on product spaces, Dieudonné wrote, one usually proves as a
 key lemma the fact that continuous functions on the product of two compact spaces
 can be uniformly approximated by product functions (i.e. f(x)g(y)). While the usual
 proof draws on Weierstrass' approximation theorem, Dieudonné's proof relies on a
 new Lemma:

 Lemma. Let E be a compact space, Ai , A2, . . An a finite number of open sets
 whose union is identical to E. One can find a finite number m of non-negative numerical

 This knowledge is partly based on Dieudonné's account (Dieudonné 1981, p. 698).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 functions Ak(jc), defined and continuous in E, such that l(z ) > 0 is contained in

 one of the A¡ sets (/ = 1,2 , . . ., л ; fc = 1,2,..., m), and that, identically,

 52 R. Chorlay

 ™ 109

 = 1.

 k= 1

 These functions were used by Weil in his 1940 book L'intégration dans les groupes

 topologiques (Weil 1940, p. 37). They were quickly introduced by other Bourbaki
 members in several important textbooks, and thus become standard elements in the
 topology/geometry toolbox. A generalised version, based on Urysohn's lemma in
 normal topological spaces, is presented in Bourbaki's Topologie générale (Bourbaki

 1948, p. 66); the term " partition continue de l'unité " is used in this publication,
 but it had already appeared in print in Chevalley 's 1946 book on the Theory of Lie

 groups (Chevalley 1946). As is well known, this book is not merely a monograph on
 Lie groups. Lie groups are only introduced after a very general study of two other

 structures, namely topological groups and differentiable manifolds, and Chevalley's

 presentation of differentiable manifolds was to set the model that has most usually

 been followed since. He used partitions of unity to define the integration of continuous

 functions on a smooth, compact, oriented manifold (Chevalley 1 946, p. 1 6 1 ). Partitions

 of unity also play an important part in De Rham's Variétés différentiables (de Rham
 1955), a part on which De Rham110 laid the emphasis in the introduction to the

 book (de Rham 1955, v). Apparently, he was then unaware of Bochner's quick and
 direct construction of smooth partitions of the unity, since he first used Dieudonné's

 continuous partitions, then smoothed them out by convolution with mollifiers. De

 Rham had been using partitions of the unity for several years, and Hermann Weyl had

 probably heard of them from him, in the 1 950 Princeton seminar on harmonic integrals

 that De Rham and Kodaira organised under Weyl and Siegel's supervision. Weyl uses
 " Dieudonnésche Faktoren " in the third edition of his Idee der Riemann 'sehen Fläche

 (Weyl 1955, p. 65), and this is part of the overall revamping of the topological toolbox:

 out with cellular decompositions and combinatorial topology, in with open coverings
 and algebraic topology.

 Bourbakian partitions of unity play a role beyond topology and geometry. For
 instance, they are also core elements in Laurent Schwartz's (1951) book, the Théorie

 des distributions , although no such things were to be found in the first papers on
 distributions (1946). In 1951, partitions of unity were closely associated with the
 introduction of a theme which, again, was absent in the early papers, namely the
 theme of "local and global"; it could be argued that, at least in this case, the tool

 and the theme are the two sides of the same coin. In order for local/global to play

 109 "Lemme.- Soit E un espace compact, Aj, A2, . . An un nombre fini d'ensembles ouverts dont la

 réunion est identique à E. On peut trouver un nombre fini m de fonctions numériques non négatives (x)

 définies et continues dans E, telles que l'ensemble 1 (z) > 0 soit contenu dans un des ensembles A, (/ =

 2

 Ô Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 110 Of course, De Rahm was not a member of Bourbaki in the strict sense, but the connections with Bourbaki

 members are just too numerous to be listed: friendship (and rivalry) with Henri Cartan, exchanges of ideas
 on analysis on manifolds with Weil (1947), early use of Schwartz's notion of distribution etc.

 From Problems to Structures 53

 an structural role in his theory of distribution, Schwartz first defines the support of a

 distribution, a notion which is not altogether straightforward, since distributions are
 not functions defined on Rn domains (in which case the notion of locus of zeroes

 is straightforward) but functionals on spaces of real-valued functions defined in R"
 domains:

 A distribution T is said to be null in a open set Q, of R" if T (<^>) = 0 whenever

 (p e D has its support in Q. Two distributions T' , T2 are said to be equal in Q if
 Ti - T2 is null in Q. This definition allows for a local viewpoint on distributions,

 like the one we have on functions or measures; we will be able to write equalities

 between distributions for an open set £2 of R", without prejudging in the least
 what holds in Rn as a whole.1 1 1

 Once this definition allows for a "local viewpoint" on distributions, partitions

 of unity can be used to prove the fundamental patching-up principle (" principe du
 "recollement des morceaux ""):

 "Patching-up" principle.- Theorem IV. Let {Q¡} be a (finite or infinite) family

 of open sets, whose union in £2; moreover, let {7/} be a family of distributions
 depending on the same family I of indices. Distribution T¡ is defined on open

 set it is furthermore assumed that, if Q' and Qj have non-empty intersection,

 Tj and Tj coincide on this intersection. Then there exists one and only one
 distribution, T, defined in £2, which coincides with T¡ in every open set Q'. 1,2

 The local/global theme is a leitmotiv throughout the whole book: in the introduction

 to the third chapter, Schwartz writes "This chapter will be devoted to the study of the

 convergence of distributions on the one hand; to their local and global structure, on
 the other hand".113 It is shown, for instance, that every distribution locally coincides

 with that associated with a continuous function, and an example shows that it need not

 be globally so (Schwartz 1951, p. 83). For several theorems, it is clearly stressed that

 they exhibit the local to global form, for instance: "If division by H is locally possible,

 it is globally possible".114

 The same link between the tool (partitions of unity) and the theme (local/global

 conceptual tension) was clear in Chevalley 's Theory of Lie groups. As Chevalleyclearly

 1 1 1 "On dit qu'une distribution T est nulle dans un ensemble ouvert £2 de Rn si T(<p) = 0 toutes les fois que
 (pe Da son support contenu dans Œ. Deux distributions Tj , T2 sont dites égales dans Q si T' - T2 est nulle
 dans Q. Cette définition permet de considérer les distributions, comme les mesures ou les fonctions, d'un

 point de vue local; on pourra écrire des égalités entre distributions pour un ouvert Q de Rn, sans préjuger
 en rien de ce qui se passe dans l'espace Rn entier." (Schwartz 1951, p. 25)

 112 "prjncipe (ju «recollement des morceaux».- Théorème IV. Soit {fìj} une famille finie ou infinie
 d'ouverts, de réunion Œ; soit d'autre part {T¡ } une famille de distributions dépendant du même ensem-

 ble d'indices I. La distribution T¡ est définie dans l'ouvert £2¡; on suppose de plus que, si £2¡ et Qj ont une

 intersection non vide, T¡ et Tj coïncident dans cette intersection. Alors il existe une distribution et une seule,
 T, définie dans Q, qui coïncide avec T¡ dans chaque ouvert £2¡." (Schwartz 1951, p. 26)

 ^ "Ce chapitre va d'une part étudier la convergence des distributions, d'autre part étudier leur structure
 locale et globale" (Schwartz 1951, p. 65)

 114 ja ¿^vision par H est possible localement, elle est possible globalement" (Schwartz 1951, p. 124).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 54 R. Chorlay

 puts in the introduction, his goal is to make up for the outrageous lack of a basic but

 thorough exposition of the theory of differentiable manifolds and Lie groups from the
 global viewpoint:

 Expository books on the theory of Lie groups generally confine themselves to

 the local aspect of the theory. This limitation was probably necessary as long as

 general topology was not yet sufficiently well elaborated to provide a solid base

 for a theory in the large. These days have now passed, and we have thought that

 it would be useful to have a systematic treatment of the theory from the global
 viewpoint. (Chevalley 1946, vii)

 As far as sheaf cohomology is concerned, fine resolutions would lose their central

 role in the 1950s, with the introduction of more general notions such as those of
 projective and injective resolutions, in a new, category-theoretic framework. Yet, in

 the 1 945- 1 950 period, partitions of unity played an important part in the settings which

 Bourbaki members devised for both classical theories (as in Chevalley 's Theory of Lie
 Groups) and brand new ones (as in Schwartz's theory of distributions). They may
 look like a mere handy trick (and, in the case of sheaf cohomology, a disposable one),

 but a trick of somewhat general and architectural value: general in so far as they

 are not constrained by specific disciplinary boundaries; architectural in so far as they

 go hand in hand with a conceptual rewriting that centred on the local-global tension.

 When, in 1946, Leray started to develop his idea of a long cohomology exact sequence
 associated with a fibre map, "local and global" was not clearly part of the research
 programme; it would be in 1949.

 In the next two paragraphs, we will present Cartan's 1950/5 1 theory of sheaf coho-

 mology, and stress the role of two neighbouring theories in Cartan's streamlining of
 Leray's ideas: fibre-bundle theory and group cohomology.

 5.3 The fibre-bundle model

 The definition of sheaves that Cartan presented in his 1 950/5 1 topology seminar differs

 significantly from that of system of local coefficients (Steenrod) and from Leray's
 notion of faisceaux. The presentation draws on notions of base space, total space,
 projection and sections which are clearly modelled after the presentation of fibre-
 bundles. The total space is first introduced:

 Definition Let К be a commutative ring with unit element (...). A sheaf of K-modules

 on a (regular) topological space X is a set F, endowed with a map p (called the "pro-
 jection") from F to X, and with the two following structures:

 ( 1 ) for each point x € X, the inverse image p~ 1 (x) = Fx is endowed with a K-module

 (2) F is endowed with a topological structural (usually not Hausdorff) satisfying

 these two conditions: (a) the laws of composition of F (not everywhere defined)
 defined by the K-module structures are continuous: ( ß ) projection p is a local

 structure;

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 55

 homeomorphism (i.e. every element of F has an open neighbourhood which p

 maps bi-univocally and bi -continuously on an open subset of X).115

 This definition via a total space (< espace étalé) had been devised by Lazard in
 1949/50 (Cartan 50/5 la: 1). Continuous sections are then defined, T(F, X) denoting

 the K-module of sections of sheaf F over open subset X of base space X. Since modules
 are modules of functions, the definition of the restriction morphism Г (F, Y) Г (F, X)

 (if X с Y) is straightforward; it is noted that, for any point x of X, the Fx module can

 be identified with the direct limit of the T(F, X) when X goes through the directed set

 of open neighbourhoods of x. This, in turn, gives a method of construction of sheaves:

 Reciprocally: let us assume that, to each open set X of a fundamental system of
 space X, a module Fx is attached, and, to each couple (X,Y) of open sets such
 that Y D X (granted Fy and Fx are defined), a homomorphism fxy from Fy to
 Fx is associated in such a way that, if X с Y с Z, homomorphism fxz is the

 composite fxyfyz- These data define a sheaf F as follows: to each point x € X,
 let us consider the module Fx, inductive limit of the Fx relative to the open sets

 containing x; on the union F of the Fx a structure of sheaf is defined, first by

 defining map p which, to an element u of F, associates the point x such that u
 € Fx, then by taking as a system of open sets V(X,x) of the topology of F the
 following sets: arbitrarily take an open set X с X such that Fx is defined, an
 element v € Fx, and the set V(X,x) of images of v in all the Fx modules relative

 to the points x of X. 1 16

 Although a general fibre-bundle structure had been introduced by Seifert and
 Threlfall (Seifert 1933), the terms "base space" and "total space" were introduced

 by Whitney in his 1935 definition of sphere-spaces (Whitney 1935); Whitney had also

 laid emphasis on the notion of sections (which he called projections!) and on the prob-

 lem of global prolongation of local sections. Later presentations of what fibre-bundles
 are (and are about), such as that of Steenrod ( 1 942) or Ehresmann and Feldbau ( 1 94 1 ),

 115 "Définition: Soit К un anneau commutatif à élément unité (...)• Un faisceau de K-modules sur un

 espace topologique (régulier) X est un ensemble F, muni d'une application p (dite «projection») de F sur
 X et des 2 structures suivantes:

 (1) pour chaque point x G X, l'image réciproque p-1 (x) = Fx est munie d'une structure de K-module;
 (2) F est muni d'une structure topologique (en général non séparée) satisfaisant aux deux conditions:

 (a) les lois de compositions de F (non partout définies) définies par les structures de K-module des
 Fx sont continues; ( ß ) la projection p est un homéomorphisme local (i.e. tout élément de F possède

 un voisinage ouvert que p applique biunivoquement et bicontinûment sur un ouvert de X)." (Cartan
 1950-5 la, 1)

 46 "Réciproquement: supposons que l'on ait attaché, à chaque ouvert X d'un système fondamental de
 l'espace X, un module Fx, et, à chaque couple (X,Y) d'ouverts tels que Y D X et que Fy et Fx soient
 définis un homomorphisme fxy de Fy dans Fx, et cela de manière que, si X С Y С Z rhomomorphisme
 fxz soit le composé fxY^YZ- Ces données définissent un faisceau F comme suit: pour chaque point x G X,
 on considère le module Fx, limite inductive des Fx relatifs aux ouverts X contenant x; sur la réunion F

 des Fx, on définit une structure de faisceau, d'abord en définissant l'application p qui, à un élément u de
 F, associe le point x tel que u G Fx, puis en prenant comme système d'ouverts V(X,v) de la topologie
 de F les ensembles suivants: on prend arbitrairement un ouvert X С X tel que Fx soit défini, un élément

 v G Fx, et l'ensemble V(X,v) des images de v dans tous les modules Fx relatifs aux points x G X." (Cartan
 1950-5 la, 3)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 also linked those three elements: (1) the definition of an abstract geometric structure
 involving a space over another space, (2) the fundamental tension between local117
 but not global triviality of the topological structure (product structure), and (3) the

 idea that the question of section prolongation is the right way to tackle fibre-bundle
 problems.

 56 R. Chorlay

 Steenrod added to that scheme a very clear analysis of how problems which were

 classically formulated in terms of magnitudes defined on a given space could be studied

 in terms of sections of a fibre-bundle. He used the example of tensors on a differentiable

 manifold: the standard presentation (as in Weyl's, Elie Cartan's and Schouten's works

 on connections in the early 1920s) was that tensors were magnitudes that could locally

 be written with explicit (extrinsic) formulae of some sort (in an arbitrary coordinate

 system); their intrinsic nature was warranted by the transformation laws according to
 which these formulae transformed under changes of local maps. Steenrod suggested
 a completely new setting: he first defined the set of point-tensors at a point of the

 manifold; he then showed that the set of all point tensors at all points of the manifold

 can be made into a new differentiable manifold, provided the classical transformation

 laws are read as patching-up rules; he eventually explained that this new manifold is
 the total space of a fibre-bundle over the first manifold, and that classical tensors are

 just sections of this fibre-bundle.118

 The same ideas (and several others) were presented in a more general setting in the
 1941-1943 series of note that Bourbaki-member Ehresmann and his student Feldbau

 published in the Comptes rendus de Г Académie des Sciences. Cartan's twofold pre-
 sentation of the sheaf structure is strictly modelled after Ehresmann's presentation of

 the fibre-bundle structure: he first defined fibre-bundles in terms of projection map,

 algebraic structure on the fibres p~x(x) (given by the action of a group) and locally
 trivial structure;119 the latter then presented a " méthode de construction d'un espace
 fibré" (Ehresmann 1941, p. 762) in which data over an open covering (U¡) of a base
 space are patched-up according to rules whose general form is expressed in terms

 of maps from U¡ П U} to the group.120 Ehresmann also introduced several ideas that
 have no equivalent in Steenrod's presentation. The most fundamental ones are those

 of principal fibre-bundle and associated fibre-bundles. They allow him to show that
 classical algebraic objects (group morphism, group representation) have fibre-bundle
 analogues.

 This quick overview of the early years of fibre-bundle theory show that the links

 between sheaves (1950/51 style) and fibre-bundles are more varied that one might
 think. It was clear from the outset that sheaf cohomology evolved from Steenrod's

 cohomology with local coefficients and that Leray aimed for a cohomological analogue

 of the long homotopy sequence associated with a fibre-bundle. But many aspects of
 the 1950/51 sheaf concept were also modelled after the fibre-bundle concept: twofold
 presentation (axiomatic description / standard mode of construction), construction of a

 1 17 In this context, "local" means "local on the base".

 118 Or of sub-fibre-bundles, such as, for instance, the bundle of non-singular quadratic forms when a
 pseudo-riemannian metrics is to be defined.

 1 19 This local triviality element is of course not retained in the definition of sheaves.

 120 The compatibility conditions over U¡ П í/j П Uk are stated (Ehresmann 1941, p. 762).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 57

 total space from local data, formulation of a single core problem (section prolongation).
 This does not mean, of course, that sheaves are instances of fibre-bundles, since the

 sheaf structure requires no local product structure. The fact that fibre-bundles are

 special kinds of sheaves is not clearly stated in the 1950/5 1 seminar, in which only the

 example of a trivial bundle (i.e. product space) is given in the list of sheaves examples
 (Cartan 1950-5 la, p. 3).

 The notion of fibre-bundle also plays a part in the history of Cousin problems in

 the 1945-1950 period, a part that is independent from the design of sheaf cohomology
 in topology. In his 1950 talk on Problèmes globaux dans théorie des fonctions de
 plusieurs variables complexes , Cartan presented the outline of his global theory of

 ideals of holomorpic functions. After expounding the Cousin II problem in this setting,

 he stressed that the new ideal-theoretic formulation of the problem fails to capture the

 original problem: it aims at a global ideal that generates the punctual principal ideals;
 to solve the Cousin problem, you need to find a single function that generates these
 ideals. He then gave a new, fibre-bundle theoretic formulation of Cousin II; В denotes

 a domain of holomorphy:

 A Cousin datum in В defines the following new topological space E : a point
 of E will be, by definition, a couple (z, /) made up of a point z of В and
 a generating element / of the principal ideal Iz attached to point z' we shall
 identify the couples (z, /) and (z, /') if z = z' and if the quotient ///' (which
 is holomorphic and Ф 0 at point z) equals one at z. Let the multiplicative group
 C* of non-null complex numbers operate on E. (...) In the parlance of modern
 topology, E is a principal fibre bundle with group C*, of base space B. The
 hypothesis according to which the ideals Iz form a coherent system expresses
 the fact that each fibre has a neighbourhood which is isomorphic to the product

 U X С* of an open set U of В by fibre C*; this enables us to define on E a

 structure of complex analytic variety.

 (...) One immediately reckons that a solution to the Cousin problem defines an

 analytic section of that fibre bundle. (...) Thus, for the Cousin problem to have
 a solution (...) our fibre bundle E has to be trivial;121

 This directly echoes Steenrod's construction of tensor-bundles, and draws on Ehres-

 mann's characterisation of the triviality of principal bundles by the existence of a global

 section. It also gives new insight into the topological nature of Cousin II (on domains

 121 "Une donnée de Cousin dans В définit un nouvel espace topologique E que voici: un point de E sera,

 par définition, un couple (z, f) formé d'un point z de В et d'un élément générateur / de l'idéal principal
 lz attaché au point z; on identifiera les couples (z, /) et ( z /') si z = z! et si le quotient ///' (qui est
 holomorphe et ф 0 au point z) est égal à un au point z. Faisons opérer, dans cet espace £, le groupe
 multiplicatif C* des nombres complexes ф 0. (...) Dans le langage de la topologie moderne, E est un
 espace fibré principal, de groupe C*, ayant В pour base. L'hypothèse selon laquelle les idéaux Iz forment
 un système cohérent exprime que chaque fibre possède un voisinage isomorphe au produit U x C* d'un
 ensemble ouvert U de В par la fibre C*; ceci permet de définir, sur E, une structure de variété analytique-
 complexe.
 (...) On voit aussitôt qu'une solution du problème de Cousin définit une section analytique de cet espace
 fibré.

 (...) Ainsi, pour que le problème de Cousin ait une solution (...) notre espace fibré E doit être trivial;"
 (Cartan 1950b, p. 161)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 58 R. Chorlay

 of holomorphy), a nature that Oka had clearly established. In fact, this reformulation

 of Cousin II in terms of principle bundle over an analytic manifold comes from André

 Weil, as Cartan acknowledged in the 1950 talk. For instance, Weil had expounded the
 algebraic geometry analogue in 1949, in a talk on Fibre-spaces in Algebraic Geom-
 etry (Weil 1949). In this context, he used the Zariski topology on an abstract alge-
 braic manifold to show that many standard questions in algebraic geometry can be
 restated as questions about fibre-bundles; the basic example is that of divisor classes

 and line-bundles. He also pointed to the fact that this new setting should help define

 new invariants in algebraic geometry, such as, for instance, the algebraic analogues of
 Stiefel-Whitney-Chern classes.

 5.4 Morphisms, exactness: the general framework of axiomatic (co)homology

 In Cartan's 1950/51 introductory seminar talk, the definition of a sheaf of K-modules

 on a topological space is followed by the definitions of a sub-sheaf and a quotient
 sheaf. The notion of sheaf homomorphism is then defined, and it is remarked that such

 a homomorphism induces a K-module homomorphism between modules of sections
 over an open subset X: "This defined T(F, X) as a functor of the sheaf F'122 The

 definitions of kernel-sheaf and image-sheaf associated with a sheaf homomorphism
 are then given, which allow for the definition of the sheaf-theoretic notion of an exact
 sequence, starting from a short exact sequence 0 -> F' -» F - ► F" 0,

 Given such an exact sequence, the sequence of associated homomorphisms

 0 -> T(F', X) -* T(F, X) r(F", X)

 is exact (that stems trivially from the definitions). But, in general, homomorphism
 T(F, X) -> r(F", X) is not onto, in spite of the fact that F -* F" is onto. We
 will take up that issue again later.123

 Indeed, the two other talks which Cartan gave in his 1950/51 topology seminar are
 devoted to the development of sheaf cohomology. Talk 2 is devoted to the introduction

 of Ф-families of closed, paracompact subsets of the base set X (Cartan 1 950-5 1 b, p. 3),
 and to lemmas about the behaviour of fine sheaves when sections Гф with support in
 a Ф-family are studied. These preliminary lemmas are used in the third talk, in which

 Cartan presented an axiomatic theory of sheaf cohomology. The ring К is assumed to
 be a principal ideal domain:

 Axioms of a cohomological theory: (...) Let us assume that the following are
 given:

 122 "Ceci définit f(F,X) comme foncteur du faisceau F' (Cartan 1950-5 la, p. 5)

 123 "Etant donnée une telle suite exacte, la suite des homomorphismes associés 0 - ► r(F', X) ->
 Г (F,X) -► Г (F", X) est exacte (trivial à partir des définitions). Mais, en général, rhomomorphisme T(F,X)
 - ► Г (F", X) n'est pas sur, bien que F -► F" soit sur. On reviendra plus loin sur cette question." (Cartan
 1950-5 la, p. 5)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 59

 I. For every sheaf F of K-modules (on a space X), and for every integer q, a

 K-module Нф (X, F), called the q-th cohomology module of space X, relative
 to family Ф and coefficient sheaf F (. . .)

 II. For every sheaf homomorphism F F', and for every integer q, a homo-

 morphism H%(X, F) -> H^(X, F').

 III. For every exact sequence of sheaves and homomorphisms 0 -> F' ->

 F -* F" -► 0, and for every integer q, a homomorphism Нф(Х, F")

 Нф+'(Х, F')-

 With respect to the above data, the following six axioms are assumed to hold:

 (a) Н£(Х, F) = 0 for q < 0, H° (X, F) = ГФ(Р);
 (b) If F is fine. Нф(Х, F) = 0 for any q;
 (c) For an exact sequence 0 -* F' -> F -* F" -> 0, the sequence

 . . F') % н£(Х, F) Д H%(X, F") ' H^+l (X, F') .

 (where ßq and yq are the homomorphisms defined at II, and 8q is the homo-
 morphism defined at III) is an exact sequence;124

 The three other axioms express the functorial nature of Нф and of the connecting

 homomorphisms H^(X,F") -> Нф+! (X,Fr). The bulk of the talk is devoted to the proof
 of the existence of such a sheaf cohomology theory; "uniqueness" is also proved, after

 the notion of isomorphism of cohomology theories has been defined.

 The style of this presentation looks strikingly new, for instance, when compared

 with Leray's versions of his sheaf cohomology theory. This fact is accounted for in the

 clearest of ways, however, by the immediate context. The 1 950/5 1 seminar is devoted
 to the study of cohomology theories, in topology and beyond. The first four talks
 deal with group cohomology: the first two talks were given by Samuel Eilenberg and

 the other two by Cartan. This series of talks starts with an axiomatic presentation of

 group homology and cohomology, which goes along the very same lines as Cartan 's

 124 "Axiomes d'une théorie de la cohomologiej (...) On suppose que l'on s'est donné

 I. Pour tout faisceau F de K-modules (sur l'espace X), et pour tout entier q, un K-module Нф(Х, F),

 appelé le q-ième module de cohomologie de l'espace X, relativement à la famille Ф et aux faisceau
 de coefficients F (...)

 II. Pour tout homomorphisme de faisceau F - ► F', et pour tout entier q, un homomorphisme Нф (X, F) -►

 HjiX.F').

 III. Pour toute suite exacte de faisceaux et d'homomorphismes 0 -> Fr - ► F -> F" - ► 0, et pour tout

 entier q, un homomorphisme Нф(Х, F") -► Нф+1 (X, F').

 Relativement aux données précédentes, on suppose vérifiés les 6 axiomes suivants:

 (a) Нф (X, F) = 0 pour q < 0, H^X, F) = r<j>(F);

 (b) Si F est fin, Нф(Х, F) = 0 pour tout q;
 (c) Pour toute suite exacte 0 -► F' -► F -* F" -> 0, la suite

 ... H 3,(X, F') h H^X, F) Гл H«(X, F") h H^1 (X, F7) -► . . .

 (où ßq et yq sont les homomorphismes définis en II, et ¿q est Г homomorphisme défini en III) est une
 suite exacte:" (Cartan 1950-5 le, p. 1)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 60 R. Chorlay

 presentation of sheaf cohomology : the role that fine sheaves play in sheaf-cohomology,

 free abelian groups play for group-homology, and injective groups play for group-
 cohomology (Eilenberg 1950-5 la). Several applications are expounded, for instance,
 the fact that a homology theory can be associated with functor - ®n A, and a coho-

 mology theory to functor Homn (- , A) (Eilenberg 1 950-5 1 b). These echoing talks on

 group- and sheaf-cohomology are but part and parcel of Cartan and Eilenberg 's col-
 laborative work on homology theories, which would result in their celebrated Homo-

 logical Algebra (Cartan and Eilenberg 1956). In this book, written between 1950 and

 1953, 125 Cartan and Eilenberg generalised this axiomatic approach (though in alge-

 braic contexts only)126 and introduced the general notion of derived functors for non

 left-exact or non right-exact additive functors.

 The wish to present the cohomology of sheaves in the larger context of cohomol-

 ogy theories thus led to the formulation of a single core problem: to study the non
 right-exactness of the section functor; this functorial formulation, in turn, called for

 an emphasis on sheaf morphisms and short exact sequences of sheaf morphisms. It
 should be stressed that, until this change of setting, morphisms played only a small
 part in the theories of cohomology with local coefficients. For instance, there are no

 morphisms between systems of local groups in Stennrod's 1943 paper on this new

 type of cohomology theory. Even in Leray 's 1949 exposition of his theory of coho-
 mology with coefficients in a faisceau , morphisms are just mentioned in passing,
 after the definition of a sub-sheaf and a quotient sheaf (Leray 1949, p. 70). As we
 saw earlier, Leray is primarily concerned with morphisms between base spaces, not
 with morphisms between sheaves on the same space; the latter need to be defined,
 however, to allow for a definition of the homology sheaf of a sheaf of differential
 complexes.127

 One should remember that when Cartan introduced his structure of ideals of holo-

 morphic functions, he mentioned ideals and modules (i.e. submodules of the product of

 a finite number of copies of the structure sheaf), but never introduced homomorphisms.
 It could be argued that, if only short exact sequences are to be studied, definitions of
 sub- and quotient objects can prove adequate. But those are nowhere to be found
 in Cartan's writings on ideals of holomorphic functions; neither in 1940-1944, nor
 even in the 1950 paper Idéaux et modules de fonctions analytiques de variables com-

 plexes (Cartan 1950a). As we mentioned earlier, the latter is mainly devoted to proofs
 of coherence and to a simplification of terminology. The general notions remain the
 same as in 1944, with some slight changes of formulations, such as, for instance, the

 introduction of direct limits (Cartan 1950a, p. 31), and a new definition of coherence.

 Sheaves of relations are not seen as kernels; the fact the "Cousin data" are systems of
 objects of a given type, which coincide up to objects of another type, is not described
 in terms of quotient structure.

 125 See Cartan's 1973 overview of his mathematical work in (Cartan 1979, XVII).

 126 The topological contexts are, of course, dealt with in Eilenberg and Steenrod (1952).

 127 Since the differential map d is a sheaf morphism.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 6 1

 5.5 The return of Cousin

 There is a striking contrast between Cartan's 1950 paper on ideals and modules of

 holomorphic functions and the last talks of the 1951/52 seminar. The first one remains

 in the 1940/44 setting, whereas the talks given by Cartan and Serre in the spring of

 1952 expound the cohomology theory of analytic sheaves on Stein spaces. This mate-
 rial was presented to the general mathematical audience in March 1953 at a Colloque
 sur les fonctions de plusieurs variables (Cartan 1953; Serre 1953), in Brussels. Rem-

 mert reported that, upon attending Serre's talk at that conference, one of the German

 participants commented: "We have bows and arrows, the French have tanks."128

 After a 1949/50 seminar devoted to the study of fibre-spaces and homotopy theory,

 and a 1950/51 seminar devoted to cohomology theories (of groups and sheaves),
 the 1951/52 Cartan seminar was devoted to analytic functions in several variables.
 The first 17 talks are devoted to a clear and up-to-date presentation of the topics
 that had been of interest to Cartan for several years: theory of important classes of

 space (Kahler manifolds, manifolds defined by various convexity properties, Stein
 spaces),129 theta functions and abelian functions (talks by Cartan and Cerf), the Weil
 integral (M. Hervé); a long series of talks is devoted to the study of local questions
 which had become central elements in Cartan and Oka's general study of ideals of

 holomorphic functions: rings of convergent power series (F. Bruhat),130 ideal of an

 analytic subvariety at one of its points (Bruhat, Cartan, Frenkel), sheaf of relations
 between holomorphic functions (Frenkel, Malatian).

 The last three talks are devoted to the cohomology of coherent sheaves on Stein

 spaces, with talks by Cartan stating and proving the main theorems and a final talk

 by Serre giving some important applications. Aside from proofs, the content of these
 talks is exactly the same as that of the 1953 conference talks in Brussels.

 The two main theorems are labelled A and B:

 Theorem A Let X be a Stein manifold , or a compact subset of a Stein manifold which

 is identical to its envelope. Let F be a coherent analytic sheaf on X. Then, for any point

 xeX, the image, in the О x- module /x, of the module of sections H°(X,I), generates /x

 for its Ox -module structure . 131

 To prevent any misunderstanding, Cartan comments that this theorem does not say

 that any local section has a global prolongation; rather, it says that any local section
 (say, at x) can be written as a linear combination of global sections, with coeffi-
 cients in Ox. This aspect is typical of Cartan's global theory of ideals of holomorphic
 functions: a central feature of the 1940 theory was the idea that two types of restric-

 tions/prolongations could be considered, one in terms of functions, and one in terms

 128 „Wir haben Pfeil und Bogen, die Franzosen haben Panzer." (Hilton et al. 1991, p. 277)

 129 These talks were all given by Cartan.

 130 As in several other talks, the theory is expounded for any non-discrete, complete valued field.

 131 "Théorème A: Soit X une variété de Stein, ou un compact d'une variété de Stein identique à son

 enveloppe. Soit F un faisceau analytique cohérent sur X. Alors, pour tout point x € X, l'image, dans le
 Ox -module Ix, du module des sections H°(X, I), engendre Ix pour sa structure de module sur Ox." (Cartan
 1951-52, p. 7)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 62 R. Chorlay

 of ideals (or modules) generated by functions. The fact that a change of domains (by

 restriction or extension) entails a change of base rings for the algebraic structures

 under study also comes from the 1940/44 theory, and no such element played a part
 in the 1950/51 sheaf cohomology theory. In spite of its cohomological formulation,
 theorem A is the final result of the " théorie globale des idéaux de fonctions holomor-

 phes " research line. Theorem В, however, had no counterpart in the 1940/44 theory,

 at least for q > 2:

 Theorem В Let X be a Stein manifold , or a compact subset of a Stein manifold which is

 identical to its envelope. Let F be a coherent analytic sheaf on X. Then the cohomology
 modules řP(XtF) vanish for all integers q> 1. 132

 Although the seminar talks on these topics were given by Cartan and Serre in

 the spring of 1952, the transcripts were written in the autumn, and Serre warns the

 reader that this text differs significantly from the actual talk (Serre 51/52: 1). Actually,
 some information can be drawn from a series of letters from Serre to Cartan, which

 were later published (Serre 1991); these documents help understand how important
 problems in the theory of functions of several complex variables were reformulated in

 the setting of sheaves and fibre-bundles. In a letter (dated April 30 1952), Serre gave
 the cohomological formulation of the conditions for solving the Cousin problems:

 Let X be a complex analytic variety; we will introduce a number of sheaves
 on X:

 Fa: sheaf of elements of holomorphic functions at all points of X (this sheaf is

 endowed with the addition of hoi. f.)

 Fm: multiplicative sheaf of elements of invertible holomorphic functions.
 Ga: same definition as for Fa, with meromorphic functions instead of holomor-

 Gm: same definition as for Fm, with non-null meromorphic functions instead of

 phic functions.

 non-null holomorphic functions.

 (...) One can thus consider the cohomology groups of space X with values in
 these various sheaves. One first checks the following:

 For the additive Cousin pb. to be always solvable in X, it is necessary and suffi-

 cient that H1 (X, Fa) - > H1 (X, Ga) be one to one and onto ; for the multiplicative
 problem to be , it is necessary and sufficient that H1 (X, Fm) -> H1 (X, Gm) be
 one to one and onto .

 In particular, for the additive Cousin pb. to be solvable, it is sufficient that
 H1 (X, Fa) = 0; same for the multiplicative one.133

 132 "Théorème В. Soit X une variété de Stein, ou un compact d'une variété de Stein identique à son
 enveloppe. Soit F un faisceau analytique cohérent sur X. Alors les modules de cohomologie H4(X, F) sont
 nuls pour tout entier q > 1 ." (Cartan 1951-52, p. 7)

 133 "Soit X une variété analytique complexe; on va introduire un certain nombre de faisceaux sur X:

 Fa: faisceau des éléments de fonctions holomorphes en tout point de X (ce faisceau muni de Y addition des
 f.hol.)

 Fm : faisceau multiplicatif des éléments de fonctions holomorphes inversibles.

 Ga: même définition que Fa, le fonctions méromorphes remplaçant les fonctions holomorphes.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 63

 However, it seems that theorem В was not known to Serre in May 1952. He writes

 that if X is a domain of holomorphy, Cartan's work on ideals of holomorphic functions
 show that H*(X, Fa) = 0, but that it is not known whether Hn(X, Fa) = 0(n >
 2) (Serre 1991, p. 279). In the next letter, he draws various conclusion from the
 hypothesis H!(X, Fa) = 0(i > 0), remarking that "to impose this condition is not a
 priori ridiculous, since we know it holds for cubes, and presumably for many other

 spaces".134 This case is the starting point of the proof given in October 1952 (Cartan
 1951-52, p. 7).135

 The restating of the Cousin problems in the new theoretical framework relies on

 the notion of quotient sheaf. In Cartan 1953 conference talk, M denotes the sheaf of

 meromorphic functions:

 It is clear that О is a subsheaf of M. Let us interpret the quotient sheaf M/O; if
 m € Mx, the class of m in Mx/Ox is called the principal part of m. A section

 of M/Ois called a system of principal parts. Let us consider homomorphism <p:
 Г(Х, M) -► Г(Х, M/O); to each meromorphic function in X, <p associates a
 system of principal parts. The classical additive Cousin problem (or first Cousin

 problem) deals with the characterisation, among systems of principal parts in X,
 of those that come from a meromorphic function on X; that is, to characterise

 the image of homomorphism cp .136

 In the 1940/44 theory, neither homomorphisms nor quotients were considered. This

 new formulation of the problem clearly derives from its being tackled by cohomolog-
 ical means. If X is a Stein space, theorem В warrants that H!(X, O) = 0, so ç is
 onto and the additive Cousin problem is always solvable. It should be noted that the

 surjectivity of map <p captures the fact the classical Cousin I problem is solvable (i.e. a

 footnote 133 continued

 Gm: même définition que Fm, les fonctions méromorphes non nulles remplaçant les fonctions holomorphes
 non nulles.

 (...) On peut donc parler des groupes de cohomologie de l'espace X à valeurs dans ces différents faisceaux.
 On vérifie d'abord ceci:

 Pour que le pb. de Cousin additif soit toujours résoluble dans X, il faut et il suffit que H1 (X, Fa) ->
 H1 (X, Ga) soit biunivoque ; pour que le problème multiplicatif le soit, il faut et il suffit que H1 (X, Fm) - ►
 H1 (X, Gm) soit biunivoque.
 footnote 133 continued

 En particulier, pour que le pb. de Cousin additif soit résoluble, il suffit que H1 (X, Fa) = 0, de même pour
 le multiplicatif." (Serre 1991, p. 278)

 134 "imposer cette condition n'est pas ridicule a priori, puisqu'on sait qu'elle est vérifiée par les pavés, et
 sans doute par bien d'autres espaces" (Serre 1991, p. 279)

 135 It seems the fact that sheaf cohomology turned out to be exactly the right framework to tackle the
 1940/44 research programme really came as a surprise to Cartan: see Cartan (1999, p. 787), and Serre's
 talk at the Cartan centenary celebration (Serre 2004).

 1 36 "И est clair que О est un sous-faisceau de M. Interprétons le faisceau quotient M/O; si m G Mx , la classe
 de m dans Mx/Ox s'appelle la partie principale de m. Une section de M/O s'appelle un système de parties
 principales. Considérons l'homomorphisme (p : Г(Х, M) -> Г(Х, M/O); à chaque fonction méromorphe
 dans X, y> associe un système de parties principales. Le classique problème additif de Cousin (ou premier
 problème de Cousin) consiste à caractériser, parmi les systèmes de parties principales dans X, ceux qui
 proviennent d'une fonction méromorphe dans X; autrement dit, à caractériser l'image de l'homomorphisme

 (Cartan 1953, p. 46)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 global meromorphic function can be found), and not only the ideal Cousin I problem
 of 1940/44.

 64 R. Chorlay

 As to Cousin II, Serre's 1953 reformulation reads as follows:

 We shall reformulate this problem in the sheaf language: let G be the sheaf
 of germs of meromorphic functions on X (the composition law being multi-
 plicative), F the subsheaf of G made up of the germs of invertible holomorphic

 functions (that is, non-null in the neighbourhood of the point at hand), let D be

 the quotient sheaf G/F; it is clear that D is the sheaf of germs of divisors.137

 F is a multiplicative group and not a coherent O-module, so even on a Stein space

 it is not necessary that H^X, F) vanish. To get some information, Serre relies on

 the sheaf theoretic rewording of the classical log transformation:138 there is a natural
 sequence of sheaves of groups 0- »Z-^O-^F-^O, where Z is the constant
 sheaf of integers and О - ► F is the exponential map / - > e2inf ; the sequence is
 exact, since every non-vanishing holomorphic function can be locally written as the
 exponential of a holomorphic function. Combining the two long exact sequence of
 cohomology, and using the fact that, on a Stein space, Hq(X, O) = 0(q > 1) gives
 a natural map H°(X, D) -> H2(X, Z). This map can be interpreted geometrically: a
 divisor can be seen as a set of subvarieties (of complex codimension 1 in a complex
 n -dimensional space X), with integer multiplicities; this is an element of H2n-2(X,Z),

 which is then mapped on its dual. Now, H2(X, Z) depends only on the topology of
 X, a fact that captures Oka's proof that the solvability of Cousin II (on a domain of
 holomorphy) is a purely topological problem.139 These aspects could not fit within
 the 1940/44 global theory of ideals of holomorphic functions, since it only considered

 sheaves of O-modules (whereas the interplay between such sheaves and group-sheaves

 are of the essence here), and the patching-up arguments did not reach beyond the first
 cohomology groups. As Cartan stressed in his talk:

 The cohomological formulation of theorem B, and the idea of studying not only
 the q = 1 case, but any q > 0 case, are both J.-P. Serre's.140

 Needless to say, Serre also mentions Poincaré's problem (though without paying
 heed to coprimeness): "On a Stein manifold, any meromorphic function is the quotient
 of two holomorphic functions."1 41

 137 "Nous allons reformuler ce problème dans le langage des faisceaux: soit G le faisceau des germes de
 fonctions méromorphes sur X (la loi de composition étant la multiplication ), F le sous-faisceau de G formé

 des germes de fonctions holomorphes inversibles (c'est-à-dire non nulles au voisinage du point considéré),
 D le faisceau quotient G/F; il est clair que D est le faisceau des germes de diviseurs." (Serre 1953, p. 60)

 138 This transformation had been used by Poincaré (to transform zeroes into singularities, in a context
 where there is control over singularities but not over zeroes) and Cousin (to apply an additive result to a
 multiplicative problem).

 139 Independently from Cartan and Serre, Karl Stein had investigated these topological issues. See, for
 instance, Stein ( 1 94 1 ) and Stein ( 1 95 1 ).

 140 "La formulation cohomologique du théorème В, et l'idée d'étudier non seulement le cas q = 1, mais le
 cas q > 0 quelconque, sont dues à J.-P. Serre." (Cartan 1953, p. 5 1)

 141 "Toute fonction méromorphe sur une variété de Stein est quotient de deux fonctions holomorphes"
 (Serre 1953, p. 63).

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 65

 6 Conclusion

 We presented this narrative as a case study in the history of structuralism in non-
 algebraic contexts, by focusing on the role of problems in the emergence of new
 structures (such as the sheaf structure) and theories (such as sheaf cohomology).

 Though the narrative goes into much more detail on the 1940-1953 period, in which
 structures are in play, we attempted to seize the opportunity to follow the history of

 the Cousin problems from Poincaré's (1883) paper.

 The following of this lead over a rather long period of time is partly justified by the

 fact that this historical line is systematically referred to in the works we mentioned,

 usually in the introduction of the papers. However, presenting the history of a very

 specific family of problems over such a large period of time (1 883-1940) raises ques-
 tions of method: how much context should you take into account? Should one stick

 to the mathematical description of successive rational moves, such as, for instance,

 exhibiting a counter-example, generalising to new domains, defining the topological

 analogue of an analytic problem? We attempted to give our narrative a more historical

 turn - though without ever aiming at a general history of the theory of functions of

 several complex variables - by focusing on what can be specific to the medium-term

 history of a problem , or problem family.

 As for Poincaré, we stressed the importance of two elements which would prove

 enduring throughout the history of the Cousin problems: first, an ekthesis which relied

 on open coverings and differences of a given type in the overlaps; second, a site
 technique of the "step by step patching-up" type, which we also referred to as the
 "£/ П V, U , V, U U V" site technique. However familiar both may have become, we

 endeavoured to show (within a limited space) that both this type of ekthesis and this site

 technique were not common in the 1880s, and pointed to a quite specific theoretical
 and technical context - that of Neumann and Schwarz's proof methods in potential

 theory - which would not be later associated with the Cousin problems. Ekthesis and

 site technique both differ from what is to be found in Weierstrass' original one- variable

 theorem; only the ekthesis is retained by Cousin, who relied on much more standard site

 techniques when it came to give proofs. We also showed that Poincaré never considered

 that this specific problem, along with several others that he tackled between 1 880 and
 1885, belonged to a family that should be labelled "global problems", or "passing
 from local data to global existence problems". These problem labels emerged a little

 later; they did not play a significant part in the history of the Cousin problems until
 Henri Cartan engaged in the " théorie globale des idéaux de fonctions holomorphes ",
 in 1940. So many elements ( ekthesis , site technique, problem label), so many time-
 lines.

 The period from 1895 to 1938 provides an interesting case study, since, in spite
 of the development of the theory of functions of several complex variables, the the-
 oretical framework does not seem to change dramatically: the Cousin problems are

 clearly identified as central and difficult problems for the theory and they are tack-
 led with the same tools. The fact that no breakthrough occurred does not mean these

 problems were just referred to in monographs, to be passed on to the next generation
 of mathematicians: after hitting on a counter-example, Gronwall (and Osgood) gave
 a restricted version of Cousin's second theorem, just to be on the safe side; Cartan,

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 66 R. Chorlay

 Behnke and Stein defined Cousin properties and investigated their links with a wealth

 of new, domain-defining properties; we termed this an indirect use of problems. To
 make sense of the deep dissimilarity between Cousin I and Cousin II, Oka defined
 and studied a topological analogue of Cousin П, thus showing its purely topological
 nature (on domains of holomorphy).

 We then investigated in greater detail how the Cousin problems got inserted into

 two structural contexts: that of Cartan's theory of ideals of holomorphic functions
 (1940-1950); that of sheaf cohomology, as from 1951.

 One could argue that the Cousin problems played only a pedagogical role in Cartan's
 (1940) exposition of his research programme on ideals of holomorphic functions.

 Along this line, the description would be the following: emulating van der Waerden's

 reformulation of elimination theory and algebraic geometry in terms of rings, ideals
 and modules, Cartan engaged in the study of ideals of holomorphic functions; the
 Cousin problems were well-known examples of the type of problems which this new

 theory aimed at tackling, thus serving his expository purposes well; however, Cousin II

 was really too specific to be much more than an emblem for the new theory, since it is a

 problem in complex codimension one, whereas the new theory aimed at subvarieties in

 any dimension (including empty subvarities, in the case of functions with no common

 zeroes). This new theory is "structural" in so far as it imports concepts and theorems
 from moderne Algebra.

 We claim that this is not accurate, and that it fails to capture what gives this case

 study a more general significance. The links between the Cousin problems and this par-
 ticular instance of structural transition are numerous and fundamental. First, the main

 target problems which motivated Cartan's (1940) research programme had emerged in

 the context of recent attempts to tackle the Cousin problems: Cartan's (1934) attempt

 depended on the Weil integral, which, in turn, depended on the holomorphic analogue
 of the classical polynomial Nullstellensatz' Oka's trick (which, among other things,
 served to bypass the ill-founded Weil integral) required that it be proved that, in a
 polycylinder, holomorphic functions on a subvariety (of any codimension) are restric-

 tions of holomorphic functions over the whole space. Second, the structure of "ideal

 of holomorphic functions" could seem to be a somewhat shallow generalisation - of
 van der Waerden, or of Riickert's algebraic study of the ring of convergent power
 series - if it were not for its links with the Cousin problems. The definition of this new

 structure enables Cartan to give an alternative reading of the Cousin problems: these

 problems can be seen either in terms of functions (in which case a global function is
 aimed for) or in terms of function ideals (in which case a global ideal is aimed for). The

 definition of the new structure is an ideal-theoretic rewriting of Cousin II's ekthesis ,

 the latter problem serving here as template problem ; by this change of setting, Cartan

 did not only generalise the problem to arbitrary codimension, but also changed the
 meaning of "being a solution to the Cousin problem". Third, Cartan's matrix general-

 isation of a fundamental lemma from Oka's 1938 proof (a lemma which was already
 is Cousin's paper) shows that the patching-up of ideals of functions is more tractable

 than the patching-up of functions. This new "ideal", generalised (in terms of dimen-
 sions) and weaker (trading ideals for functions) form of Cousin problems was too

 weak to solve the classical Cousin II problem, but potent enough to solve the target
 problems. The move is structural in style and practice, since both a general structure

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 67

 and general problem form are abstracted from Cousin data and Cousin problems; the

 general structure is studied as such, which leads to the investigation of inner problems,
 and to the identification of "coherence" as a new and fundamental abstract property.

 This style is consistent with the model given by abstract algebra; this practice fits the

 general description given by Bourbaki in their 1942 L'architecture des mathématiques
 (Bourbaki 1950).

 The detailed study of the links between problem families and structural transi-

 tion should help flesh out the very general description of the structural approach that
 can be found, for instance, in Bourbaki. In 1942, they described mathematics as a "a
 storehouse of abstract forms" (Bourbaki 1950, p. 231); forms which are also tools ,
 whose abstract (i.e. context-free), object-WYe definition warrant general applicabil-

 ity: "The "structures" are tools for the mathematician. (...) One could say that the
 axiomatic method is nothing but the "Taylor system" for mathematics" (Bourbaki

 1950, p. 227). The arguments as to why it should be done, and what the epistemic

 gains result (economy of thought, insight into formal analogies, uniform treatment of

 seemingly different problems etc.) are quite clear; but no clue is given as to how it is

 done. In particular, Bourbaki stress the fact that the list of important structures is not
 closed, and that invention of structures accounts for numerous recent breakthroughs

 (Bourbaki 1950, p. 230). They also emphasise the fact that the axiomatic method is
 at its best when it succeeds in showing that some structure plays an important part

 in a field where, a priori , it seems it played none (Bourbaki 1950, p. 228). Yet, as to

 how these breakthroughs were made, these new structures invented and these unex-

 pected structures identified in more classical settings, Bourbaki give no clue; or rather,

 they leave it to intuition: "more than ever does intuition dominate in the genesis of
 discoveries." (Bourbaki 1950, p. 248)!

 Though Bourbaki's 1942 assessment of the axiomatic method differs completely
 from that of Weyl's 1932 talk, L'architecture des mathématiques really makes it all
 look like the " magic key " which Weyl derided. The cohomology theory of analytic

 sheaves on Stein spaces, which Cartan and Serre presented in their 1953 conference
 talks on global problems in the theory of functions of several complex variables,
 seems all the more magical for its combination of two features: an extraordinary

 efficiency, and an extraordinary coherence. The list of elements is impressive: list of

 target problems, axiomatic definition of the sheaf structure, cohomology groups, exact
 sequences (short and long, of sheaves and of groups), coherence results, sections of
 a projection map between a total space and a base space, left exact but not right-
 exact functors, quotient sheaves, fine sheaves, fine resolutions, Čech cohomology,

 convexity properties . . . ; all the elements appear as necessary and interconnected parts
 of an indivisible whole. The links are so tight that the very idea of a genesis of the

 theory is puzzling.

 The context for the formulation of this theory differs significantly from that of

 Cartan's (1940) theory of ideals of holomorphic functions; so is the part played by the

 Cousin problems. The stages in the perfecting of the cohomological tool have been
 recounted elsewhere, so we strove for a different kind of picture: one of piecemeal

 tool-making and unexpected efficiency. Between 1944 and 1950, two research lines
 evolved with no specific intersection: the "global theory of modules of holomorphic
 functions" on the one hand, for which the main (thorny) coherence problems took

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 68 R. Chorlay

 some time solving, and an extension of the local part of the theory in purely algebraic

 settings was contemplated (replacing С by complete, sometimes algebraically closed,

 valued fields); the cohomology of " faisceaux ", on the other hand, at the intersection
 of topology and axiomatic cohomology. Though local coefficients and faisceaux had
 been introduced by Steenrod and Leray with specific targets problems in mind, it
 can be argued that in the hands of Cartan, sheaf cohomology was partly perfected,
 simplified and streamlined for the sake of perfecting, simplifying and streamlining,
 in consistence with the epistemic values promoted by Bourbaki; tapping, also, on
 know-how in the design of structures accumulated within Bourbaki (Weil, Ehresmann,

 Dieudonné) and bourbakian circles (Leray, de Rham, Eilenberg). Concepts, axiom
 schemes for structures, axiom schemes for cohomology theories, tools and mottoes

 circulated across blurred disciplinary boundaries. We mentioned the well-known parts

 played by fibre-bundle theory - with its notions of total space, its focus on the question

 of section prolongation - and general cohomology - with the parallel between sheaf
 cohomology and group cohomology, the focus on the question of non-exactness of

 additive functors etc. We also used the example of partitions of unity, to show that a

 tool and mottoes (such as: pass from local to global) could, temporarily, be seen as two

 sides of the same coin, and circulate through various theories: partitions of unity and

 the sheaf-flavoured setting-out of Schwartz's theory of distribution in 1951 ; a central

 part played by fine resolutions in the early years of sheaf cohomology. Streamlining
 indeed, but bricolage as well, with both a lateral circulation of epistemic elements

 (tools, mottoes, site techniques, problem laying-out schemes etc.) across disciplinary
 boundaries, and replacement of functionally equivalent elements at various stages of

 the theory: the definition of sheaf structures as total spaces ( espace étalé) would later be

 replaced by a more category-theoretic formulation; fine resolutions would be replaced

 by other, more general types of resolutions (be they, injective, projective, flabby etc.);

 the 1950 definition of coherence is not that of 1944 any more etc.142

 The Cousin problems were not target problems in the 1945-1950 development of

 sheaf cohomology, and Cartan's 1 952 theorem A is merely a rewording in the language
 of sheaves of the main result of the research line he initiated in 1940. Yet, it turned

 out, unexpectedly, that the proof methods used in that context could also prove the
 cohomological triviality of coherent analytic sheaves on Stein manifolds (theorem B).
 The Cousin problems played a part in the merger of two research lines, as Serre's
 1952 letters to Cartan clearly show. This new change of setting affected the Cousin

 problems in manifold ways. Among other things, they meant a return to the original

 functional Cousin problems, as opposed to Cartan's ( 1 940) ideal problems; a return that

 Weil had anticipated in the context of fibre-bundles. At a deeper level, new structural

 elements had to be injected into the 10-year-old "modules of holomorphic functions"

 structure to make it fit into the cohomological machinery: until then, oddly enough,
 neither homomorphisms nor quotients played any part in that research line. This led

 to the reformulation of Cousin data as sections of a quotient sheaf. The merger of the
 research lines eventually led to exchanges of conceptual elements in the other direction

 just as well. In particular, the fact that a change of domains entails a change of base

 Our analysis in terms of epistemic culture and elements of practice clearly parallels that of K. Chemla.

 See, for instance Chemla (2009).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Problems to Structures 69

 rings had been a core element of the "modules of holomorphic functions" programme,

 whereas changes of base rings played no part in Cartan's 1950/51 topological sheaf

 cohomology. Later in the 1950s, this feature would be fundamental for the rewriting

 of abstract algebraic geometry in the framework of sheaf cohomology.

 References

 Appell, Paul . 1 883. Sur une classe de fonctions de deux variables indépendantes. Acta Mathematica 2:7 1 -80.
 Behnke, Heinrich, and Karl Stein. 1937. Analytische Funktionen mehrerer Veränderlichen zu vorgegebenen

 Null- und Polstellenflächen. Jahr. DM-V 47: 177-193.

 Behnke, Heinrich, and Peter Thullen. 1934. Theorie der Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderlichen.

 Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 111(3). Berlin: Springer.

 Briot, Charles, and Jean-Claude Bouquet. 1875. Theorie des fonctions elliptiques ( 2cme édition). Paris:

 Gauthier- Villars.

 Bochner, Salomon. 1937. Remark on the Theorem of Green. Duke Math. J. 3(2):334-338.
 Bourbaki, Nicolas. 1948. Topologie générale. Chapitre IX Utilisation des nombres réels en topologie

 générale. Actualités scientifiques et industrielles 1045. Paris: Hermann.

 Bourbaki, Nicolas. 1950. The Architecture of Mathematics. Amer. Math. Monthly 57(4):22 1-232.
 Cartan, Henri. 1930. Sur les fonctions de deux variables complexes. Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques

 Cartan, Henri. 193 1 . Sur les variétés définies par une relation entière. Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques

 Cartan, Henri. 1934. Les problèmes de Poincaré et de Cousin pour les fonctions de plusieurs variables

 complexes. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 199:1284-1287.

 Cartan, Henri. 1938. Sur le premier problème de Cousin. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 207: 558-560.
 Cartan, Henri. 1940. Sur les matrices holomorphes de n variables complexes. Jour. Math. Pures Appi

 Cartan, Henri. 1944. Idéaux de fonctions analytiques de n variables complexes. Ann. Sci. ENS 61 (3e ie

 Cartan, Henri. 1945. Méthodes modernes en topologie algébrique. Com. Math. Helv. 18:1-15.
 Cartan, Henri. 1950a. Idéaux et modules de fonctions analytiques de variables complexes. Bull. SME 78:

 Cartan, Henri. 1950b. Problèmes globaux dans la théorie des fonctions analytiques de plusieurs variables
 complexes. In Proc. ICM (Cambridge Mas. 30.8-6.9 1950), 152-164. Providence (R.I.): AMS Publica-
 tions.

 Cartan, Henri. 1950-5 la. Faisceaux sur un espace topologique I. In Seminaire Cartan , exposé 14. Paris:

 Cartan, Henri. 1 950-5 lb. Faisceaux sur un espace topologique II. In Seminaire Cartan , exposé 15. Paris:

 Cartan, Henri. 1950-5 le. Théorie axiomatique de la cohomologie. In Seminaire Cartan , exposé 16. Paris:

 Cartan, Henri. 1950-5 ld. Théorie de la cohomologie des espaces. In Seminaire Cartan , exposé 17. Paris:

 Cartan, Henri. 1950-5 le. Théorèmes fondamentaux de la théorie des faiscaux. In Seminaire Cartan , exposé

 Cartan, Henri. 1951-52. Faisceaux analytiques sur les variétés de Stein. In Séminaire. Cartan , exposé 18.

 Cartan, Henri. 1953. Variétés analytiques complexes et cohomologie. In Colloque sur les fonctions de

 plusieurs variables , C.R.B. M., 41-55. Liège: Thone, and Paris: Masson.

 Cartan, Henri. 1979. In Œuvres , eds. R. Remmert and J-.P. Serre. New-York: Springer.

 Cartan, Henri. 1987. Sur quelques progrès dans la théorie des fonctions analytiques de variables complexes

 entre 1930 et 1950. In (Hilton et alii 1991), 45-58.

 Cartan, Henri. 1999. Interview with Henri Cartan (A. Jackson). Notices of the A.M. S. 46(7):782-788.
 Cartan, Henri, and Samuel Eilenberg. 1956. Homologuai algebra. Princeton: Princeton university rress.

 54:99-116.

 55:24-32, 47-64.

 19:1-26.

 série): 149-197.

 29-64.

 ENS.

 ENS.

 ENS.

 ENS.

 19. Paris: ENS.

 Paris: ENS.

 Q Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 70 R. Chorlay

 Cartari, Henri, and Peter Thullen. 1932. Zur Theorie der Singularitäten der Funktionen mehrerer komplexen

 Veränderlichen. Regularitäts- und Konvergenzbereiche. Math. Ann. 106:617-647.

 Čech, Eduard. 1933. Théorie générale de l'homologie dans un espace quelconque. Fund. Math. 19: 149-1 83.
 Chemla, Karine. 2009. Apprendre à lire: la démonstration comme élément de pratique mathématique.

 Communications (forthcoming).

 Chevalley, Claude. 1946. Theory of Lie Groups. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Chorlay, Renaud. 2007. L'émergence du couple local- global dans les théories géométriques, de Bernhard

 Riemann à la théorie des faisceaux (185 1-1 953). Paris: Université Denis Diderot.

 Chorlay, Renaud. 2009. Passer au global: le cas d'Elie Cartan, 1922-1930. Revue d'Histoire des Mathéma-

 tiques (forthcoming).

 Cole, Frank. 1914. The October Meeting of the American Mathematical Society. Bull. AMS 20(4): 169-176.
 Corry, Leo. 1996. Modem algebra and the rise of Mathematical Structure ( Science Networks - Historical

 Studies 17). Boston-Basel: Birkhäuser.

 Cousin, Pierre. 1895. Sur les fonctions analytiques de n variables complexes. Acta Math. 19: 1-61 .
 de Rham, Georges. 1955. Variétés différentiables - formes, courants, formes harmoniques. Actualités sci-

 entifiques et industrielles 1 222. Paris: Hermann.

 Dieudonné, Jean. 1937. Sur les fonctions continues numériques définies dans un produit de deux espaces

 compacts. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 205:593-595.

 Dieudonné, Jean. 1981. Notice sur les travaux scientifiques. In Choix ď œuvres mathématiques II. Paris:

 Hermann.

 Ehresmann, Charles. 1941. Espaces fibrés associés. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 213:762-764.
 Ehresmann, Charles. 1942. Espaces fibrés de structures comparables. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 214: 144-147.

 Ehresmann, Charles. 1943. Sur les espaces fibrés associés à une variété différentiable. Compt. Rend. Acad.

 Sci. 216:628-630.

 Rend. Acad. Sci. 212:945-948.

 1. Paris: ENS.

 ENS.

 58(2):23 1-294.

 31:117-120.

 University Press.

 Ehresmann, Charles, and Jacques Feldbau. 194 1 . Sur les propriétés d'homotopie des espaces fibrés. Compt.

 Eilenberg, Samuel. 1950-5 la. Homologie des groupes I: axiomes et unicité. In Séminaire Cartan , exposé

 Eilenberg, Samuel. 1950-5 lb. Homologie des groupes I: existence. In Séminaire Cartan , exposé 2. Paris:

 Eilenberg, Samuel, and Saunders MacLane. 1945. General Theory of Natural Equivalences. Trans. AMS

 Eilenberg, Samuel, and Norman Steenrod. 1945. Axiomatic Approach to Homology Theory. Proc. NAS

 Eilenberg, Samuel, and Norman Steenrod. 1952. Foundations of Algebraic Topology. Princeton: Princeton

 Fasanelli, Florence. 1981. The creation of sheaf theory. Ph.D. Thesis, American University.

 Gilain, Christian. 1991 . La théorie qualitative de Poincaré et le problème de l'intégration des équations dif-

 férentielles. In La France mathématique , ed. Hélène Gispert, 22 1-242. Cahier d'histoire et de philosophie
 des sciences 34, SFHST - SMF. Paris: Belin.

 Goldstein, Catherine, and Norbert Schappacher. 2007. A Book in Search of a Discipline. In The Shaping of
 Arithmetic , eds. Catherine Goldstein, Norbert Schappacher, and Joachim Schwermer, 3-65. New- York:
 Springer.

 Goodman, Nelson. 1976. Languages of Art, 2nd ed. Indianapoli: Hackett Publishing.

 Gray, Jeremy. 1986. Linear Differential Equations and Group Theory from Riemann to Poincaré. Boston:

 Birkhäuser.

 Gray, John. 1979. Fragments in the History of Sheaf Theory. In Application of Sheaves, eds. M.P. Fourman,

 C.J. Mulvey, D. Scott, 1-79. London Mathematical Societv. New- York: Snrineer.

 Gronwall, Thomas. 1917. On the expressibility of a uniform function of several complex variables as the

 quotient of two functions of entire character. Trans. AMS 18:50-64.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1912. L'œuvre mathématique de Poincaré. Acta Math. 38:203-287 = (Hadamard 1 968)

 Hadamard, Jaques. 1968. Œuvres (4 volumes). Paris: C.N.R.S.
 Hilton, Peter, Friedriech Hirzebruch, and Reinhold Remmert (eds.) 1 99 1 . Miscellanea Mathematica. Berlin:

 Houzel, Christian. 1990. A Short History: les débuts de la théorie des faisceaux. In Sheaves on Manifolds ,

 eds. Masaki Kashiwara and Pierre Schapira, 7-22. New- York: Springer.

 vol. 4:1921-2006.

 Springer.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Houzel, Christian. 1 998. Histoire de la théorie des faisceaux. In Matériaux pourl 'histoire des mathématiques

 au XXe siècle (Séminaires et Congrès 3), 101-119. Paris: SMF.

 Hurewicz, Witold, and Norman Steenrod. 1941. Homotopy Relations in Fibre Spaces. Рте. N.A.S. 27:60-

 From Problems to Structures 7 1

 64.

 James, loan Mackenzie (ed.) 1999. History of topology. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 Kneser, Hellmutt. 1926. Die Topologie der Mannigfaltigkeiten. Jahr. DM-V 34: 1-13.

 Krull, Wolfgang. 1938. Dimensionstheorie in Stellenringe. Jour. Rein. Ang. Math. 179:204-226.
 Krömer, Ralf. 2007. Tool and object : a History and Philosophy of Category Theory ( Science Networks -

 Leray, Jean. 1945. Sur la forme des espaces topologiques et sur les points fixes des représentations. Jour.

 Historical Studies 32). Boston: Birkhäuser.

 Math. Pures Appl. 24 (9èwe série): 95-167.

 Leray, Jean. 1946. L'anneau d'homologie d'une représentation. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 222:1366-1368.
 Leray, Jean. 1949. L'homologie filtrée. Colloques internationaux du C.N.R.S.: topologie algébrique, juin-

 juillet 1947. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Marquis, Jean-Pierre. 2006. A path to the Epistemology of Mathematics: Homotopy Theory. In The architec-
 ture of modern mathematics , eds. Jeremy Gray and Jose Ferreiros, 239-262. Oxford: Oxford University
 Press.

 Mittag-Leffler, Gösta. 1882. Sur la théorie des fonctions uniformes d'une variable. Compt. Rend. Acad . Sci.

 94:414-416.

 Teubner.

 Neumann, Carl. 1884. Vorlesungen über Riemann's Theorie derabelschen Integrale (2tc Auflage). Leipzig:

 Noether, Emmy. 1921. Idealtheorie in Ringbereiche. Math. Ann. 83:24-66.
 Oka, K., 1936. Domaines convexes par rapport aux fonctions rationnelles. Journal of Science of the

 Hiroshima University 6:245-255 = (Oka 1984). pp. 1-10.

 Oka, Kiyoshi. 1937. Domaines ďholomorphie. Journal of Science of the Hiroshima University 7: 1 15-130

 = (Oka 1984): 1 1-23.

 Oka, Kiyoshi. 1939. Sur les fonctions analytiques de plusieurs variables III. Deuxième problème de Cousin.

 Journal of Science of the Hiroshima University 9:7-19 = (Oka 1984): 24-35.

 Oka, Kiyoshi. 1942. Domaines pseudoconvexes. Tôhoku Math. J. 49:15-52 = (Oka 1984): 48-70.
 Oka, Kiyoshi. 1950. Sur les fonctions analytiques de plusieurs variables VII. Sur quelques notions arith-

 métiques. Bull. SA/F 78: 1-27 = (Oka 1984): 80-106.

 Oka, Kiyoshi. 1984. In Collected papers, ed. R. Remmert; trans. R. Narasimhan. New York: Springer.

 Osgood, William. 1899. Selected topics in the General Theory of Functions (Six Lectures delivered before

 the Cambridge Colloquium, August 22-27, 1898). Bull. AMS 5:59-87.

 Osgood, William. 1901 . Analysis der komplexen Größen. Allgemeine Theorie der analytischen Funktionen
 a) einer und b) mehrerer komplexen Größen. In Encyclopädie der mathematischen Wisenschaften II.2,
 1-114. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Osgood, William. 1914. Topics in the Theory of Functions of Several Complex Variables. In The Madison

 Colloquium 1913 part II. Providence: AMS, 1914 = New- York: Dover, 1966 (reprint).

 Poincaré, Henri. 188 1 . Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle. J. de Math. 7 (3 me

 série): 375-422, and 8 (3ème série): 251-296 = (Poincaré 1951), vol. 1:3-84.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1882. Théorie des groupes fuchsiens. Acta Math. 1:1-62 = (Poincaré 1951), vol. 2:108-168.
 Poincaré, Henri. 1883a. Sur un théorème général de la théorie des fonctions. Bull. SMF 11:1 12-125 =

 (Poincaré 1951), vol. 1 1:57-69.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1883b. Sur les fonctions de deux variables. Acta Math. 2:97-1 13 = (Poincaré 1951), vol.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1 883c. Sur les fonctions de deux variables. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 96:238-240 = (Poincaré

 Poincaré, Henri. 1884. Sur les groupes des équations linéaires. Acta Math. 4:201-31 1 = (Poincaré 1951),

 4:147-161.

 1951), vol. 4:144-146.

 vol. 2:300-401.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1885. Sur les courbes définies par les équations différentielles ( 3eme partie). Jour. Math.

 Pures Appl. 1 (4^me série): 167-244 = (Poincaré 1951), vol. 1:90-161.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1895. Analysis situs. Journal de Г Ecole Polytechnique 1 ( 2tme série) = (Poincaré 1951),

 Poincaré, Henri. 1898. Sur les propriétés du potentiel et les fonctions abéliennes. Acta Math. 22:89-178 -

 vol. 6:193-288.

 (Poincaré 1951), vol. 4:162-243.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poincaré, Henri. 1901 . Analyse des travaux scientifiques de Henri Poincaré faite par lui-même. Acta Math.

 72 R. Chorlay

 Poincaré, Henri. 1907. Les fonctions analytiques de deux variables et la représentation conforme. Rend.

 Cire . Mat. Pal. 23:185-220 = (Poincaré 1951), vol. 4:244-289.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1908. Sur l'uniformisation des fonctions analytiques. Acto Math. 3: 1-63 = (Poincaré 195 1 ),

 Poincaré, Henri. 1909. L'avenir des mathématiques. In Am' del IV congresso internazionale dei matematici,

 vol. 1 (Roma, 6-1 1 Aprile 1908), 167-182. Rome: Accademia dei Lincei.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1951-56. Œuvres de Henri Poincaré (1 1 volumes). Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Rückert, Walter. 1933. Zur Eliminiationsproblem der Potenzreihenideale. Math. Ann. 107:259-281.
 Scholz, Erhard. 1980. Geschichte des Mannigfaltigkeitsbegriff von Riemann his Poincaré. Boston:

 Scholz, Erhard. 1999. The concept of manifold. In (James 1999): 25-64.
 Schwartz, Laurent. 1951. Théorie des distributions. Actualités scientifiques et industrielles 1122. Paris:

 Schwarz, Hermann. 1890. Gesammelte mathematische Abhandlungen (2'erBand). Berlin: Springer.
 Seifert, Karl. 1933. Topologie dreidimensionaler gefaserter Räume. Acta Math. 60:147-238.

 Serre, Jean-Pierre. 1951-52. Application de la théorie générale à divers problèmes globaux. In Séminaire

 Cartan , exposé 20. Paris: ENS.

 Serre, Jean-Pierre. 1953. Quelques problèmes globaux relatifs aux variétés de Stein. In Colloque sur les

 fonctions de plusieurs variables , C.R.B. M., 57-68. Liège: Thone, and Paris: Masson.

 Serre, Jean-Pierre. 1991. Les petits cousins (lettres à H. Cartan, 1950-1953). In (Hilton et alii 1 99 1 ):278-

 Serre, Jean-Pierre. 2004. Le rôle des séminaires Cartan. Journée Henri Cartan (28 Juin 2004), E.N.S. http://

 www.diffusion.ens.fr/index.php?res=conf&idconf=282#. Accessed 17 Novembre 2008.

 Steenrod, Norman. 1936. Universal Homology Group. Aw. J. Math. 58 (4):66 1 -701 .
 Steenrod, Norman. 1942. Topological methods for the Construction of Tensor Functions. Ann. Math. 43

 38:3-131.

 vol. 4:70-143.

 Birkhäuser.

 Hermann.

 291.

 (1):1 16-131.

 Steenrod, Norman. 1943. Homology with Local Coefficients. Ann. Math. 44 (4):6 10-627.

 Stein, Karl. 1941. Topologische Bedingungen für die Existenz analytischer Funktionen komplexer Verän-

 derlichen zu vorgegebenen Nullstellenflächen. Math. Ann. 1 17:727-757.

 Stein, Karl. 195 1 . Analytische Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderlichen zu vorgegebenen Periodiz-

 itätsmoduln und das zweite Cousinsche Problem. Math. Ann. 123:201-222.

 Stiefel, Eduard. 1935. Richtungsfelder und Fernparallel ismus in л-dimensionalen Mannigfaltigkeiten. Com.

 Math. Helv. 8:305-353.

 Struik, Dirk. 1933a. Outline of a History of Differential Geometry (I). ISIS 19:92-120.

 Struik, Dirk. 1933b. Outline of a History of Differential Geometry (II). ISIS 20: 161-191 .
 The Henri Cartan topology seminar is available at NUMDAM http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/

 feuilleter?j=SHC&sl=0

 Thullen, Peter. 1935. Sur le deuxième problème de Cousin. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. 200:720-721.
 van der Waerden, Bartel. 1927. Zur Nullstellentheorie des Polynomideale. Math. Ann. 96:183-208.
 van der Waerden, Bartel. 1930. Moderne algebra (erster Teil). Berlin: Springer.
 van der Waerden, Bartel. 1931. Moderne algebra (zweiter Teil). Berlin: Springer.

 Veblen, Oswald, and Whitehead John Henry Constantine. 1932. The foundations of Differential Geometry.
 Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics 29. London: Cambridge University Press.
 Weierstrass, Karl. 1870. Über das sogenannte Dirichleťschen Princip (Gelesen in der Königl. Akademie

 der Wissenschaften am 14. Juli 1870) = (Weierstrass 1894-1927), vol. 2:49-54.

 Weierstrass, Karl. 1876. Zur Theorie der eindeutigen analytischen Functionen, Abh. König. Ges. 1876 =

 (Weierstrass 1894-1927), vol. 2:77-124.

 Weierstrass, Karl. 1988. Einleitung in die Theorie der analytischen Funktionen (Vorlesung Berlin 1878, in
 einer Mitschrift von A. Hurwitz). Dokumente zur Geschichte der Mathetnatik. Braunschweig: DMV -
 Vieweg und Sohn.

 Weierstrass, Karl. 1894-1927. Mathematische Werke (5 vol.). Berlin: Mayer & Müller.
 Weil, André. 1932. Sur les séries de polynômes de deux variables complexes. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci.

 194:1304-1305.

 Weil, André. 1935. L'intégrale de Cauchy et les fonctions de plusieurs variables. Math. Ann. 1 1 1 : 178-1 82.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Weil, André. 1940. L'intégration dans les groupes topologiques. Actualités Scientifiques et Industrielles

 From Problems to Structures 73

 Weil, André. 1947. Sur la théorie des formes différentielles attachées à une variété analytique complexe.

 1045. Paris: Hermann.

 Com. Math. Helv. 20: 1 10-1 16.

 Weil, André. 1949. Fibre-spaces in Algebraic Geometry. Algebraic geometry conference (mimeographed),

 University of Chicago: 55-59 = Collected Papers vol.1, 411-413. New- York: Springer, 1979.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1919. Die Idee der Riemannschen Fläche ( 2ter Auflage). Leipzig: Teubner = Die Idee der
 Riemannschen Fläche (R. Remmert (ed.)), Teubner Archiv zur Mathematik 5. Leipzig: Teubner, 1997.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1925. Theorie der Darstellung kontinuirlicher halbeinfacher Gruppen durch lineare Trans-
 formationen I, II, III (resp. Math. Zeit 23:271-309, Math. Zeit. 24:328-376, Math. Zeit. 24:377-395) =
 (Weyl 1968), vol. 2:543-647.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1955. Die Idee der Riemannschen Fläche (3., Vollständig umgearbeitete Auflage). Stuttgart:

 Teubner.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1968. In Gesammelte Abhandlungen, ed. K. Chandrasekharan. New York: Springer.
 Weyl, Hermann. 1995a. Topology and Abstract Algebra as two roads of mathematical Comprehension (part

 I, trans. A. Shenitzer). Amer. Math. Monthly 102 (5):453-460.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1995b. Topology and Abstract Algebra as Two Roads of Mathematical Comprehension

 (part II, trans. A. Shenitzer). Amer. Math. Monthly 102 (7):646-651.

 Whitney, Hassler. 1935. Sphere-spaces. Proc. NAS 21:464-468.
 Whitney, Hassler. 1936. Differentiable manifolds. Ann. Math. 37 (3):645-680.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

