 

 

 

 

Further adventures of the Rome 1594 Arabic redaction of Euclid's "Elements"
Author(s): Gregg De Young
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 3 (May 2012), pp. 265-294
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41472233
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:10 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2012) 66:265-294
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0094-9

 of Euclid's Elements

 Gregg De Young

 Further adventures of the Rome 1594 Arabic redaction

 Received: 14 November 2011 / Published online: 18 April 2012
 © Springer- Verlag 2012

 Abstract This article takes up the adventure of the Arabic version of the Elements
 published in Rome at the Typographia Medicea in 1594 at the point where the first
 installment (Cassinet, Revue française d'histoire du livre 78-79:5-51, 1993) ended.
 In this new installment of the adventure, we situate the Rome edition within a stemma

 of connected Arabic copies spanning some four centuries. We show that the text of
 the Rome edition was typeset from Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, Or. 20 and that
 Or. 20 in turn was copied from Or. 50. We show that a manuscript (Tehran, Sipahsa-
 lar 540) was later copied from the printed edition and that still later the text of the
 Rome edition was reissued in lithograph form in Fez. The story is important because

 the Rome edition influenced the development of non-Euclidean geometry in European

 mathematics and because the mistaken identity of its author has led to persistent errors

 in the history of mathematics.

 Keywords Euclid's Elements • Medici Press

 1 Introduction

 The 6th/l 3th century was an age of TahrTr writing in the exact sciences.1 This century

 saw the production of at least three different TahrTr of Euclid's Elements - by Muhyi

 1 The Arabic term tahrïr is often rendered in English as redaction. It implies an editing, usually not so

 much in terms of re-arranging or altering the mathematical content but in terms of improving the style or
 presentation of earlier Arabic versions of the text. Sometimes it also has the connotation of bringing into

 Communicated by : Menso Folkerts.

 G. De Young (13)
 Department of Mathematics and Actuarial Science, The American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt
 e-mail: gdeyoung@aucegypt.edu

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 266 G. De Young

 al-Dïn al-Maghribl, by the most prolific tahrïr writer of them all, Naslr al-Dïn al-TusT,

 and by a still anonymous author who, apparently inspired by al-TüsI, completed his

 work at the very end of the century. These efforts are often considered to embody the
 summation of four centuries of study and discussion of Euclid's text, and the works

 composed during this century mark perhaps the culmination or fullest elaboration of

 these discussions, although assuredly not the end of interesting debate and speculation
 about mathematical questions.

 Thaer (1934) was one of the first historians to call attention to the fact that among

 the many manuscripts of the Arabic redaction of Euclid's Elements attributed to Nasïr
 al-DTn al-TusT there were a few that differed somewhat from the others. These few

 included only books I-XIII rather that the usual 15 books (omitting the apocryphal
 books XIV and XV which were traditionally attributed to Hypsicles) and contained
 a demonstration of the perennially problematic parallels postulate different from that

 in the majority of manuscripts. They were typically designated as the "longer" and
 "shorter" versions and both were assumed to be the work of al-TüsI - the "shorter"

 being a further or secondary editing of the "longer" version. The differences in their

 demonstrations of the parallels postulate were intriguing, though. More than 40 years
 ago Rosenfeld (1966) and Sabra (1968, p. 15) independently raised doubts whether
 these two versions actually represented the work of the same person. It was Sabra
 (1969, p. 18) who argued that the date of completion (698 AH/ AD 1298) given in
 the colophon of one of the surviving manuscripts of the "shorter" or "thirteen book"
 version was inconsistent with al-TusI's known date of death (674 AH/ AD 1274).

 The shorter or "thirteen book" version was printed in Rome in 1594 as part of
 the Arabic publishing program of the Medici Oriental Press (Typographia Medicea).
 This press was set up by Ferdinand de Medici (1549-1609), Grand Duke of Tuscany,
 with Giovan Battista Raimondi (ca. 1536-1614) as its director. The precise origins of
 the press are somewhat shadowy.2 Although Ferdinand may have also entertained the

 hope of personal aggrandizement and perhaps pecuniary gain through the press, his
 primary publicly stated purpose was religious. In his directions to Raimondi, the Duke

 ordered first the printing of the Holy Bible in Arabic . . . and all Catholic books

 on Scripture that could be recovered in that language to serve the Arab Chris-

 tians in the East and the Granadans in Spain. And he ordered the printing of all
 available Arabic books on permissible human sciences which had no religious

 content to introduce the art of printing to the Mahomedan community so that by
 the same means knowledge of the Mahomedans' errors and of the truth of the

 Christian faith could gradually get through to them (Jones 1994, p. 97).

 Footnote 1 continued

 the text supplementary materials, such as alternate demonstrations, or discussions of the more difficult
 mathematical points of the text. Most of the tahrïr in the exact sciences were based on Arabic translations

 of Greek treatises that had originally been made in the second/eighth or third /ninth centuries at a time when

 Arabic lacked a consistent and standardized vocabulary and rhetorical style for expressing mathematical
 concepts. This genre represents only one of several - there were also corrections, additions, commentar-

 ies, extracts, abridgements and more being produced in a steady stream even into the thirteenth century.
 These various genres typically represent overlapping categories which shade into one another rather than
 indicating rigidly defined domains.

 2 Jones (1994, p. 97) gives 1584 as the date of inception, while Cassinet (1993, p. 5) suggests the date 1586.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 267

 Based on these instructions, Raimondi constructed a very ambitious publication

 plan that would have included some 80 titles. Unfortunately, the press of immediate
 activities and duties gradually drew Ferdinand's interests away from the press and his
 financial contributions became less and less. Eventually, Raimondi himself purchased

 the press from Ferdinand, but without financial resources he was unable to complete

 more than a tiny fraction of what he had once intended.

 This publishing program represented one of the earliest attempts to print Arabic in

 Europe. That Euclid should have been chosen as one of the Arabic texts to be printed

 by the press only serves to remind us of the remarkable role that the Elements has

 played in the intellectual history of Mediterranean and European cultures. By the time
 this Arabic version was issued by the press the Elements had already been printed
 numerous times in Europe.3 This was the only Arabic print edition to be published

 prior to the nineteenth century and the only printed Arabic edition to be produced
 in Europe. Inevitably, it became the Arabic treatise that was most widely studied by
 European mathematicians and historians of mathematics over the past centuries.

 The treatise published by the Medici Press was not, however, a version of one of the

 original translations into Arabic. It was, rather, a reworking of Euclid's text - one of

 several such redactions produced during the thirteenth century. It has been suggested

 that a secondary motive for printing an Arabic version of the Elements was to provide
 additional material to scholars who wished to learn Arabic or improve their linguistic

 skills. But if this goal were to be usefully realized, it would have been better to print
 an actual Arabic translation from the Greek, which could then have been compared
 either with the Greek text or one of the Latin translations to introduce the needed tech-

 nical vocabulary and to familiarize the student with basic grammatical structures.4

 A second goal might have been to expose the intellectuals of the Muslim East to the
 content of the Elements. For what purpose? Ferdinand's stated goal was to introduce

 the Islamic world to printing and so show them the value of European learning and woo

 them to Christianity. But if this were indeed the motivation, it seems a strangely mis-

 placed hope since there was a long-standing and prolific Arabic manuscript tradition

 featuring discussions of Euclid going back almost to the time of the first translations

 some 750 years earlier. This printed edition would be unlikely to impress the eastern
 Mediterranean scholars with European mathematical superiority.

 Whatever its motivation, the initial print run of the Arabic Elements was an aston-

 ishing 3000 copies. This was exceeded only by the 3500 print run for the bilingual
 Arabic-Latin Gospels printed in 1590. Clearly Raimondi and the press administrators
 must have expected a considerable market from the Arabic-speaking Middle East for

 this first venture into printing Arabic mathematics.5 The records of the press also attest

 3 The first Latin printed Euclid (the Campanus version) was published by Ratdolt in 1482. A Greek edition
 (by Simon Grynaeus) was printed in 1533. Italian, German, French, and English versions of the Elements
 had also been printed by the 1590s (Heath 1956, 1, pp. 97-1 13).

 4 The most popular printed Latin editions also were not based on the primary transmission of Euclid but
 on reworking of the text by Campanus and others. Hence, it would have been a delicate or even dauntingly
 difficult problem to make direct comparisons between the Arabic and the Latin printed versions of the
 Euclidean text.

 5 Even in nineteenth century Britain, the typical print run for popular geometry textbooks seems rarely to
 have exceeded 1000 copies (Ackerberg-Hastings 2002, p. 43).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 268 G. De Young

 Fig. 1 That the Rome 1594 edition targeted two different audiences seems clear even from the title page.
 Some copies were issued with only an Arabic title page containing nothing more than an author and title
 statement (left). Image courtesy History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries. Other
 copies were issued with a bilingual Arabic and Latin title page (right). The Latin portion of the page con-

 tains not only author and title statement but also names the printing press and states the date of publication.

 Image courtesy of the Rare Books and Special Collections Library, The American University in Cairo

 that these expectations were not met - only a little more than 1000 copies had been

 sold when the press ceased operations Jones (1994, p. 108). Despite the personal pious

 hopes of Ferdinand, the printed edition had almost no impact on the Eastern world,

 either religiously or mathematically. Most copies were apparently bought by European
 scholars.

 2 Disentangling genuine and Pseudo-TüsT Tahrïr

 Until Rosenfeld and Sabra began to question the ascription of the "shorter" version

 to al-Tusï, most historians had regarded it as a somewhat edited form of the "longer"

 (and genuine) version of al-Tusï' s treatise. They did so in good faith, misled by the
 ascription to Nasïr al-Dïn al-Tusï on the title page of the Rome edition (Fig. I).6 And
 since earlier historians tended to focus their study mainly on the demonstration of

 the parallels postulate it contained, they considered only a small part of the treatise.
 Since there are two demonstrations of the parallels postulate found in the genuine
 works of al-Tusï and they differ somewhat from one another, it was easy to assume
 that the demonstration in the printed Rome edition, which differs from both genuine

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 6 Although some have suggested that the author must be Sadr al-Dïn al-Tusï, son of Nasïr al-Dïn and
 his successor as head of the Marägha observatory, there is at present no explicit evidence to support this
 hypothesis. I prefer to denominate the author simply as Pseudo-Tûsï.

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 269

 demonstrations in significant ways, although it in part also seems inspired by these
 demonstrations, could also be the work of al-TüsI.7

 If we examine the texts closely, however, we must conclude that if the Rome edition

 represents an editing of the original version of al-TusI, then that editing must have

 been very extensive indeed. For example, the Rome edition contains an introductory
 discussion not found in al-Tusï's treatise and inserts into the definitions of book V

 paraphrases of al-Jawhan's attempt to demonstrate Euclid's definitions 5 and 7 and
 the converse of 5 (De Young 1997, 2009a). Moreover, nearly every definition and
 every proposition enunciation has been reformulated. One example, the enunciation

 of proposition 1,2, must suffice to illustrate these rhetorical differences:

 T = We want to extend from a given point a line equal to a bounded line.8
 PT = We are to add to any specified point a straight line equal to a bounded

 straight line on condition of the two of them being in a single plane.9

 And when we examine the demonstrations carefully, we find sometimes substantial
 differences in formulation between the two.10 Al-TusT had included numerous math-

 ematical notes and alternative demonstrations, many of them derived from an earlier

 commentary on the Elements by Ibn al-Haytham, Kitäb fi hall shukük kitäb uqlTdis
 (De Young 2009b). None of the notes and alternative demonstrations based on Ibn
 al-Haytham appear in the Rome edition. The few notes that occur are mainly struc-
 tural and editorial remarks such as notes on how the translation version of al-Hajjäj
 differed from the edition of Thäbit ibn Qurrah. Some of these notes also appear in

 al-Tûsî' s Tahrïr , but they are formulated differently, and sometimes contain informa-

 tion not present in the Pseudo-TusT text. A few editorial notes not found in al-Tusï

 also appear in the Rome edition. More striking, though, are the many references to
 preceding propositions found within the text of the Rome edition. Such references
 were not part of the text of al-TüsI, although one often finds that some references
 have been added either interlinearly or in the margins of manuscripts of the genuine

 Tahrïr , presumably by later readers. There are also occasional differences in ordering

 of definitions or numbering of propositions between the traditional Byzantine Greek
 text and the Arabic version of al-TusT.11 The re-orderings found in the Rome edition

 7 Jaouiche discussed the details of these demonstrations (1986, pp. 99-111) and also provided a French
 translation of the Arabic texts (1986, pp. 201-226, 233-241). Rosenfeld (1980, pp. 74-80) gives one of the

 more comprehensive discussions of these demonstrations in English.

 8 London, British Library, ms. add. 23387, fol. 5a:

 9 Pseudo-Tusi, Kitab tahrir usul li-uqlidis (Rome, 1594), p. 9:

 «£ yo Jai I» jLi-« lia» ocuJaJ (j! 11)

 10 See, for example, the different attempts to demonstrate Euclid's fifth postulate, as edited by Sabra (1959).

 1 1 These differences appear already in the Arabic primary transmission documents. Based on these differ-
 ences in ordering and on differences in technical vocabulary, (De Young 1984; De Young 2004, pp. 314-3 1 8)
 and Engroff (1980) divided the testimonia into Group A and Group B. Although it has been suggested that
 these two primary textual traditions may derive from the earliest translations of the Elements into Arabic,

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The proposition numbers in the Greek column represent the actual number of the propositions as recorded

 in the manuscripts. The table shows that the ninth proposition in the Greek text is the twelfth proposition in
 al-Tusï's Tahrïr , and the same proposition is the eleventh in the Pseudo-Tusï text. The difference between

 al-Tusï and Pseudo-Tusï is that the latter has converted the equivalent of Greek proposition VI, 12 (which
 is proposition VI, 1 1 in al-Tusï's text) into a porism attached to the previous proposition. This change was
 introduced, we are informed, because al-Hajjäj, the early translator of the Greek text into Arabic, had not
 included the demonstration as an independent proposition (Pseudo-Tusï 1594, 144)

 Table 1 An example of alteration in proposition ordering in book VI

 270 G. De Young

 Greek Tusï Rome

 VI, 9 VI, 12 VI, 11

 VI, 10 VI, 13 VI, 12

 VI, 11 VI, 10 VI, 10

 VI, 12 VI, 11 VI, 10 Porism

 VI, 13

 r a /'

 LZZZa L±zz===]

 Fig. 2 Diagrams for Element, II, 14. Left the diagram edited from Bologna, Biblioteca Comunale, 19,
 fool. 74v. Greek manuscripts typically show the given figure as a triangle. Center the diagram from Tahrïr
 Kitäb Uqlidis of al-Tusï edited from Cairo, Där al-Kutub, Tal' at riyäda 107, fol. 34a. The Arabic tradition

 sometimes shows the given figure as a triangle but more often as a square or rectangle. In this manuscript,
 the copyist uses an irregular quadrilateral. Right the diagram edited from the Rome 1594 printed edition,

 p. 62. The Pseudo-Tusï tradition typically uses an unusual elongated shape to represent the given figure

 sometimes differ from both the Byzantine transmission and from al-Tusï's version.
 One example, taken from book VI, is outlined in Table 1.

 Finally, there are sometimes significant differences in construction of diagrams

 between al-Tûsï's genuine Tahrïr and the Rome edition. For example, the diagram for
 Elements II, 14 has distinctly different characteristics in different transmission streams

 (Fig. 2). Also, diagrams representing numbers, which were traditionally constructed

 using line segments, are constructed in the printed Pseudo-Tusï Tahrïr using columns
 of dots to represent the discrete magnitudes (Fig. 3). 12

 Footnote 1 1 continued

 this speculation has been difficult to demonstrate because only a few brief quotations ascribed to the ear-
 lier translation work of al-Hajjäj ibn Yüsuf ibn Matar have survived, embedded within other versions or

 commentaries (De Young 1991; De Young 2003a). Al-Tusï usually follows the formulation and ordering
 of Group A primary manuscripts.

 Although these differences in diagram construction are helpful diagnostic devices, they are not com-

 pletely reliable. We know at least one copy of the genuine Tahrïr of al-Tusï that also constructs the diagrams
 of books VII-IX using columns of dots (Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, or. 26). At present I am unable to

 determine whether this use of dots represents an independent experiment by a copyist or whether it might
 have been influenced by the diagram conventions of the Pseudo-Tusï tradition.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 271

 Fig. 3 Diagrams for Elements,
 VII, 1 from the Pseudo-Tusï

 tradition. Left the diagram edited
 from Or. 50, fol. 81a. Use of line

 iii •

 segments to represent discrete
 magnitudes is consistent with

 -9» •
 •
 j •
 the traditional approach to
 • L
 diagramming numbers in books
 VII-IX. Right the diagram edited
 from Or. 20, fol. 149a. Use of

 : :

 columns of points to represent
 discrete magnitudes (numbers)
 is typical of this manuscript and
 later works dependent upon it

 * : : •
 - 1

 j c

 These differences strongly suggest that the Rome 1594 printed edition does not

 represent simply a re-editing of al-Tusï' s treatise but an independent work. At the
 same time, it is not completely independent of the earlier work, since it incorporates

 some distinctive technical vocabulary from al-Tusfs redaction.

 3 Laurentian library manuscripts Or. 50 and Or. 20

 We have long known that there were two manuscript copies of the "shorter" version
 of the Tahrïr in the Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana in Florence. These manuscripts,

 once thought to be the only extant copies of the text, were identified by Murdoch
 (1971, p. 454) as Or. 2 and Or. 51. The manuscripts are currently classed as Or. 20
 and Or. 50 (Sabra 1968, p. 15). In the four decades since Murdoch wrote his sum-

 mary, a few other copies have been identified. I shall discuss them further later in this

 article. It is impossible to estimate how many additional manuscripts may also exist,
 still incorrectly cataloged under the name of al-TusT. Cassinet (1993, p. 6), following
 Taha (1986), who had studied three manuscripts attributed to al-TüsI in the Biblioteca
 Medicea Laurenziana, argued that Or. 50 rather than Or. 282 (a copy of the genuine
 al-Tusï Tahrïr ), was the source for the text of the Rome 1594 printed edition.13 He

 was correct in the sense that Or. 50 is a copy of the "shorter" (Pseudo-Tüsl) version

 that was printed. But closer examination of Or. 20 and Or. 50 shows definitively that

 it was mainly from Or. 20 that the compositors worked when they typeset the Rome
 edition. Moreover, it is now clear that the text of Or. 20 (but not its diagrams) was

 copied from Or. 50.

 3.1 Manuscript characteristics

 Manuscript Or. 50 is complete in 205 folios. Its colophon gives the date of composition
 of the text as 698 AH and the date of its copying as 969 AH/ AD 1561. The text is

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 13 Taha's study is not available to me. Thus, the question why he chose these copies - two incomplete cop-
 ies of the genuine al-Tusï Tahrïr and a complete copy of the Pseudo-Tusï Tahrïr - for his study remains
 unanswered.

 272 G. De Young

 copied with 20 lines per page. Definitions and axioms are written in a single block
 of text. Sometimes the beginning of a new definition is indicated by a line over the
 first word, a very typical format for an Arabic manuscript in the Euclidean tradition.

 Proposition numbers are given only in the outer margins using the traditional abjad
 system. Diagrams are also placed in the outer margins beside each demonstration.
 In general, these diagrams are constructed in the traditional forms used in the Ara-

 bic primary transmission manuscripts. We note especially that the diagrams of books
 VII-IX are constructed using line segments.14 The copyist has inserted guide words
 in the lower margin at the end of each folio to aid the transition to the next folio.

 Corrections, apparently in the hand of the copyist, have been placed in the margins.

 Someone, whether the copyist or a reader is not clear, has inserted in the upper margin
 of each page an indication of the book (indicated by the Arabic letter qäf) and the

 propositions (indicated by the Arabic letter shin) found on that page. These book and
 proposition numbers are given using Arabic-script numerals. At the end of the man-
 uscript, following a blank folio, are six scraps of paper containing notes of various

 kinds, written in a different hand. Some appear to be calligraphic practice, while others
 appear to contain some geometrical content.

 Manuscript Or. 20 is now incomplete. At present, the text fills 262 folios and breaks

 off at the end of folio 262 before the completion of proposition X, 95. 15 Since the man-

 uscript is now incomplete, there is no colophon to provide information on the date of
 copying.16 The Arabic text of Or. 20 was copied with 24 lines per page. Definitions

 and axioms are written in a single block of text at the beginning of the various books,

 except in the case of book V, where later definitions each begin on a new line. This

 formatting pattern is continued in the definitions of book VII and of book X. Proposi-

 tions are given a verbal heading written in larger script, which is usually centered on an

 independent line and takes the form "al-shakl" followed by an ordinal number. Prop-
 ositions are also numbered in the margin using the traditional Arabic abjad system.

 For unknown reasons, not every proposition is numbered. When no number is given,
 the proposition is simply labeled "al-shakl," the term used for a proposition within the

 Euclidean tradition. Each proposition's enunciation is written in larger script, sepa-
 rated from the text of the heading by two blank lines and is followed by a blank line.

 Porisms and other comments are also separated from the preceding text by a blank
 line. There are occasional corrections, apparently in the hand of the copyist, placed in

 the margins. Their intended location in the text is usually indicated by symbols (such
 as a pair of crossed lines) above the line.

 When included, diagrams are placed in the outer margins beside the demonstration

 of the proposition. These diagrams often appear relatively small in relation to the text.

 Many propositions, however, lack diagrams. Diagrams are missing from proposition
 I, 38 to the end of the book (including the misplaced folios from book I that now lie at

 14 These diagrams thus constitute a notable exception to the style of the remainder of the Pseudo-Tûsï
 manuscripts described earlier.

 56 folios from books I- III are now disordered. Their correct order is: 1-8, 13-16, 9-12, 49-56, 17^48.

 From folio 57 onward, the ordering is correct.

 16 As I shall argue below, Or. 20 was copied from Or. 50. Since the colophon of Or. 50 indicates that the

 date of its copying was 969 AH, this provides us at least a terminus post quem for the copying of Or. 20.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 273

 the beginning of book III). Diagrams are also missing from VI, 18 and 20. Again, we
 find no diagrams for propositions VII, 33-IX, 36. There are diagrams for propositions
 X, 1-8 but thereafter more and more propositions have either no diagrams or only

 rough sketches of diagrams rather than the more carefully constructed diagrams found

 earlier in the manuscript.

 Following the text there are several folios containing geometrical diagrams. Folios
 263 and 272-273 contain diagrams apparently from the Spherics of Menelaus. The
 diagram points are labeled in Greek and the proposition numbers are also indicated
 with Greek alphanumeric notation beside each diagram. Folio 263, containing dia-
 grams 1-9, has been bound into the treatise upside down. The diagrams on folio 272r
 are inverted relative to the diagrams on folios 272v-273v. The diagram numbering
 in this section is somewhat confusing, since several diagrams have been labeled with

 the same number - presumably they represent diagrams for different parts of each
 proposition. Folios 264r-271r contain diagrams apparently from the Conic Sections
 of Apollonius. At the head of the collection the name "Äblünyüs" is written in Arabic
 script. The collection is further subdivided into seven books labeled in Arabic book
 two through book seven. Although the diagram points are labeled with Arabic letters,

 the corresponding proposition numbers are given in Latin script numerals, beginning
 anew in each section. The diagrams of book seven are followed by thirty diagrams from

 an unidentified treatise (folio 27 lr). These diagrams are separated from the diagrams

 attributed to Apollonius by a double ruled horizontal line across the page.

 3.2 Or. 20 copied from Or. 50

 A careful examination of the manuscripts indicates that the text of Or. 20 was copied

 from Or. 50. 17 The relationship between the two manuscripts is shown perhaps most

 clearly in the copying of proposition IV, 3. The original copy of Or. 20 contains a

 lacuna corresponding to the text between the last word of folio 45 a and the first word

 of folio 46b in Or. 50. Apparently the copyist accidentally turned two leaves of Or.
 50 and failed to notice his error until he reached the beginning of proposition IV, 5

 (second line of Or. 50, folio 47a) and realized that he had not yet copied proposition

 4. He canceled the incorrectly copied section and replaced it with the correct copy in

 the margins of two folios (81a-82a). In doing so, the diagrams for propositions 3 and
 4 were omitted since the text left no space in the margin for their insertion. Since we

 can still read the original text of Or. 20, we can see that the text from Or. 50, folio 46b
 as originally copied had been reproduced correctly by the copyist. We cannot know
 at this distance in time what prompted the copyist to cancel the text and recopy the

 offending section rather than simply adding the omitted material in the margin, which
 would have been a more common copyist response to such an accidental lacuna. But
 in several other places as well the copyist of Or. 20 preferred to cancel and replace

 portions of text rather than merely correct his errors.

 17 It is tempting to speculate that the copyist was Patriarch Nehemias himself (see Sect. 4, below), who
 provided many Arabic manuscripts to the Medici Press. The paléographie evidence so far is too scanty to
 reach a definite conclusion.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 274 G. De Young

 Fig. 4 Left Orientali 20, folio 83b, with the demonstration of proposition IV, 7. The original text has been
 canceled by the copyist and replaced with alternative text in the margin. The alternative text served as
 the template when typesetting the Rome 1594 edition. The canceled text had been correctly copied from
 Orientali 50, folio 48a. The underscored words near the center of the canceled section appeared in the margin

 of Or. 50. The copyist has inserted them into the text, but indicates uncertainty about their placement by

 underscoring. Vertical strokes indicating the end of typeset lines are visible in several places, for example,
 in the line immediately above the canceled section. Right Orientali 20, folio 243a. Italian notes to the
 compositors in the margin indicate placement of diagrams and indicate the use of larger font for the heading

 at the bottom of the page. The numeral 4 placed in the right margin marks the beginning of the fourth of
 the eight panes printed on a single sheet. Images courtesy Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana

 Another lengthy passage has been canceled from proposition VIII, 4 and replaced

 by a shorter text in the margin (folios 160a-161a). In this case, however, the expla-
 nation is not a copyist error, since the text from Or. 50, folio 90b-91a was copied
 correctly in the canceled section. It appears that the copyist, once he had completed

 his copying of this demonstration, realized that the result could be demonstrated more
 concisely. It is this more succinct version found in the margin that was used in the
 printed Rome edition (pp. 189-190). A similar alternate formulation has replaced part
 of the demonstration of proposition IV, 8 (folio 63b). This demonstration also was

 copied correctly from Or. 50 but later canceled and an alternative demonstration was

 written in the margin, again in the hand of the copyist. Translations of these passages
 are given in the Appendix. These alterations must have been made after the copying
 was completed but before the typesetting was done because in each case the copying
 of the canceled section follows very closely the wording of Or. 50 but the typesetting

 follows the alternate formulation written in the margins.

 Similar examples of canceled and replaced passages, although smaller in extent,
 occur in propositions III, 34; IV, 7; IV, 9; VII, 22; IX, 32; X, 7; X, 16; X, 24; X, 25; X, 26;

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 275

 X,44; X,45. These passages are different from the typical corrections that occur in
 the margins of so many manuscripts, including this one. In these examples, parts of

 the text - some more extensive than others - are very clearly and definitively canceled

 and replaced by alternate text in the margins (Fig. 4). Sometimes the cancelation is so

 heavy that it is almost impossible to decipher the original text.

 In proposition III, 34, the main difference between the canceled passage and the

 replacement passage is whether the justification for the demonstration (which relies on

 the Pythagorean Theorem) should refer to proposition 1, 46 or proposition 1, 47. This is

 a legitimate debate, since some Arabic versions - most notably those associated with
 the translation of al-Hajjäj - omit Elements 1,45. Thus, the famous theorem attributed

 to Pythagoras becomes number 46. 18 Whether the differences in this reference are

 indicators of personal preference in this debate is unclear because the Rome 1594 edi-

 tion places the Pythagorean Theorem as number 47, so if only for reasons of internal
 consistency the correction of the reference was a positive contribution. It is not so
 immediately clear, though, why the entire passage had to be canceled and recopied.
 In other propositions where a similar correction is made, for example, X,44 and 45,

 it is only the proposition number itself that is corrected.

 In proposition IV, 7, the copyist inserted two sections which had been placed in the

 margin of Or. 50 (folio 48a), apparently as corrections to the text. Since no indication

 of precisely where they were intended to be placed is provided in Or. 50, the copyist

 had to make assumptions. We find that he underlined the second insertion in his copy,

 perhaps to indicate some uncertainty as to its placement. Then the entire demonstration
 was canceled and replaced by another formulation (folio 63b). In a similar fashion,
 a section of the original demonstration of proposition VII, 22 has been canceled and

 replaced by another formulation (folio 152a).

 In the case of proposition IV, 9, we find a section of text in the margin of Or. 20

 (folio 84b). This material corresponds to material in the margin of Or. 50 (folio 49b).

 It seems likely that the copyist was unsure where the material should be inserted, but

 felt it was important to include it in his copy. In a similar way, in propositions V, 7, X, 7

 and X, 18 the copyist of Or. 20 repeated material from the margin of Or. 50. But since
 he did not know where to insert the text, he simply placed it in boxes in the margins
 of Or. 20.

 We find that the copyist has canceled part of the enunciation of three propositions

 near the beginning of book X and has re-written them in the margin. In proposition
 X,24, the first of these examples, the re- written material (folio 207b) appears to be

 exactly the same as the original material which was itself copied correctly from Or. 50
 (folio 1 14b). I suggest that this "correction" probably resulted from a mistaken action

 by the copyist. In the next proposition (X, 25), we find a very similar correction in
 which the last part of the enunciation of the proposition was canceled and replaced by
 new text (folio 208a). This new text is exactly the same as the original version except

 that a reference to proposition 23 has been removed and the copyist has incorrectly
 written al-tül instead of al-atwal although the term is correctly given in the original

 copy. Again in proposition X,26, the copyist has (mistakenly?) introduced a word -

 18 This omission is noted both by al-Tüsi (De Young 2003b, p. 135) and by the author of the Rome 1594
 edition (p. 44).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 276 G. De Young

 it appears to be hïna (the word is not found in Or. 50) into the enunciation. And once

 again, rather than simply cancel the incorrect word, he canceled the entire last half of

 the enunciation and rewrote it in the margin (folio 208b).

 3.3 Puzzling features of the copying process

 Although the evidence adduced so far seems strongly to point to the direct copying of

 the text of Or. 50 into Or. 20, there are still some puzzles associated with that transmis-

 sion hypothesis. Perhaps the most puzzling feature of the transition from Or. 50 to Or.

 20 are the differences in diagram construction between the two manuscripts. We have

 already noted the distinctive difference, for example, in the diagram for proposition
 II, 14 (Fig. 2). In Or. 50, the given shape is drawn as a quadrilateral, while Or. 20

 has the classic irregular elongated figure with which we are familiar from the printed
 Rome edition.19 This striking difference in construction can function as a convenient

 diagnostic to identify manuscripts related to the Pseudo-TusT tradition. A second use-

 ful diagnostic is the choice of dots rather than line segments to represent discrete
 magnitudes (numbers) in book VII (Fig. 3) - a pattern found also in books VII-X of

 the printed Rome edition.20 In fact, the differences between Or. 50 and Or. 20 appear

 already in the diagrams illustrating the definition of the circle and its components at
 the beginning of book I. In Or. 50, there are only three diagrams, but in Or. 20 there

 are four. (Or. 50 does not include a diagram to illustrate the diameter of the circle.)

 A second puzzling feature about the diagrams of Or. 20 is that several diagrams

 have been constructed only to be canceled and redrawn again. Often these canceled

 diagrams represent errors by the copyist rather than errors in construction of the dia-

 grams themselves. For example, on folio 63b (end of proposition III, 12), the copyist
 mistakenly repeated diagram number 13 instead of diagram number 14. A parallel
 situation appears on folios 67b and 68a, as well as folios 70b and 71a, when once
 again, diagrams have been copied or drawn in the wrong margin and then canceled
 and replaced by correct diagrams. In the case of propositions V, 12 and VI, 7, we can

 only say that the copyist apparently made a mistake. One has the impression that these

 diagrams are being constructed based on the text and that sometimes the draughtsman
 did not clearly understand the text. But this observation merely begs the question -

 if the text is being copied from Or. 50, why were not the diagrams also copied?21

 19 The diagram for this proposition has undergone a considerable evolution. The Byzantine tradition reg-
 ularly constructs the given shape as a triangle. The Arabic transmission sometimes retains the triangle, but
 more often replaces is with a quadrilateral.

 20 I have found a similar technique using dots in a manuscript of the genuine TahrTr of al-Tûsï, Laurentiana,
 Or. 26. The manuscript is unfortunately incomplete - it breaks off abruptly in the middle of the folio 123b

 after three lines of book VIII. There is no colophon to provide a date but the script appears to be relatively
 recent. In the case of proposition VII, 1, its diagram is exactly like that found in Or. 20, except that its

 structure is inverted, so that instead of reading from bottom to top, one reads from top to bottom. Although
 this is a striking coincidence, there is no consistent pattern of numerical values to indicate that the Or. 26
 manuscript might be the source for the apparent innovation in Or. 20.

 21 Placement of the diagrams in the margins of the manuscript leaves the question of when they were
 constructed somewhat more ambiguous. Diagrams placed within the text more often contain clues that help

 to establish the sequencing of text and diagram construction. If the text completely surrounds the diagrams,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 277

 A third puzzling feature of manuscript Or. 20, is that so many propositions lack

 diagrams. Even when there is no extant diagram in Or. 20, the intended placement

 of diagrams has been indicated, apparently by the compositor preparing the typeset-

 ting, using the appropriate proposition number. But when there were no diagrams in
 the manuscript Or. 20, where did the printer or compositor find the diagrams that
 were commissioned for inclusion in the printed edition? Of course, there is always

 the manuscript Or. 50. But its diagrams typically differ structurally, as well as in their

 proportions and their orientation, from those found in Or. 20 and in the printed edition.
 At the moment, our questions have no easy answer.

 4 Arabic manuscripts and the Medici Press

 Where did the Medici press get the Arabic manuscripts needed to prepare its printed
 editions? The announced publishing program of the Medici press necessitated access
 to Arabic source material in manuscript form. I have already outlined some of the
 evidence indicating that the Rome 1594 edition of Euclid was typeset from Arabic
 manuscript Or. 20, which is now in the Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana in Florence.
 In this section, I outline how this and other manuscripts used in the publishing program

 of the press were acquired.

 Current evidence suggests that they were acquired from the exiled Jacobite Patriarch

 of Antioch, Ighnätyus Nicmat Allah (died ca. 1590), whom Latin sources called Patri-
 arch Ignatius or Nehemias.22 Ignatius appears to have been an exceptionally learned
 polymath who, in addition to his ecclesiastical position as head of the Jacobite Chris-
 tians of Asia Minor, served as personal physician to the Muslim ruler of Diyarbakir

 because of his widely recognized skills in Islamic medical lore. Members of the local

 Muslim religious elite were not happy with the influential court position held by the

 Patriarch and stirred up public feeling against him. Apparently in the hope of quelling

 the controversy and at the same time protecting his physician, the ruler, during one
 of his regular evening séances, took off his own turban and placed it on Ignatius's
 head while declaring that he had converted to Islam. Nicmat Allah was scarcely in a

 position to refuse the "honor" bestowed by the ruler's gesture, but the episode turned
 the Christian community against him, and he was forced to abdicate his ecclesiastical
 position (1576).

 When he departed from Antioch into self-imposed exile, the former Patriarch took
 with him his considerable collection of Arabic manuscripts. With his manuscripts, he

 Footnote 21 continued

 so that the space for the diagram takes the same basic shape as the diagram itself, we would conclude that
 the diagram of the proposition was drawn first, then the remaining text added around. On the other hand,
 if some of the diagrams impinge on or overlap lines of text, the diagrams were added later in spaces that

 apparently were too small for the intended diagram (De Young 2012). In both manuscripts Or. 50 and Or.
 20, we find that even though placed in the margins, the diagrams occasionally impinge on the neighboring
 text. Hence, it is probable that these diagrams were added after the text was copied.

 22 In this section, I rely primarily on the biographical information published by Toomer (1996, pp. 22-24)
 and Saliba (2008, pp. 199-212). The main source for information on the career of this colorful scholar is a
 letter sent by Ignatius near the end of his life to his former Jacobite Christian congregation in Diyar Bakir.
 This letter has been published in Arabic (cAzzö 1933).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 278 G. De Young

 sailed to Venice (1577). 23 From there he traveled to Florence, where he probably met

 Ferdinand, who was already thinking about the possibility of setting up his printing

 venture, and ultimately made his way to Rome. There he was received with great honor

 by Pope Gregory XIII, perhaps with the hope that he might be able to help return the

 Eastern church to papal authority.24 After some negotiation with Ferdinand, Ignatius

 reached an agreement under which he would donate his manuscripts to the press.25

 In gratitude for his donation, he was named to its editorial board, awarded a monthly

 stipend of 25 scudi, and promised free access to his manuscripts for the rest of his life.
 Today these manuscripts form the core of the Orientali collection of the Biblioteca
 Medicea Laurenziana in Florence.

 5 Typesetting the Rome 1594 edition

 In this section, I turn to specific evidence supporting my claim that the Rome 1594

 edition was typeset from manuscript Or. 20. The primary evidence for the use of Or.

 20 is the markings left in the manuscript by the typesetter. These markings are of three

 basic types which are introduced into the manuscript in successive stages. The first

 type of marking is a pencil stroke to indicate the beginning of each typeset page. The

 second type of marking, apparently introduced a little later in the typesetting process,
 is a pencil stroke to indicate the beginning of each new typeset line of text in the

 printed edition. The third type of marking are printer notes written in the margins in
 Italian, usually indicating placement of diagrams, appears only near the end of the
 manuscript.

 5.1 Printer instruction markings in Or. 20

 No printer markings can be discerned in the first 56 folios of the manuscript. This sec-

 tion of the manuscript corresponds to the portion of the manuscript that is currently

 disordered, but it is impossible to ascertain whether this fact is anything more than a
 coincidence.

 Beginning with the fourth proposition of book III, someone has inserted into Or.

 20 a pencil stroke to mark the beginning of each page of text in the printed edition and

 placed opposite this point in the margin of the manuscript a numeral in Latin script.

 23 The date is certain because he noted at the end of a short mathematical manuscript that he had finished
 studying the tract while sailing to Venice"in the year 1888 of the Greeks" or 1577 AD. The manuscript in
 question was a copy of the Ashkäl al-Ta'sïs of al-Samarqandï (fl. last half of 6th/13th century), a collection
 of 35 propositions and summary demonstrations drawn mainly from books I and II of the Elements (De
 Young 2001) in the commentary of Qâdïzâde al-Rûmï. The manuscript is now in the Biblioteca Medicea
 Laurenziana, Or. 177. The Patriarch's hand-written note appears on fol. 79b.

 Although he was never in a position to effect such an ecclesiastical re-unification, Ignatius did enter
 Papal service, playing a key role on the panel of mathematical astronomers deliberating on the reform of
 the calendar which was eventually to produce the modern Gregorian calendar. DellaVida (1948) contains
 interesting details of the Patriarch's relations with the Vatican, drawn from original documents.

 25 Although Toomer (1996, p. 23) merely reports this donation, Saliba (2008, p. 202) goes on to suggest
 that the donation was influenced by monetary considerations.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 279

 The first of these numbers that we encounter is 2 (folio 57b) and the numbers continue

 to 8, after which they repeat again from l.26 This pattern continues to the end of the

 manuscript. These marks appear to serve no useful purpose apart from the typesetting

 process. From this observation, we may deduce that the book was printed with four
 pages on the one side of each sheet and another four pages on the reverse. The sheet

 would then have been folded into quarters making eight pages.

 Beginning with book III, proposition 10 (which represents the eighth pane of a

 sheet), the beginning of every line of Arabic text in the typesetting has been indicated

 in the manuscript with a vertical pencil stroke (Fig. 4). This pattern is continued for

 the remainder of the treatise, superimposed on the first marking pattern. The reason

 for the introduction of this second marking procedure at this point in the treatise is not

 clear. We may speculate that this marking was introduced to facilitate checking the

 proofs against the manuscript for accuracy.

 Some diagrams in Or. 20 are numbered. In book III, this numbering occurs usually

 when there are two or three different cases and is intended to indicate the order in

 which the diagrams are to appear in the printed text. Beginning from proposition V, 6

 each diagram is numbered using the alphanumeric abjad values - usually the same as

 the proposition number. These numbers begin anew in each new book. For reasons still

 not understood, in book X the numbering changes to use the Latin-script numerals and

 these numerals often indicate the intended placement of the diagrams in the margins

 when the actual diagrams are missing. I suspect that these numerals also are inserted by

 the compositor or typesetter, not a reader of the manuscript. In the earlier books, the dia-

 gram numbers often seem correlated to the ordering of diagrams in the printed edition

 when they differ from the ordering given in the manuscript. For example, the diagrams

 accompanying the definitions of the parts of a circle in book I are not in the same order

 in Or. 20 as those found in the printed edition, but the compositor has numbered them

 (using Latin-script numerals) to show in which order he wished them to appear - and

 this is just the order we find in the Rome 1594 version. The diagrams illustrating clas-

 ses of triangles and quadrilaterals as well, although not different in form from those

 in Or. 50, were printed in a different order from that found in Or. 20. For unknown

 reasons, the compositor has used the traditional abjad numbers to indicate the desired

 ordering of these diagrams, although everywhere else he used Latin-script numerals.

 The clearest indication that the Rome 1594 edition was typeset from Or. 20 lies in

 the Italian notes found in the margin in book X (beginning with folio 235). Most often

 these refer to placement of diagrams (qui va la figura della xx - where xx is the number

 of the diagram within the book, not necessarily the proposition number - sometimes a

 proposition uses the same diagram as the previous proposition). There seems no other
 explanation than that these Italian notes must be instructions to the compositor.

 The manuscript Or. 20 was already in its present incomplete state when the modern

 cataloging and foliation were done - probably in the eighteenth or nineteenth century.

 26 This implies that the first page to be marked in this way would have been the immediately preceding
 page, which begins in the middle of proposition III, 2. This seems an unlikely place to introduce a new
 procedure - the first proposition of book III begins a new page and that would have seemed a more logical
 beginning point. The beginning point of the new procedure was not indicated in the manuscript, however.
 Although numerals 2 through 8 are easily read, the form of the initial numeral is not written as a typical
 Latin-script "1" but appears more like a combination of Roman letters B and A.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 280 G. De Young

 This leaves open the question of exactly what was the state of the manuscript when
 the text was typeset. It must have been more complete than it is today because the

 typesetter's markings indicate that the fourth frame would have been incomplete if the

 manuscript ceased at the point it does today. The manuscript Or. 50 is still in com-

 plete form, and it is obvious that the typesetters must have had available an exemplar
 from which they worked, but there are no annotations in Or. 50 similar to those found

 routinely in Or. 20 that would indicate that Or. 50 was used to complete the printed
 edition. But if manuscript Or. 20 was complete at the time of typesetting the Rome
 edition, what has happened to the remainder of the text?

 5.2 Printing errors

 The Dutch Arabist Thomas Erpenius (1584-1624) had complained that one of the
 first Medici Press publications, an Arabic grammar titled Äjurrümiyya (1592), had
 been printed "with very elegant lettering but... with omissions here and there not so

 much of words but of entire sentences" (Jones 1994, p. 91). Erpenius, we should note,

 was not a completely neutral witness - he had set up a press in his home in Leiden to

 print Arabic materials, among the first of which was his own popular edition of the

 Äjurrümiyya (1613). Nevertheless, we should ask ourselves whether his criticism may
 have had some basis in fact and whether the same criticism may be applicable to the

 Medici edition of Euclid. As one reads through the text, occasional errors tend to leap

 out from the page. We find, for example, that the typesetter has incorrectly omitted the

 letter käf from the word kullu in the demonstration of proposition III, 8 (two lines from

 the bottom of page 69). But even though such typesetting errors occur in the Rome

 edition, they are no more frequent than proof-reading errors in any modern printed
 book. And in most cases the correct reading is obvious and so the mistakes are often

 not transmitted into later copies.

 But not all errors in the typeset text are the result of compositor carelessness, as

 we can tell from comparing the printed text with the manuscript Or. 20. In the enun-

 ciation of proposition VII, 1, the typesetter has written al-awwol , rather than al-aqall
 and a little later in the same enunciation, he has written bacd instead of the correct

 yacuddu (p. 149). The typesetter in this case has correctly reproduced the text of Or.
 20 (fol. 143a). These errors represent apparent copying lapses that were introduced
 between manuscript Or. 50 (fol. 81a) and Or. 20. When we look at the text in manu-

 script Or. 50, we can understand how these errors might have occurred as the result of

 orthographical ambiguities in the earlier treatise. Another apparent typesetting error

 occurs in the numbering of proposition III, 1 1. In manuscript Or. 20, each proposition
 is given a title - "al-shakl al-awwal" for example - written out in words. Beside the
 first line of the proposition enunciation, one usually finds the same number written in

 traditional abjad form. Someone has changed the abjad number of this proposition
 from "yä-alif" to "yä-bä" - that is, from eleven to twelve (fol. 62b). When the Rome

 edition was typeset, it did not retain the verbal titles found in Or. 20 but used only the
 abjad numerals as headings for propositions. So the printers followed the apparent
 "correction" in the manuscript and labeled this proposition "yä-bä" - resulting in two
 propositions being given the same number in the printed edition (pp. 72-73). Again,

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 281

 when one looks at Or. 20, it is clear that this is not a typesetting error but a faithful

 representation of an error that had crept into the manuscript copy. This example pro-

 vides one more piece of evidence, if more is needed, that the typesetting of the Rome

 edition was done using manuscript Or. 20.

 5.3 Diagrams puzzles

 One of the persistent puzzles pertaining to the printing of this TahrTr is how Raimondi

 managed to produce such elegant diagrams. The standard presumption is that they were

 created using woodblock technology, but mixing woodblock with cast type while still
 obtaining a clear crisp print was not an easy task. Inserting the diagrams into the
 text rather than placing them in the margins would probably have complicated the

 typesetting process still further. The results, though, show the care that went into

 the production process. The quality of the final product reveals the cost expended to

 produce the edition.

 Much more puzzling, of course, is the question where the diagrams in Or. 20 came
 from. It is obvious that they were not copied from Or. 50, since there are so many
 basic differences between the diagrams of the two manuscripts. The appearance of

 the diagrams in the Medici edition indicate a connection with the manuscript Or. 20

 (Figs. 2, 3), but many propositions in this manuscript lack diagrams. It appears that

 the press must have commissioned someone to construct the diagrams, but the models

 for the printed diagrams have not yet been discovered. One may speculate about the

 existence of yet another manuscript of the Pseudo-Tüsl tradition, but until it is found,
 we cannot reach a definite resolution to our puzzles.

 6 From print to manuscript: Sipahsalar 540

 Tehran manuscript, Sipahsalar 540, 27 was copied from the printed edition of 1594.
 The manuscript is complete in 234 folios. We do not know for certain where in the
 Islamic world the manuscript was copied, but the colophon is dated 1101 AH/ AD

 1690. By a remarkable historical coincidence, this manuscript has also been the vic-
 tim of mistaken identity. The copyist of Sipahsalar 540 apparently did not copy the

 title page of the Rome edition - manuscripts do not have title pages. Without the title

 page and its inaccurate attribution to al-TusI, however, the user must attempt to make
 his own identification of the author and title of the treatise. Thus, someone has written

 on the first folio, in what appears to be a hand different from that of the copyist, the
 statement that this is the Isläh ("Correction") of the Elements created by Athïr al-DTn
 al-Abhan (died 663 AH/ AD 1265). This statement, repeated in the printed catalogs,

 has misled at least one compiler of a modern bio-bibliography.28

 27 I thank Dr. M. Bagheri for his assistance with this manuscript.

 2° In fact, it was this incorrect attribution in the bio-bibliographical literature that first drew the manuscript

 to my attention. Al-Abhan's work is currently known only in two other manuscript copies: Chester Beatty,
 Arabic ms. 3424 and Bursa, Hiisein Çelebi 744 (Sezgin 1974, p. 111).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 282 G. De Young

 Manuscript Sipahsalar 540 reproduces many of the essential features of the printed

 edition. Propositions are numbered with the abjad numerals centered in a blank line, as

 in the printed edition. Thus, we know that the copyist is not relying on Or. 20 because

 in that manuscript proposition headings are written verbally, not in alphanumeric form.

 Nor can the copyist be following Or. 50 because he includes the alternative formula-

 tions inserted by the copyist of Or. 20 and which are incorporated into the Rome 1594
 edition.

 The diagrams are constructed exactly following the pattern of those in the Rome

 printed edition, for example, the curiously formed diagram for proposition II, 14
 (Fig. 2) and the use of dots to diagram numbers in books VII-IX (Fig. 3) and the dia-

 grams are placed in the same general location within the manuscript as in the printed

 text. It is also true that the diagrams of the printed edition closely follow the pattern

 of diagrams found in Or. 20, but since there are many diagrams missing from that
 manuscript, I argue that it is far more likely that the diagrams in Sipahsalar 540 are

 constructed on the model of the diagrams in the printed edition.

 The copying is not a completely slavish or mindless action, though. Most of the

 obvious typographical errors in the text or diagrams of the Rome edition, such as those

 in the demonstration of proposition III, 8 mentioned above, have been corrected.

 One of the clearest indications that this manuscript was copied from the Rome

 edition is found in proposition VI, 1 . The proposition is accompanied by a porism in

 the margin in manuscript Or. 50. This porism was transferred into the text when ms.

 Or. 20 was copied. Near the end of the porism is the statement " wa-hädhihi süratuhu"

 (and this is its picture), implying that one should find a diagram at that point. Acting

 on this implication, the person preparing the typesetting has drawn a box in the margin

 opposite this statement in Or. 20, within which is a plus sign surmounting a star. This

 sign corresponds to an identical sign indicating placement in the text. Obeying this

 instruction, the typesetters of the Rome edition left a space in the text for insertion of a

 diagram. But since the intended diagram would have been the same as the diagram for
 the proposition itself, no new diagram was commissioned and the space was simply
 left blank. In Sipahsalar 540, no space has been left for a diagram, but we find at this

 point a note in the margin, written in the hand of the copyist: ihtimäl mahall shakl
 (probable site of a diagram). It seems obvious that the copyist must be looking at
 the printed Rome edition at this point, since this is the only place where we find an
 apparently missing diagram for this porism.

 In fact, examination of the diagrams leads us to the confident conclusion that Sip-

 ahsalar 540 was copied from the Rome printed edition. There can be no other interpre-

 tation of the diagrams of books VII-IX with their distinctive construction. Not only
 does Sipahsalar 540 use the same convention of representing numbers with dots, it
 consistently uses the same number of dots and the same numerical values as those

 found in the Rome edition. Furthermore, in the Rome edition, every diagram in book

 VII is constructed with vertical columns of dots except for the diagram of proposition
 28, where the dots are arranged horizontally (p. 182). This unusual horizontal orien-
 tation is repeated in the diagram of VII, 28 in Sipahsalar 540 (fol. 96a), and the same

 number of dots have been used to construct the diagram. And the argument is clinched
 by the observation that the upside down placement of the term al-wähid (the unit) in

 proposition IX, 14 (page 214) in the Rome edition is mirrored in the copy of Sipahsalar

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 283

 540 (folio 111b). There are no diagrams present in Or. 20 for these propositions, so

 the inspiration for these distinctive features clearly cannot come from the manuscript.

 In addition, the person who inserted the diagrams into the text - it is clear that they

 were added later in spaces left blank by the copyist because occasionally they invade
 the already written text (for example, the diagram for proposition 1,30 (fol. 20b) or
 XI, 23 (fol. 176a)) - sometimes rotated the diagram from vertical to horizontal orien-

 tation.29 The rotation of a diagram ninety degrees to the right or left is not entirely

 unknown within the manuscript tradition. Usually such rotation represents a need for

 more space than the copyist left for the diagram. On several occasions in this manu-

 script, however, we find that diagrams together with their letter labels are completely

 inverted in relation to the text.30 Such superficial differences in orientation, though,

 do not undermine the very strong impression that this manuscript was copied from the

 printed edition.

 7 From typography to lithography (Fez 1876)

 A new printing of this Pseudo-TüsT Tahrïr was made in Fez in 1293/1 876 using litho-

 graph technology. As far as I am aware, this was the only time that an Arabic version

 of the Elements was printed in the Maghrib before the twentieth century. There were,

 of course, manuscript copies not only of the Arabic primary transmission, but also of
 many classical Arabic Euclidean works from the secondary transmission, including

 al-TusI's Tahrïr , present in the great libraries of the Maghrib. And one must wonder,

 with so many manuscript copies of the genuine Tahrïr available to choose from, why

 would the printer decide to revive the Rome 1594 edition?

 Although this lithograph edition initially looks rather like a manuscript, the pres-

 ence of a title page is one clue that it is not.31 Written in Maghribi script, the Fez edition

 follows almost exactly the same architectural principles as the Rome 1594 edition. It

 appears that the insertion of a title page was a last minute addition by the publisher.

 Being somewhat unfamiliar with the conventions of printed books, though, he inserted

 the title page facing the first page of text. This has the effect of displacing the running
 header so that, until the problem is corrected on pages 154-155, the second part of

 the header appears on the right-hand page, while the first part appears on the left-hand

 page. Another obvious feature is the presence of page numbers - and curiously, these

 page numbers are only in Latin script rather than Arabic script numerals.32 (The Rome

 29 When a diagram is rotated in this fashion, it is rotated as a unit. Not only are the diagram lines rotated, but
 also the labels of the diagram points are typically rotated along with the lines themselves. This observation

 suggests that the diagram, both lines and labels, was considered as a unit.

 30 These inverted diagrams occur in propositions 11,7 (fol. 32a), III, 19 (fol. 44b) and VI, 22 (fol. 82a). The
 reason for this inversion of the diagram relative to its standard orientation is puzzling, since it seems to
 serve no useful purpose. I have not seen such inversions outside this manuscript.

 31 Since lithograph printing requires that the text be written by hand on a stone or plate, it is often said that

 lithography represents a kind of half-way house between typographic print and the manuscript. It rapidly
 became the preferred method for reproducing Arabic treatises quickly and cheaply.

 3 This Fez edition was published in two volumes. The pagination begins anew in volume II, rather than
 running continuously.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1594 edition had page numbers in both scripts - Latin script at the bottom of the page

 and Arabic script at the top, except that the Latin script numbers prior to page 25

 are mostly missing.) The treatise is followed by several pages of corrigenda - another

 feature implying some familiarity with Western printing conventions. (This corrig-
 enda section is in addition to small corrections placed in the margins throughout the
 treatise.)

 284 G. De Young

 Although there are many superficial differences between the two printed editions,

 there are still several clues that tie the Fez 1293 edition to the earlier printed version.

 Once again, these clues are found mainly in the diagrams. The diagram for proposi-
 tion II, 14, for example, is constructed in exactly the same way as that found in the
 Rome edition (Fig. 2). Similarly, the use of dotted lines rather than line segments to
 represent numbers in the diagrams of books VII-IX (Fig. 3) mirrors what we have
 seen in the Rome edition. Not only are the diagrams in the same style, but the same
 number of dots are regularly used. An even more telling piece of evidence comes

 from the diagram of proposition VII, 28. In the Rome edition, this diagram is the only

 one from book VII that is oriented horizontally. It appears in the Fez edition (vol. 1,

 p. 355) in the same horizontal orientation and with the same number of dots represent-
 ing each number. Moreover, the insertion of the term "al-wähid" upside down in the

 diagram of proposition IX, 14 (vol. 1, p. 422) mirrors its upside down placement in the
 diagram found in the Rome edition (p. 214). These observations are consistent with

 the hypothesis that the Fez edition was based on the earlier Medici edition printed in
 Rome. But could the Fez edition have been based on Sipahsalar 540? This is not an
 easy question to answer. Although in each of these versions diagrams are rendered

 with a certain degree of "artistic license," we can detect a few significant differences.

 The diagrams for the alternative forms discussed in proposition 1, 9, for example, are

 missing from Sipahsalar 540 but they are present in the Fez edition (vol. 1 , p. 29) and
 are a close approximation of the diagrams found in the Rome edition (p. 15). Thus,
 I would argue that this Fez edition is also derived from the earlier printed edition of
 1594.

 8 Concluding thoughts

 The reader who has followed this tangled tale thus far may well wonder what benefits
 can be gained from the journey. I propose several areas in which our historical knowl-

 edge has been enriched. First, we are now able to offer a fairly secure stemma of the
 Arabic Pseudo-TusI transmission as we know it today (Fig. 5).

 Second, the repeated copying of the text outlined in this article provides us a rare

 window into the world of the manuscript copyist. There are few examples currently
 known in the Arabic mathematical tradition wherein we can with considerable confi-

 dence identify both the copy and the original manuscript from which it was copied.33
 Through study and analysis of such cases of direct copying we can trace the changes
 introduced into successive copies of a treatise and we acquire greater understanding

 33 In another likely example of manuscript copying, I suggest that manuscript Tehran, Majlis 200 is a direct
 or very nearly direct copy from Chester Beatty Library Arabic manuscript 3035.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 285

 p^Jo-r:-:
 vrocs jph
 / Ijv-

 I

 I

 I

 Bt ^ho-* i M-dice's

 L i : i a Or. 50

 . 1 O / i < i ,

 , I

 BiMio'.eea Medioea |

 laurrr.zrir.a Or 20 j

 Rome T't>og:äo/.ia /" Poeocke Lati.i tv.-4at:o- o:
 Medicea Ediic:: [,

 i 159-4» 'x «Before 1655 •

 ir I

 I T^-.-'an Wnîh^ of -la* all«3!
 I I Smaksa"lar 5-^0 « ( police Jemens a'io: "j
 j .1*101/1690) ' ' 1665 / 1693 s

 SaCC* I of
 I y i'àh i '
 ' âe-i o' -fTt'io' J

 I cj kf.oüa-y..

 tV.riOr

 1 1^ / IS~0<

 Fig. 5 Proposed stemma for the known Pseudo-Tûsï tradition. Dates of copying/printing are included in
 parentheses when known. Apart from the Rome printed edition, all dates for the Arabic sources use the
 Hijra calendar. I have included the Gregorian equivalent to clarify the temporal relations. The dashed line
 indicates an unknown portion of the transmission. Solid line indicate a direct transmission of the text. The

 Latin transmission is indicated with ovals rather than rectangles. The dotted line indicates translation from
 the Arabic (but only the demonstration for the parallel lines postulate)

 of the details of the process of reproducing a manuscript. Thanks to such chains of

 copying, we are able to discern the finer details of how one copy differed from another,

 providing insight into the copying process itself and allowing us the opportunity to
 assess the quality of the copying trade. In the case of mathematical texts involving
 diagrams, we are also able to observe changes to the diagrams by successive drau-
 ghtsmen.

 Third, we obtain some fresh insights into the process by which Arabic manuscripts

 were converted to printed texts during the early European experiments in typesetting

 Arabic script. In the present case, the chain of connection extends for at least four
 centuries and we have both manuscript and print copies produced. And because the

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 286 G. De Young

 Fez edition was produced using lithograph technology, we also have an opportunity

 to compare directly the same text printed by typography and by lithography.

 But someone may protest that we have so far said almost nothing about the influence

 of the Rome edition in Europe.34 As the only printed Arabic version of Euclid's work

 available to the European scholarly community, the Rome edition was studied far more

 than any Arabic manuscript. It was not so often studied in its entirety, but usually only

 with regard to specific mathematical points. From the beginning, the focus of attention

 has been on its attempted demonstration of Euclid's parallels postulate. Jesuit math-
 ematician, Christoph Clavius (1537-1612), who published the second edition of his
 Latin version of the Elements in 1589, 35 wrote in its introduction (Knobloch 2002,
 p. 419):

 We learned long ago that the Arabs demonstrated the same principle. [He refers

 to the parallel lines postulate.] Though I diligently looked for this demonstration

 [for] a long time, I could not see it because it was not yet translated from the

 Arab into Latin. Hence, I was obliged to imagine it by myself.

 Since Clavius did not read Arabic himself, he searched for a Latin translation. So far
 as we know, no Latin translation of the Pseudo-Tûsï Tahrïr existed at that time.36 If

 Clavius had had access to the Arabic text, he could have at least used the diagrams to

 guide his imagination, and he could also have had the text translated. Although this
 statement of Clavius leaves the situation somewhat ambiguous, he is more precise
 in his complaint in the 1612 edition of his collected mathematical works (Knobloch
 2002, p. 420):

 I never got permission to read [this demonstration] though I continuously asked
 the owner of this Arabic Euclid for it.

 So Clavius not only knew that an Arabic text existed, he knew where the manuscript

 was. Saliba (2008, pp. 21 1-212) suggests that Clavius must be referring in these pas-
 sages to the manuscripts of the Elements owned by Patriarch Nehemias, who was

 34 In one sense, something of the Pseudo-Tûsï tradition had been known in Europe long before the Rome
 edition appeared. Already in the thirteenth century, Rabbi Levi ben Gershon (1288-1344) - known also
 by his Latinized name, Gersonides - had discussed a demonstration of the parallel lines postulate that is
 identical to that found in the Pseudo-Tûsï Tahrïr (Lévy 1992a,b). There is no indication that the Arabic

 treatise was ever translated into Hebrew, so this knowledge probably traveled by way of an extract or report

 embedded in another text. Since the Pseudo-Tûsï treatise had been completed, apparently in the territory of
 what is now Iran, during the lifetime of Gersonides, it is evident that mathematical ideas were capable of
 quickly traversing the great distance from Iran to southern France even in the medieval period.

 35 This second edition differs from the first edition of 1574. In the first edition, the scholion following
 proposition 1, 28 gives only the demonstration of Proclus. In the second edition, this scholion is divided into

 two parts. The first gives again the demonstration of Proclus. The newly added second part is essentially
 the demonstration of the Pseudo-Tusï Arabic edition (Maieru 1978, p. 192). This scholion is repeated in
 later editions of Clavius's Euclid as well (Clavius 1611, pp. 49-53).

 Youschkevitch (1976, p. 183) claimed that the entire treatise was published in Latin translation under
 the title Euclides Elementorum libri tredecim studio Nasseredini (Rome, 1657), but Mercier (1994, p. 213)
 reports being unable to find any confirming evidence for the existence of such a published translation. The
 similarity of the putative title to the Latin title used on the bilingual title page of the Rome 1594 Arabic
 edition suggests that Youshkevitch might be referring to the Rome Arabic edition, but using an incorrect
 date.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 287

 probably in the process of negotiating his agreement with Ferdinand. Or perhaps even

 after he reached his agreement, he hesitated to share his manuscripts with scholars for

 fear of damaging sales of the printed volume. In any case, we see that from the time

 when the manuscripts entered Europe with the hapless Patriarch, some knowledge of

 their existence and contents was circulating by word of mouth among mathematicians.

 Thus, by the time the Medici Press issued its printed edition there was an eagerness
 for this new source of knowledge spreading widely among the mathematicians of

 Europe. In this fertile intellectual climate, at least one mathematical seed contained in
 the Arabic text soon took root.

 The Arabic text of the Pseudo-Tûsï attempt to demonstrate the parallel lines postu-

 late was eventually translated into Latin by Edward Pococke (1604-1691). This trans-
 lation must have been made before 1 663 when John Wallis (1616-1 703) discussed the

 attempt to demonstrate the parallels postulate in his lecture as Savillean Professor of

 Geometry at Oxford (11 July 1663). But Wallis was apparently not keen to publish his

 thoughts, so it was thirty years later that this quotation from Pococke became widely

 available in printed form (Wallis 1693, II, pp. 665-678).37 Through Wallis, knowledge
 of this Arabic discussion of Euclid's postulate entered the mainstream of European

 geometrical discussions. Wallis's discussion of the postulate directly influenced Sacc-
 heri (1667-1733) in his famous attack on the parallels postulate in his Euclides ab
 omni nœvo vindicatus (1733) (Saccheri 1920, pp. 100-109). It was his discussion and
 criticism of the approach of Pseudo-TusI to the parallels postulate (in Scholion III

 of proposition XXI) that helped to lay the foundation for the modern study of non-
 Euclidean geometry (Rosenfeld 1980, pp. 97-99). And thus the Pseudo-Tüsl attempt

 to demonstrate the parallel lines postulate entered the mainstream of European discus-

 sion under a mistaken identity, although the remainder of the treatise has been largely

 ignored by historians.

 And so our little historical adventure comes to an end. Not all our questions have

 been answered, leaving the hope that there may yet be future installments to our nar-
 rative. For now, the convoluted transmission story of this Arabic Euclidean treatise

 has demonstrated that many of the traditional historical interpretations about Naslr
 al-Dln al-TusT have been built on a false attribution.38 Moreover, even though our

 present conclusions rely on a line of evidence that leads back to a single manuscript,
 Or. 50, that treatise and its descendants have played a continuing part in the history
 of mathematics, both in the Arabic East and in the Latin West, for more than four
 centuries.

 Acknowledgements I am very grateful to the directors of the History of Science Collections of the Uni-
 versity of Oklahoma Library, the Rare Books and Special Collection Library of the American University in
 Cairo, and the Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana for permission to reproduce images of material held in their

 respective libraries. Dr. M. Bagheri very generously responded to my queries about several manuscripts
 from Iranian libraries. All diagrams included in this article have been edited using the free software tool,

 37 Cassinet (1993, p. 16) reproduces a page from Wallis's Latin treatise illustrating his criticism of the
 supposed al-TusT demonstration of the parallel lines postulate. This is the first documented publication of
 a Latin translation of the Pseudo-Tusï and it was apparently based on the printed Rome edition.

 38 Perhaps the most commonly read is still that of Heath (I, 77-82) in his introduction to his English
 translation of the Elements.

 *0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 DRaFT , developed by Ken Saito (Osaka Prefecture University). A summary version of this article was
 presented at the 5th Joint Meeting of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics
 and the British Society for History of Mathematics (Dublin, 2011). I thank the School of Sciences and
 Engineering of the American University in Cairo for a travel grant to attend this meeting. The referees have

 provided detailed comments on the text and have saved me from several errors. I am very grateful for their

 efforts. Needless to say, whatever faults still remain are attributable solely to me. I gratefully acknowledge
 a Minigrant from the School of Sciences and Engineering, The American University in Cairo, in partial
 support of research costs.

 288 G. De Young

 Appendix I

 The copyist of Or. 20 replaced the demonstration of proposition VIII, 4 with another,
 shorter, demonstration. This appendix provides an English translation of both the
 original and the replacement texts. I begin with the original (later canceled) text. I

 translate the entire proposition, including enunciation, to provide a complete context
 for the two demonstrations.

 We want to show how we find the smallest numbers according to the ratio of
 given numbers.

 Let the given numbers according to a ratio be A, B, G, D, E, Z and let each

 one of them be the smallest pair of numbers according to their ratio. Let us take

 the smallest number which B [and] G measure, according to proposition VII, 34,
 and let it be T. Let A measure H and D [measure] K according to the amount
 by which B measures T. Let us take the smallest [number] that numbers E and

 K measure, according to proposition VII, 34. Now that number is either K or [a
 number] other than that.

 As for the first, namely, that the smallest number which numbers E, K mea-

 sure is K, let Z measure L according to the amount by which E measures K.
 Then, because B, G measure T according to the amount by which A [measures]
 H and D [measures] K and E measures K according to the amount by which Z
 [measures] L, the ratio of A to H is as the ratio of B to T and the ratio of G to T
 is as the ratio of D to K.

 But the ratio of E to K is as the ratio of Z to L. Then by alternation the ratio

 of A to B is as the ratio of H to T and the ratio of G to D is as the ratio of T to K.

 But the ratio E to Z is as the ratio of K to L, according to proposition VII, 13.
 Thus, I say that H, T, K, L are the smallest numbers according to the ratios of
 A, B, G, D, E, Z.

 Its proof is that if not, let M, N, S, S be the smallest numbers according to
 these ratios. Then because the ratio of A to B is as the ratio of M to N, and the

 two of them are the smallest pair of numbers according to their ratio, B measures
 N, according to proposition VII, 20

 But the ratio of G to D is as the ratio of N to S, and the two of them are the

 smallest numbers according to their ratio. G measures N by the amount by which
 D [measures] S, according to proposition VII, 20.

 Now because B, G measure N and T is the smaller of the two numbers that mea-

 sure it, T measures N, according to proposition VII, 35. Thus, the larger measures
 the smaller. This is a contradiction. Therefore, the proposition is established.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 6 Diagrams for Elements ,
 VIII, 4. Above diagrams as
 edited from Or. 50, fol. 90b.

 Left, diagram of part I of the

 demonstration. Right diagram

 of part II of the demonstration.

 Or. 50 uses line segments to
 represent numbers. Below
 diagrams as edited from Rome,
 1594. Top diagram of part I of
 the demonstration (p. 189).

 Bottom diagram of part II of the
 demonstration (p. 190). Note the
 use of small vertical lines to

 group sets of numbers in the

 diagram

 289

 1H4H'

 . ^ L c

 j j J * ^ '

 J 5 c , " j , " L.« <j

 o** i>* u f

 . (5 ^ a- t

 • i i i ^

 1 • • ! : h I
 • • ! : I •
 • I ! * ! • i ! • $ ; t
 Mil * ! • Iii! $ ; i t £ s . i :

 o" ô f J i i ; j-*

 rf rr ^ a f a r- n î

 i rf i rr 1 ^ S a f a i i : i i

 !!!!!!,

 ! : I « 1 : I t ! s i : . .
 ! : : ! « ill : : I t :i: : ''l : . !|2 :l: . Î
 J t ù»- J ? ù S C

 Further, as for [the case that] the smallest number that measures E and K is

 a number other than K, let it be L. Let Z measure M by the amount by which E

 [measures] L. Then let H measure N and T [measure] S by the amount by which
 K [measures] L.

 Now because A measures H and D [measures] K according to the amount by
 which each one of numbers B, G [measures] T and H measures N, K [measure]

 L by the amount by which T measures S.

 But Z measures M by the amount by which E measures L. Thus, A, B measure

 N, S by the amount by which G, D [measure] S, L and E, Z [measure] L, M.
 Thus, the ratio of A to N is as the ratio of B to S and the ratio of G to S is as the
 ratio of D to L.

 But the ratio of E to L is as the ratio of Z to M. Then by alternation the ratio

 of A to B is as the ratio of N to S and the ratio of G to D is as the ratio of S to L

 and the ratio of E to Z is as the ratio of L to M, according to proposition VII, 13.

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Now I say that N, S, L, M are the smallest numbers according to the given

 ratios. If not, let the smallest numbers according to that ratio be numbers O, S,
 F, Q. Thus, the ratio of O to S is as the ratio of A to B and the ratio of S to F is
 as the ratio of G to D.

 290 G. De Young

 But each of the pairs of numbers A, B [and] G, D is the smallest pair of
 numbers according to their ratio. Thus, the two of them measure each pair of
 numbers according to their ratio, according to proposition VII, 20. Thus, B, G
 measure S.

 But T was the smallest number which B, G measure. So T measures S, accord-

 ing to proposition VII, 35.

 But the ratio of T to K is as the ratio of G to D and the ratio of S to F is as the

 ratio of G to D. Thus, according to the porism of proposition VII, 4, the ratio of
 T to K is as the ratio of S to F.

 But T measures S. Thus, K measures F.

 But the ratio of E to Z is as the ratio of F to Q, and the two of them are

 the smallest number according to their ratio. Thus, E measures Q, according to
 VII, 20.

 But K, E measure F, and L is the smallest number that K, E measure. Thus,

 L measures F, according to proposition VII, 35. Therefore the larger measures
 the smaller. This is a contradiction. Thus, the proposition is established. That is
 what we wanted to show.

 This demonstration, copied correctly according to the text of Or. 50 and then can-

 celed by the copyist, is replaced by another, somewhat shorter, demonstration written
 in the margins of folios 160a-b.

 Let the given numbers according to a ratio be A, B, G, D, E, Z and let each

 one of them be the smallest pair of numbers according to their ratio. Let us take

 the smallest number that measures B, G, according to proposition VII, 34. Let it
 be T and let A measure H according to the amount by which B measures T and

 D [measure] K according to the amount by which G measures T.

 Now E either measures K or it does not.

 As for the first [case] we make Z measure L according to the amount by which

 E measures K. Then, because A measures H according to the amount by which B

 [measures] T, the ratio of A to B is as the ratio of H to T, according to proposition
 VII, 17. Likewise, the ratio of G to D is as the ratio of T to K and the ratio of E
 to Z is as the ratio of K to L.

 I say that H, T, K, L are the smallest numbers according to the ratios of A, B,

 G, D, E, Z.

 The demonstration is that if not, then let M, N, S, S be the smallest numbers

 according to these ratios. Then, because the ratio of A to B is as the ratio of M

 to N and the two of them, namely A, B, are the smallest pair of numbers accord-

 ing to their ratio, A measures M and B [measures] N, according to proposition
 VII, 20.

 For that reason also G measures N. Then, because B, G measure N, T, which is

 the smallest [number] that B, G measure, measures N, according to proposition

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 291

 VII, 35. Therefore, the larger measures the smaller. This is a contradiction. Thus,

 the proposition is established.

 But as for the second [case], namely that E does not measure K, let us take
 the smallest number that measures E, K, according to proposition VII, 34, and
 let it be L. And we make T measure M and H [measure] N by amount by which
 K [measures] L.

 But Z measures S according to the amount by which E measures L. Thus,

 because T measures M according to the amount by which H [measures] N, the
 ratio of H to T is as the ratio of N to M, according to proposition VII, 17, and
 the ratio of H to T is as the ratio of A to B. Thus, the ratio of A to B is as the
 ratio of N to M. Likewise the ratio of G to D is as the ratio of M to L.

 But because E measures L according to the amount by which Z measures S,
 the ratio of E to Z is as the ratio of L to S, according to proposition VII, 17.
 Therefore, numbers N, M, L, S are according to the ratio of the given numbers,
 A to B and G to D and E to Z.

 I say that N, M, L, S are the smallest numbers according to the ratios of the

 given [numbers]. But if not, let the smallest numbers according to these ratios
 be numbers O, S, F, Q.

 Then, because the ratio of O to S is as the ratio of A to B and A, B are the

 smallest numbers according to their ratio, B measures S and likewise G measure
 S. Therefore, B, G measure S.

 Now the smallest [number] that measures B, G, measures S. But the smallest
 of the numbers that measures B is T. Thus, T measures S. Therefore, the larger

 measures the smaller. This is a contradiction. Thus, the proposition is established.
 This is what we wanted to show.

 Appendix II

 In this section, I first translate proposition IV, 7 as found in Orientali 50 and copied into
 Orientali 20. The demonstration of the proposition was later canceled by the copyist

 and replaced by another formulation written in the margin of folio 83b (Fig. 4).

 [For] any specified circle, we [are] to draw about it a square.
 Let the circle be ABGD. We find its center by proposition III, 1 . Let it be point

 E. We connect between point B on its circumference and the center by a straight
 line and we extend it until it ends at its circumference. Let it end at point D. Let

 us extend from point E a perpendicular to diameter BD according to proposition
 1, 1 1 and let us extend it in both directions until it ends at the circumference at

 points A [and] G. We extend from points A, B, G, D perpendiculars to the diame-

 ters AG, BD. They are tangent to the circle, according to the porism of proposition
 III, 15. And because we extended chords AB, AD, DG, GB, each of the pair of

 angles bounded by a pair of chords and two of the mentioned perpendiculars
 is less than two right angles. Thus, if we extend the perpendiculars rectiline-

 arly in both directions, it is necessary that they meet each other at points Z, H,
 T, K.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 I say that figure ZK is a square.
 Its proof: because each one of angles ZBE, HDE, ZAE, TGE is right, each

 pair of sides ZT, HK, ZH, TK is parallel to the other, according to proposition
 1,28.

 292 G. De Young

 Fig. 7 Diagram for
 Elements, IV, 7, as edited from
 Orientali 20, folio 83b. This

 diagram does not differ from
 that found in Orientali 50 (fol.

 47b) or from that found in the
 Rome 1594 edition (p. 99).

 m -A

 J I

 But because each of the angles which are at point E is right, according to

 proposition 1, 13, and the two diameters are equal to one another, the sides of the

 square are equal to one another, according to proposition 1, 34.

 Now, according to proposition 1, 28, sides ZT, HK are parallel to diameter AG.

 Thus, the two of them are parallel to one another, according to proposition 1, 30.
 But sides ZH, TK are parallel to diameter BD. Thus, the two of them are

 parallel to one another, according to proposition [I], 30.

 Now, according to proposition 1, 29, each of the angles at points Z, H, T, K
 is right. Therefore, quadrilateral ZK is a square. Thus, the proposition is estab-
 lished.

 That is what we wanted to show.

 The demonstration has been replaced by a shorter alternative formulation in the

 margin.

 Now because each one of the angles at points A, B, G, D is right, according
 to proposition III, 19, and each one of the angles which is at point E is right,
 according to proposition 1, 13, sides ZT, HK are parallel to diameter AG. Thus,
 the two of them are parallel to one another, according to proposition 1, 30.

 But ZH, TK are parallel to diameter BD. Thus, the two of them are parallel
 to one another. Therefore, each one of areas HT, HG, ZG, ZD, DT, HE, ET, ZE,

 EK are parallelograms.

 Now, according to proposition 1, 34, sides ZT, HK are equal to diameter AG
 so they are equal to one another and sides ZH, KT are equal to diameter BD so
 they are equal to one another.

 But the two diameters are equal to one another. Thus, sides ZH, HT, TK, KZ

 in figure ZK are equal to one another.

 But because each one of the angles at E is right, each one of the angles at Z,
 H, T, K is right, according to proposition 1, 34. Therefore, quadrilateral ZK is a
 square. Thus, the proposition is established.

 That is what we wanted to show.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rome 1594 Arabic Euclid 293

 References

 Ackerberg-Hastings. 2002. Analysis and synthesis in John Playfair's Elements of Geometry, British Journal

 for History of Science 38: 43-72.

 Azzö, Y. 1933. Risâlat al-batriyark Ighnatyus Ni'meh, Al-Mashriq 31: 613-623, 730-737, 831-838.
 Cassinet, R. 1986. L'aventure de l'édition des Éléments d'Euclide en arabe par la Société Typographique
 Médicis vers 1594. Revue française d'histoire du livre 78-79: 5-51 (1993). An earlier version appeared
 under the same title in Cahiers d'histoire des mathématiques de Toulouse 9.

 Clavius, C. 1999. Operum Mathematicum, Tomus Primus Complectens Commentaria in Euclidis Elementa

 Geometrica, In Sphœrica Theodosij. Rome (1611). Re-issued in facsimile edition, ed., E. Knobloch,
 Hildesheim: Olms- Weidmann.

 De Young, G. 1984. The Arabic textual traditions of Euclid's Elements. Historia Mathematica 1 1 : 147-160.

 doi: 1 0. 1 0 1 6/S03 1 5- 0860(84)80006- 3

 De Young, G. 1991. New traces of the lost al-Hajjäj Arabic translation of Euclid's Elements. Physis: Rivista

 Internazionale di Storia della Scienza 28: 647-666.

 De Young, G. 1997. Al-Jawhan's additions to book five of Euclid's elements. Zeitschrift für Geschichte der

 Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 11: 153-178.

 De Young, G. 2001. The Ashkal al-Ta'sis of al-Samarqandi: A translation and study. Zeitschrift für Ges-

 chichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 14: 57-117.

 De Young, G. 2003a. The Arabic version of Euclid's elements by al-Hajjäj ibn Yüsuf ibn Matar: New

 light on a submerged tradition. Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch- 1 slamischen Wissenschaften 15:
 125-164.

 De Young, G. 2003b. The Tahnr of Euclid's Elements by Nasir al-Din al-Tüsi: Redressing the balance,

 Farhans: Quarterly Journal of Humanities and Cultural Studies 15-16: 1 17-143.

 De Young, G. 2004. The Latin translation of Euclid's Elements attributed to Gerard of Cremona in relation
 to its Arabic antecedents. Suhayl: Journal for the History of the Exact and Natural Sciences in Islamic
 Civilization 4: 311-383.

 De Young, G. 2009a. A Persian translation of al-Jawhan's additions to Elements , book V. Tarikh-e Elm:

 Iranian Journal for the History of Science 1: 1-24. doi: 10. 1 177/027836491039655 1 .

 De Young, G. 2009b. The Tahrir Kitab Usui Uqlidis of Nasïr al-Din al-Tusi: its sources. Zeitschrift für

 Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 18: 1-71

 De Young, G. 2012. Mathematical diagrams from manuscript to print: Examples from the Arabic Euclidean

 transmission. To appear in Synthese, doi: 10. 1007/sl 1229-012-0070-6.

 Della Vida, G. 1948. Documenti intorno alle relazioni della chiese orientali con la S. Sede durante il

 Pontificato di Gregorio XIII. Città del Vaticano: Biblioteca apostolica vaticana.

 Engroff, J. 1980. The Arabic Tradition of Euclid's Elements'. Book V. Harvard University PhD Dissertation,

 unpublished.

 Heath, T. L. 1956. The thirteen books of Euclid's Elements (3 Vols). New York: Dover.
 Jaouiche, K. 1986. La Theorie des paralleles en pays d Islam. Pans: Vnn.
 Jones, R. 1994. The Medici Oriental Press (Rome 1584-1614) and the impact of its Arabie publications on

 northern Europe. In The 'Arabick' Interests of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth Century England ,
 ed. G. Russell, 88-108. Leiden: Brill.

 Knobloch, E. 2002. Christoph Clavius (1538-1612) and his knowledge of Arabic sources. In Gesuiti e

 université in Europa (secoli XVI-XVIII), eds. G. Brizzi and R. Greci, 403-420. Bologna: CLUEB.

 Lévy, T. 1992a. Gersonide, le Pseudo-Tusï, et le postulat des parallèles. Les Mathématiques en Hébreu et

 leurs sources arabes. Arabie Sciences and Philosophy 2: 39-82.

 Lévy, T. 1992b. Gersonide, commentateur d'Euclide: Traduction annotee de ses gloses sur les Elements. In
 Studies on Gersonides - A Fourteenth Century Jewish Philosopher-Scientist, ed. G. Freudenthal, 83-147.
 Leiden: Brill.

 Maieru, L. 1978. II quinto postulato Euclideo in Cristoforo Clavio. Physis 20: 191-212.
 Mercier, R. 1994. English orientalists and mathematical astronomy. In The ' Arabick ' Interests of the Natural

 Philosophers in Seventeenth Century England, ed. G. Russell, 158-223. Leiden: Brill.

 Murdoch, J. 1971. Euclid: Transmission of the Elements. In Dictionary of scientific biography, Vol. 4, ed.

 C. Gillispie, 437^158. New York: Scribner.

 Rosenfeld, B. 1980. A history of non-Euclidean geometry. New York: Springer.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rosenfeld, B., Kubesov, A. K., Sobirov, G. S. 1966. Kto by avtorom rimskogo izdania 'Izlozhania Evklida

 Nasir ad-Dina at-Tusi' [Who was the author of the Rome edition 'Recension of Euclid by Nasïr al-Dïn
 al-Tusï?]. Voprosy istorii estestuoznaniya i tekhniki 20: 51-53.

 Sabra, A. I. 1959. Burhän Nasir al-Dïn al-Tûsï cala musadarat Uqlïdis al-khämisa. Bulletin of the Faculty

 of Arts of the University of Alexandria 13: 133-170.

 Sabra, A. I. 1968. Thäbit ibn Qurra on Euclid's parallels postulate. Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld

 294 G. De Young

 Institutes 3 1 : 12-32.

 Institutes 32: 1-24.

 Sabra, A. I. 1969. Simplicius's proof of Euclid's parallels postulate. Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld

 Saccheri, G. 1920. Euclides vindicatus. G. Halsted, ed. and trans. Chicago: Open Court.

 Saliba, G. 2008. Embedding scientific ideas as a mode of science transmission. In A shared legacy: Islamic

 science east and west, eds. E. Calvo, M. Comes, R. Puig, M. Rius, 193-213. Barcelona: University of
 Barcelona Press.

 Sezgin, F. 1974. Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums , Band V: Mathematik. Leiden: Brill.
 Taha, A. 1986. Sur trois manuscrits arabes du XIIIe siècle: Or. 26, Or. 50 et Or. 282 de la Bibliothèque

 Laurentienne de Florence. Cahiers des Mathématiques de Toulouse 9: 41-50.

 Thaer, C. 1934. Die Euklid- Überlieferung durch at-Tusi. Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathe-

 matik, Astronomie und Physik, Abteilung B, Studien 3: 1 16-121.

 Toomer, G. J. 1996. Eastern wisedome and learning: the study of arabic in seventeenth-century England.

 Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Wallis, J. 1972. De postulate quinto et definitione quinta lib. 6 Euclidis: disceptatio geometrica. In his Opera
 mathematica, volumen secundum [De algebra tractatus : cum variis appendicibus]. Oxford: E Theatro
 Sheldoniano (1693), 665-678. Hildesheim: Olms- Weidmann. Reprinted.

 Youshkevitch, A. P. 1961. Les mathématiques arabes: VIIIe-XVe siècles (M. Cazenave and K. Jaouiche,
 trans.). Paris: Vrin (1976). Originally published in Russian under the title Istoriya matematiki v srednie
 veka. Moscow.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:10:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

