 

 

 

 

Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics: The flywheel analogy in Maxwell's 1865 paper on

electrodynamics
Author(s): Cameron Lazaroff-Puck
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 5 (September 2015), pp. 455-490
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569662
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:14 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2015) 69:455^190 /SN rrn«Mark
 DOI10.1007/s00407-015-0157-9 vfl/

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics

 The flywheel analogy in Maxwell's 1865 paper on electrodynamics

 Cameron Lazaroff-Puck

 Received: 29 April 2015 / Published online: 2 July 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract James Clerk Maxwell's 1865 paper, "A Dynamical Theory of the Elec
 tromagnetic Field," is usually remembered as replacing the mechanical model that

 underpins his 1862 publication with abstract mathematics. Up to this point histori

 ans have considered Maxwell's usage of Lagrangian dynamics as the sole important

 feature that guides Maxwell's analysis of electromagnetic phenomena in his 1865

 publication. This paper offers an account of the often ignored mechanical analogy that

 Maxwell used to guide him and his readers in the construction of his new electromag

 netic equations. The mechanical system consists of a weighted flywheel geared into

 two independently driven crank wheels in what amounts to a mechanical differential.

 I will demonstrate how Maxwell made use of the analogy between his flywheel sys

 tem and electromagnetic induction to ground his study of electromagnetism in clear

 mechanical conceptions and to structure the derivation of the equations that together are

 now recognized as Maxwell's equations for electrodynamics. By reconceiving specific

 components of his model in electromagnetic terms, while at the same time retaining

 many of the relations between concepts in the mechanical case, Maxwell gradually
 assembled increasingly generalized equations for electromotive force. Maxwell thus

 realized a much sought after balance between physical analogy and abstract mathe

 matics in this, the last of his three seminal papers on electromagnetism.

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 El Cameron Lazaroff-Puck

 cameron.lazaroffpuck@gmail.com; lazarl 14@umn.edu

 1 Program in the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine,

 University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 456 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 Introduction

 In the introduction to his Natural Philosophy of James Clerk Maxwell, Peter Harman
 writes:

 The mechanical or dynamical worldview, which dominated the programme of

 physical explanation in the nineteenth century, shaped Maxwell's scientific the

 orising. But his attitude to mechanical explanation was complex. There was a

 tension in his thought between physical and mathematical models of mechanical

 systems; and his reflections on the relationship between mechanical represen

 tations and physical reality shaped his evolving programme of explanation.
 (Harman 1998, p. 4)

 As historians have constructed the narrative of the maturation of Maxwell's views

 on electricity and magnetism, weaving it through the three seminal papers that he

 delivered before his Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism was first published in

 1873, they have also necessarily constructed a narrative around this evolving tension

 between physical and mathematical explanation. Maxwell's use of physical analogies

 and models fluctuates between his three major papers. To understand the approaches

 Maxwell took toward demystifying electromagnetic phenomena and eventually codi

 fying its underlying relations we must come to terms with the ways in which physical

 analogies and models shaped his work. A crude summary of this story runs as follows.

 In 1855, Maxwell used an illustrative physical analogy to fluid flow to mathema

 tize Faraday's lines of force (Maxwell 1855). In 1862, he constructed a hypothetical

 physical model of the electromagnetic medium which explained and at times was

 even directly involved in the derivation of laws of electromagnetism (Maxwell 1862).
 Finally, in 1865 Maxwell dropped his prior commitments to physical analogy, instead

 importing the dynamical equations of Lagrange to serve as the sole aid in the devel

 opment of his general equations of the field (Maxwell 1865).1 The emphasis previous

 historians have placed upon the apparently abstract character of the 1865 paper sig

 1 The picture of Maxwell's 1865 paper "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" as founded

 exclusively on the abstract analysis of Lagrangian dynamics is commonly accompanied by quotations from

 two of Maxwell's letters, one before the paper's publication and one after. In the first, a letter from Maxwell
 to William Thomson dated October 15, 1864, Maxwell states: "I can find the velocity of transmission

 of electromagnetic disturbances independently of any hypothesis now and it is equal to v [the speed of

 light]" (Maxwell 1995, p. 180). As both Martin Goldman and Harman dutifully point out, by 1864 Maxwell
 had absolved himself of his early reliance on hypotheses about the electromagnetic medium as well as

 his impious inclusion of terms that emerge directly from his mechanical analogy (Goldman 1983, p. 155;

 Harman 1998, p. 113). The second quotation, from a late December 1867 letter from Maxwell to Peter

 Guthrie Tait, compares the 1862 and 1865 papers: "The former is built up to show that the phenomena

 are such as can be explained by mechanism...The latter is built on Lagrange's Dynamical Equations and
 is not wise about vortices" (Maxwell 1995, p. 337). Harman and Goldman both accept this statement as
 evidence of the purely mathematical nature of Maxwell's methodology in the 1865 paper (Goldman 1983,

 p. 155; Harman 1998, p. 118). Nevertheless, they both admit that despite reforming his methods, Maxwell's

 new conception of the electromagnetic field as a "complicated mechanism" is still explicitly based upon a

 physical/mechanical analogy (Maxwell 1865, p. 533). Each letter makes clear (as does the content of the

 paper itself) that Maxwell is no longer relying on a hypothetical model, but the second is supposed to show
 that Maxwell believes that the analogy in the 1865 paper is to nothing but Lagrangian dynamics.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 457

 nificantly distinguishes it from the mechanical specificity of the earlier 1862 model.

 As Harman puts it, in 1865 "[t]he mechanical analogy for the electromagnetic field

 is explicated in terms of energy relations, rather than the pictorial mechanical model

 contrived in 'On physical lines of force'" (Harman 1998, p. 116). There is undoubt

 edly truth to this claim concerning Maxwell's "Dynamical Theory," as the theory is

 founded on the methods of Lagrangian dynamics that apply to any system defined by

 the same energy and momentum relations that apply in mechanics. Nevertheless, a

 close look at Maxwell's application of Lagrangian dynamics yields a picture of his

 1865 approach that is governed by something beyond pure dynamical abstraction. Led

 by the peculiarities of Maxwell's analysis, I will introduce a more harmonious account

 of Maxwell's explanatory approach in "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic

 Field," one in which Maxwell strikes a balance between his often ignored analogy

 to a mechanical flywheel and the more abstract mathematical analysis that is usually

 identified as the hallmark of the paper. This analogy between a particular differential

 system and electromagnetism grounds Maxwell's study of electromagnetism in clear

 mechanical conceptions and structures the derivation of the equations that together

 are now recognized as Maxwell's equations for electrodynamics.

 Martin Goldman and Thomas K. Simpson both invoke Maxwell's famous bell

 ringer metaphor to describe the dynamical approach of the 1865 paper (Goldman
 1983, pp. 155-156; Simpson 1997, p. 372).

 In an ordinary belfry, each bell has one rope which comes down through a hole

 in the floor to the bellringer's room. But suppose that each rope, instead of acting

 on one bell, contributes to the motion of many pieces of machinery, and that the

 motion of each piece is determined not by the motion of one rope alone, but by

 that of several, and suppose, further, that all this machinery is silent and utterly

 unknown to the men at the ropes, who can only see as far as the holes in the floor

 above them. (Maxwell 1879, p. 783)

 In this metaphor impressing velocities on the ropes hanging ftom the belfry and mea

 suring impulses for every possible position and final velocity of the ropes is the only

 recourse available to the men below. Nonetheless, they still may obtain generalized

 Lagrange equations which describe the motion of the ropes due to any impressed force

 despite total ignorance of the system of bells above. The association of this sort of

 black-box reasoning with Maxwell's use of Lagrangian dynamics in his 1865 paper

 naturally discourages the discussion of any aspects of a physical/mechanical analogy
 above and beyond the equations of Lagrangian dynamics. If Lagrangian dynamics

 allows us to black-box the mechanism under investigation, then the inclusion of any

 sort of additional physical or mechanical analogy would be entirely superfluous. If this

 is Maxwell's picture of how to apply Lagrangian dynamics, we should not expect him

 to pair this sort of mathematical analysis with the kind of pictorial physical analogy

 seen in his first paper on electromagnetism, and should be even more skeptical of a

 pairing with a mechanical model like the one presented in his second paper. This may

 have become Maxwell's picture eventually, but, as we will see, it was not in 1865. The

 quote above comes from the first appearance of the bell-ringer analogy in print, an
 1879 review by Maxwell of the second edition of Thomson and Tait's Natural Philos

 ophy. The first edition of his Treatise was preempted by the first edition of Thomson

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 458 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 and Tait's Natural Philosophy (1873) and we can find a discussion of something like
 a proto-bell-ringer metaphor, albeit concerning his preferred Hamiltonian form of

 dynamics, within the pages of Maxwell's book:

 I have applied this method [Hamiltonian/Lagrangian dynamics] so as to avoid

 the explicit consideration of the motion of any part of the system except the coor

 dinates or variables, on which the motion of the whole depends. It is doubtless

 important that the student should be able to trace the connexion of the motion of

 each part of the system with that of the variables, but it is by no means necessary

 to do this in the process of obtaining the final equations, which are independent

 of the particular form of these connexions. (Maxwell 1873, Vol. 2, p. 185)

 Given the similar approaches found in the 1865 paper and the Treatise and given

 that the analogical scaffolding of any sort of mechanical differential (let alone the

 more specific flywheel system) is entirely absent from the first (and second) edition

 of the Treatise, it should not come as a surprise that the bell-ringer metaphor has been

 exported to describe Maxwell's method in the 1865 paper.

 We should, however, not read Maxwell's affection for abstract Lagrangian dynamics

 suggested by the bell-ringer metaphor or for Hamiltonian dynamics from the first

 edition of the Treatise back into the 1865 paper. In fact, it seems much more likely

 that this black-box style of analysis was at least partly inspired by Thomson and Tait's

 Natural Philosophy, something Maxwell suggests in his 1879 review:

 The credit of breaking up the monopoly of the great masters of the spell [general

 theory of dynamics] and making all their charms familiar in our ears as household

 words, belongs in great measure to Thomson and Tait. (Maxwell 1879, p. 782)

 With the bell-ringer metaphor exorcized from the narrative surrounding Maxwell's
 "Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" we can reexamine whether it is

 appropriate to characterize Maxwell's approach in his 1865 paper as something purely

 "abstract and general rather than concrete and pictorial" (Siegel 1991, p. 50). Is it fair

 to say that Maxwell's analysis in his 1865 paper is guided only by a clever extension

 of Lagrangian dynamics?

 In what follows I will argue that Maxwell's introduction of Lagrangian dynamics

 in "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" is guided by an amalgam of

 Maxwell's approaches that preceded it. The mechanical reasoning that is so charac

 teristic of his 1862 paper remained a central, albeit less conspicuous, aspect of his

 "Dynamical Theory;" however, it is the more philosophically cautious 1855 paper

 that most closely resembles the methodological approach that Maxwell adopted in his

 third major paper on electromagnetism. Indeed in his third paper Maxwell's extension

 of Lagrangian dynamics from mechanical interactions to electrodynamics and optics

 presupposes the existence of some sort of mechanical model, some "complicated
 mechanism"; however, unlike his second paper, this dynamical theory is not depen

 dant on the specifics of any one model (Maxwell 1865, p. 533). We shall see that while

 Lagrangian dynamics offered Maxwell more than one way to structure his analysis,

 especially in one particular case (cf. Sect. 3.4), the approach taken by Maxwell embod

 ies relations expressed in the dynamics of a particular mechanical system, namely the

 4t) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 459

 flywheel.2 The flywheel is referenced only briefly toward the beginning of Maxwell's

 paper; however, we will come to recognize just how impactful the concepts and rela

 tions governing it were when transferred to electromagnetism.

 Broadly speaking, in the 1865 paper Maxwell found a way to realize a successful

 harmony between physical analogy and abstract mathematics that he had called for in

 his first major paper on electromagnetism all the way back in 1855;

 The first process therefore in the effectual study of the science, must be one of

 simplification and reduction of the results of previous investigation to a form in

 which the mind can grasp them. The results of this simplification may take the

 form of a purely mathematical formula or of a physical hypothesis. In the first

 case we entirely lose sight of the phenomena to be explained; and though we may

 trace out the consequences of given laws, we can never obtain more extended

 views of the connexions of the subject. If, on the other hand, we adopt a physical

 hypothesis, we see the phenomena only through a medium, and are liable to

 that blindness to facts and rashness in assumption which a partial explanation

 encourages. We must therefore discover some method of investigation which

 allows the mind at every step to lay hold of a clear physical conception, without

 being committed to any theory founded on the physical science from which

 that conception is borrowed, so that it is neither drawn aside from the subject

 in pursuit of analytical subtleties, nor carried beyond the truth by a favourite
 hypothesis. (Maxwell 1855, pp. 155-156; quoted and discussed by Goldman
 1983, pp. 140-141)

 Maxwell retained much of this sense of paired physical and mathematical analyses

 which had brought him success in his first electromagnetic paper in "A Dynamical

 Theory." As Sir James Jeans notes in a posthumous essay on Maxwell's scientific

 methodology, "[fjrom the very beginning his [Maxwell's] mathematical ideas were

 not only guided but controlled by a strong sense of physical reality" (Jeans 1931,
 p. 96).

 The role of physical analogy, and thus the flywheel analogy, in 1865 was roughly

 similar to the role of the flow analogy in his 1855 paper, both "show[ed] how to

 partition the space" (Wise 1977, p. 215). The flywheel provided a "natural physical
 partitioning" that allowed Maxwell to not only generate particular conceptual units

 but also a roadmap to direct his construction of a new dynamical theory of electromag

 netism (Wise 1977, p. 136). As such, although the analogy to a mechanical flywheel

 is presented as a "dynamical illustration," its role was not limited to just clarifying

 2 Olivier Darrigol gestures to the presence of the flywheel in the 1865 paper, although he assigns it little

 significance (Darrigol 2000, p. 156). Francis Everitt takes the time to explain how the analogy is constructed

 although he does not delve much into its uses (Everitt 1975, pp. 103-105). Daniel Siegel acknowledges the

 status of the flywheel as a mechanical analogue for inductive circuits in his notes, citing Everitt, but given his

 book's focus on Maxwell's 1862 paper, he understandably does not push any deeper (Siegel 1991, p. 199).

 Harman and Goldman ignore its existence entirely. In a guided study of Maxwell's electromagnetic papers,

 Thomas K. Simpson suggests that the flywheel might be of some significance: it need "not necessarily be
 an inferior but quite possibly a more insightful way of grasping the principles of a connected mechanical

 system" (Simpson 1997, p. 367). 1 will advocate for something very close to this view.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 460 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 physical conceptions (Maxwell 1865, p. 538).3 Maxwell's flywheel analogy filled a

 critical role within his new electrodynamic theory, a role outlined by Maxwell in an

 unpublished essay for the Apostles Club, "Analogies: Are There Real Analogies in
 Nature":

 Before we can count any number of things we must pick them out of the universe,

 and give each of them a fictious unity by definition...The dimmed outlines of

 phenomenal things all merge into another unless we put on the focussing glass

 of theory and screw it up sometimes to one pitch of definition, and sometimes

 to another, so as to see down into different depths through the great millstone of

 the world. (Maxwell 1990, p. 377)

 This illustrative analogy to a mechanical flywheel embodies that elusive "method of

 investigation" described by Maxwell in 1855 and not only supplied Maxwell with clear

 distinctions between electromagnetic phenomena by grounding them in mechanical

 analogues, it also suggested the unique route taken in his mathematical analysis and

 helped to lead him to his general equations of the electromagnetic field. The 1865

 paper is then much more than an abstract application of Lagrange's methods; the elec

 tromagnetic equations it introduces are instantiations of the concepts and connections

 outlined by the dynamics of the flywheel, as I will now show.

 This paper is structured as follows.

 Section 1 : covers the mechanical properties of Maxwell's flywheel, how it works

 and its specific components, both as an isolated mechanism and as an expanded

 flywheel system. The section highlights the concept of reduced momentum, which

 by analogy becomes a crucial feature of Maxwell's electromagnetic project. It con

 cludes with a discussion of the example that Maxwell uses to clarify the flywheel's

 link to electromagnetic phenomena.

 Section 2: lays out the analogy between the mechanical flywheel and electromag

 netism, drawing the necessary connections between components of the flywheel

 and concepts in electromagnetic theory. I will consider two specific cases where

 circuits act on one another through the field.

 Section 2.1: Demonstrates the induction of a current in a passive circuit by changes

 in another circuit (by alteration of its current in Sect. 2.1.1 and by setting the
 circuit in motion in Sect. 2.1.2). At the same time this section illustrates how the

 relevant concepts in electromagnetism are grounded in mechanical understanding

 by analogy to the flywheel and how the flywheel analogy guides Maxwell in

 structuring his analysis.

 Section 2.2: looks at Maxwell's derivation of an equation of power and the impli

 cations his mechanical analogy has for his concept of the electromagnetic field

 by locating energy in the field itself. The conclusion of this section briefly parses

 Maxwell's justification for reversing the use of his mechanical illustration to now

 analyze how the field affects circuits.

 3 This is not to say that Maxwell viewed this clarifying role as unimportant. Maxwell still regarded this

 application of analogy as crucial when giving his "Introductory Lecture on Experimental Physics" at Cam

 bridge in October 1871: illustrative analogy lends "vividness and relief to ideas which, when presented as
 mere abstract terms, are apt to fade entirely from the memory" (Maxwell 1871, p. 242).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 461

 Section 3: primarily investigates this shift to the field acting on circuits and the

 way in which Maxwell uses his mechanical analogy to guide his piece-by-piece

 construction of a generalized equation for induced electromotive force.

 Section 3.1 : serves primarily as an introduction to electromagnetic momentum and

 electromotive force, considering these concepts localized at a point in the field.4

 Section 3.2: reconstructs Maxwell's derivation of the electromagnetic momentum

 of a circuit, illustrating the role of the mechanical analogy in guiding Maxwell's
 mathematics.

 Section 3.2.1: reconstructs Maxwell's derivation of an expression for magnetic

 force in terms of electromagnetic momentum; this will prove useful later in Sect. 3.

 Section 3.3: illustrates how the flywheel aids the construction of the first piece of

 a generalized equation of induced electromotive force on a circuit.

 Section 3.4: reconstructs Maxwell's derivation of the final piece of this generalized

 equation for induced electromotive force, the induced electromotive force on a

 moving conductor. Again Maxwell's analogy to a mechanical flywheel is shown

 to direct his analysis of this particular electromagnetic phenomenon, suggesting

 the inclusion of terms which are ultimately unnecessary for the purposes of this
 derivation.

 Section 4: demonstrates the deep methodological similarities between Maxwell's

 work in 1855 and 1865, specifically the similar role assigned to the physical analo

 gies in both papers.

 professionals.

 Section 5: highlights some of the ways in which the flywheel analogy and systems

 like it continued to be used as instructional tools by scientific and engineering

 Section 6: brief concluding remarks summarizing the findings in this paper.

 1 Flywheels and bevel gears

 After an introductory discussion Maxwell's "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromag
 netic Field"5 moves to a general discussion of electromagnetic induction. The first

 part of this discussion is entitled "Electromagnetic Momentum of a Circuit," and it

 is here that Maxwell explicitly references a flywheel system as an analogue of the
 electromagnetic cases he will investigate:

 Now, if the magnetic state of the field depends on motions of the medium, a
 certain force must be exerted in order to increase or diminish these motions, and

 when the motions are excited they continue, so that the effect of the connexion

 between the current and the electromagnetic field surrounding it, is to endow the

 current with a kind of momentum, just as the connexion between the driving

 4 What Maxwell calls electromagnetic momentum is what we would now call the vector potential A. It

 should not be confused with the modern definition of electromagnetic momentum, ®o(E x B), where so is

 the dielectric constant in vacuo and E and B are the electric and the magnetic field, respectively.

 5 Unless noted otherwise, all page references refer to the reprint of this paper in The Scientific Papers of
 James Clerk Maxwell, Volume 1. Equations marked M(x), where x is an integer or capital letter, refer to
 the equation number or letter within Maxwell's 1865 paper.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 462 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 Fig. 1 Maxwell's flywheel, the
 Fig. 1 Maxwell's flywheel, the
 labels in this image has been
 labels in this image has been
 modified from those in the
 modified from those in the

 version shown in (Maxwell
 version shown in (Maxwell
 1892, Vol. 2, p. 228)
 1892, Vol. 2, p. 228)

 c

 B

 The abstract of the 1865 paper as well as a deleted passage from the original
 manuscript, both submitted to the Royal Society in late October 1864, indicate that in

 addition to the flywheel, Maxwell began writing this paper with two more mechanical
 analogies in mind (Maxwell 1864). Another mechanical analogy could conceivably
 have done similar work, the flywheel analogy is after all meant to be illustrative and not

 a hypothetical model of reality. Maxwell was aware that "[t]he problem of determining
 the mechanism required to establish a given species of connexion between the motions

 of the parts of a system always admits of an infinite number of solutions" (Maxwell

 1873, Vol. 2, p. 417). The change from "a rod acted on by two forces perpendicular to its

 direction" and "two horses harnessed to a carriage by the intervention of a lever so that

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 point of a machine and a fly-wheel endows the driving-point with additional
 momentum, which may be called the momentum of the fly-wheel reduced to the

 driving-point, (p. 536)

 There is no accompanying illustration of the flywheel system that Maxwell references

 in the 1865 paper; however, a sketch and description of a fly wheel designed by Maxwell
 that is also intended to illustrate electromagnetic induction is printed in the first,
 unabridged edition of The Life of James Clerk Maxwell, and later in the third edition
 of Maxwell's Treatise (Campbell and Garnett 1882, pp. 550-554; Maxwell 1892,
 Vol. 2, p. 228). The later drawing from Maxwell's Treatise is shown in Fig. 1. This
 image was likely added by J.J. Thomson who took over from W.D. Niven as the editor

 for the Treatise's third edition, carrying on despite Maxwell's death in 1879, before
 the release of the second edition.

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 463

 Fig. 2 Maxwell's flywheel
 Fig. 2 Maxwell's flywheel
 model built for the Cavendish
 model built for the Cavendish

 Laboratory (in the Whipple
 Laboratory (in the Whipple
 Museum of the History of
 Museum of the History of
 Science, University of
 Science, University of
 Cambridge Wh.2455)
 Cambridge Wh.2455)

 each horse pulls at its own arm of the lever while the lever is attached to the carriage by

 its fulcrum" to the flywheel was most likely a decision based simply on the respective

 clarity of each analogy as "some may be more clumsy or more complex than others"
 (Maxwell 1995, pp. 191, 197; Maxwell 1873, Vol. 2, p. 417). The elements of the
 rod and horse analogies seem ill-suited to embody the components of the dynamical
 equations with which Maxwell begins, while these analogies taken as a whole are
 clumsy illustrations of Maxwell's discussion of dynamics more generally. Ultimately,
 Maxwell presumably saw an advantage in using only the flywheel as an analogue
 of electromagnetic phenomena in his 1865 paper. The perceived superiority of the
 flywheel analogy seems to have persisted as the flywheel was built under Maxwell's

 orders by Elliott Bros, in late 1876 (see Fig. 2) as a teaching aid for the newly founded
 Cavendish Laboratory in accordance with his design (Maxwell 2002, p. 421 ; Maxwell
 1892, Vol. 2, p. 228). In what follows, the advantages of founding this paper on an
 analogy to a mechanical flywheel will become apparent.

 First, the structure and operation of the flywheel must be understood to make sense

 of the analogy Maxwell exploits to construct his equations of electromagnetism. The
 two driving-wheels A and B are supported by separate axles geared into the central
 flywheel C. Both driving-wheels A and B have a string hung over them attached to
 a weight acting as a friction break on each wheel. The flywheel is nothing but two
 rods arranged like a cross with weights on all four ends and a single gear. The setup

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 464 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 is similar to the simple mechanical differentials found in automobiles that allow the

 wheels to turn at different speeds, a crucial invention that allows the driver to make

 turns without the wheels slipping and which is the foundation of many traction control

 systems. The two driving-wheels turn their respective axles, each connected on the

 opposite end to a bevel gear, which allows for the transmission of motion at right

 angles. The flywheel has its own bevel gear loosely afixed to it, geared into the bevel

 gears at A and B. There is no requirement that the gearing ratios of these independent

 bevel gears be equal. The weighted flywheel is set perpendicularly to the axles of the

 driving-wheels. The flywheel's primary axis of rotation is a line that passes through the

 axles of the driving-wheels. The bevel gear on the flywheel C is only loosely attached

 and is thus able to rotate around the long axis of the flywheel, perpendicular to the

 primary rotation of the flywheel.

 As mentioned above, the gearing ratios of those bevel gears directly attached to

 the driving-wheels may be different and it is in this way that both wheels might spin

 at different constant velocities without accelerating the flywheel. Assuming for the

 moment that the gearing ratios of A and B are equivalent, we see that if the driving

 wheels A and B rotate with opposite angular velocities such that the linear speed at

 the rim of each wheel is of equal magnitude, v, then the intermediary bevel gear on

 the flywheel C rotates around the long axis of the flywheel with an angular speed vr,

 where r is the radius of the bevel gear on the flywheel C. If A and B are made to rotate

 at different speeds, then the entire flywheel C will rotate around an axis through the

 centers of A and B with an angular speed equal to half of the difference between the

 magnitudes of the linear speeds of A and B at their peripheries multiplied by the length

 of one arm of the flywheel (from one end to the axis through A and B). If there is an

 acceleration of the velocity of driving-wheel A while B is at rest, then the flywheel C

 will not move at first, but its loosely attached bevel gear will communicate a motion

 to the wheel B in the opposite direction of that at A. As this motion at B is resisted

 by its attached hanging weight, this reaction by B as well as the force imparted by A

 will cause the flywheel C to rotate around the axis through the centers of A and B

 in the same direction as A and with an angular speed equal to half of the magnitude

 of the linear speed of A at its periphery multiplied by the length of one arm of C.

 As long as the driving-wheel A remains at a constant velocity, C will remain at this

 speed, rolling around B, which will eventually come to rest due to the resistance of

 the weighted string. Any acceleration of A will again drive an opposite motion in B.

 This is illustrated in Fig. 3. As a consequence of the weights in the system, we see a

 transfer of momentum, first from the accelerated driving-wheel to the flywheel, and

 then from the flywheel to the other driving-wheel, making this system particularly

 suited for the application of Lagrangian dynamics.

 On the page immediately following his discussion of the "fly-wheel," Maxwell

 provides a Lagrangian account of a mechanical system. Although Maxwell's discus

 sion of the flywheel is limited to the brief given at the beginning of this section, his

 Lagrangian analysis comfortably describes just such a system. Indeed both the fly

 wheel and the abstract Lagrangian system aim to illustrate the same concept, namely

 reduced momentum. Maxwell's general Lagrangian system introduces two "driving

 points" A and B and a connected body C. In unifying the mechanical systems involved

 in both the prior discussion of the "fly-wheel" and the more general description that

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 465

 Fig. 3 Mechanical induction
 Fig. 3 Mechanical induction
 through the flywheel
 through the flywheel

 immediately precedes Maxwell's mathematical investigation, the only leaps necessary

 are to equate the central flywheel connected to drWmg-wheels with the generic "body

 C" similarly attached to driving -points A and B and thus to make a jump from rota

 tional to linear velocities. In the case of the flywheel, we take the mass of the central

 flywheel to be C. Maxwell sets u as the linear velocity of A, v as that of B, and w as
 the linear velocity of C, a motion we take to be analogous to the flywheel's primary
 rotation around the axis through A and B. The system is geared such that the velocity

 w of C is p times the velocity u of A and q times the velocity v of B. Using Sx, Sy, Sz
 for the respective simultaneous displacements (Sx and Sy are independent) of A, B,
 and C, Maxwell obtains what he calls, citing Part II, Sect. 2, §5 of Lagrange's Ana
 lytical Mechanics, "the general equation of dynamics" (p. 537). Lagrange's "general
 formula of dynamics for the motion of an arbitrary system of bodies" is represented
 as (Lagrange 1997, p. 186):

 f /d2x d2y d2z \ [
 / ( d?5"^ + + dr^) m + / (psP + QS(H + RSr ^ )m= 0. (1)

 Without parsing out Lagrange's more general dynamical equation, we can still recog

 nize its paternity when we move back to Maxwell and his general equation of dynamics,

 C^-Sz = XSx + YSy, (2)

 cu

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 466 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 which describes the balance of work in the system, where X and Y are the driving
 forces acting at A and B.

 Maxwell goes on to form two equations describing the relationship of linear veloc

 ities in parts of the system in terms of what amount to gearing ratios p and q. The first

 relates the accelerations at each of the points A, B, and C.

 The second expresses the relation between their respective displacements.

 dw du du
 d7 = "d7+,d7- (3)

 Sz = pSx + qSy. (4)

 Inserting Eqs. (3) and (4) into Eq. (2) and grouping 8x and Sy terms, Maxwell isolates
 X and Y, the forces at A and B.

 d ,

 X = —(Cpu + Cpqv),

 dt

 dt

 d 7

 M(l) (5)

 Y = — (Cpqu + Cq2v).

 In moving from Eqs. (2)—(4) to Eq. (5), Maxwell assumes that C, p, and q are

 constants. As we will see, Maxwell treats the electromagnetic analogues of these

 quantities as if they are time dependent. That Maxwell is willing to grant this latitude

 to quantities that would otherwise be treated as constants in a standard Lagrangian
 system suggests that he may be pursuing the physical analogy to the flywheel beyond

 what can be strictly justified by Lagrangian dynamics.

 In Eq. (5), Maxwell arrives at a key concept that he will use to motivate his discussion

 of the electromagnetic field, namely the quantity he calls "reduced momentum." He

 defines the "momentum of C referred to A" (p. 537) as the momentum of C imparted

 by the force at the driving-point A, given by (Cp2u+Cpqv). Similarly, the momentum

 of C referred to B is the momentum of C imparted by the force at the driving-point B

 and is given by (Cpqu + Cq2v). Reduced momentum is nothing but the momentum

 stemming from a particular force acting on the central body, C (or in the case of the

 flywheel, the central flywheel, C). Put another way, the effect of forces such as X and

 Y is to change the momentum of C in relation to the points A and B at which these

 forces are applied.

 This simple system is generalized so that there may be an arbitrary number of bodies

 like C linked up to A and B, perhaps with different masses C and different gearing
 ratios p and q6 The quantities Cp2, Cpq, and Cq2 in Eq. (5) then get replaced by

 sums over the different values of these three parameters

 6 In his 1862 cogwheel model Maxwell had felt it necessary to insert idle wheels to overcome a similar

 mechanical problem, namely "coupling neighboring vortices" (Siegel 1991, p. 66). That Maxwell appeared

 unconcerned with the potential mechanical difficulties of coupling an arbitrary number of these systems

 together demonstrates his move away from modeling electromagnetic phenomena and the ether itself,
 instead offering only a "dynamical illustration".

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 467

 L = £«V) M = ^(Cpq) N = J^(Cq2). (6)

 Note that L and N relate only to the driving force at their respective driving-point,

 A or B. In the electromagnetic case, L and N refer to the shapes of the circuits and

 act as coefficients of self-inductance. By contrast M, which in the electromagnetic

 case Maxwell refers to as the coefficient of mutual inductance, relates to the driving

 forces at both A and B. These quantities are loosely analogous to moments of inertia

 insofar as they measure resistance to rotational acceleration if we think in terms of an

 expanded flywheel system. The momentum referred to A is

 while the momentum referred to B is,

 Lu + Mv, (7)

 Mu + Nv. (8)

 The forces X and Y acting on A and B to drive the expanded system can then be

 written as before [cf. Eq. (5)]:

 X = —(Lu + Mv),

 M(2) (9)

 Y = ^-(Mu + Nv).

 at

 Resistance forces due to the weighted wires, which are also in reference to A or B

 and their respective velocities, take the form Ru and Sv as extra terms on the right-hand

 sides of these equations. The manner in which both resistance forces are incorporated

 in the electromagnetic case is demonstrated in Eqs. (12)—(13) at the beginning of the
 next section.

 Although Maxwell's Lagrangian analysis is supposedly general and does not imme

 diately reference the flywheel within his "Dynamical Theory," very nearly the same

 equations of Lagrangian dynamics appear 3 years later in an investigation of differen

 tially geared governors in his paper "On Governors" (Maxwell 1868, pp. 118-120).7

 The device Maxwell describes appears remarkably similar to the differentially geared
 flywheel:

 In some contrivances the main shaft is connected with the governor by a wheel or

 system of wheels which are capable of rotation about the axis of the main shaft.

 These two axes may be at right angles, as in the ordinary system of differential

 bevel wheels; or they may be parallel, as in several contrivances adapted to
 clockwork. (Maxwell 1868, p. 118)

 7 Maxwell had previously described the relevance of William Siemens' differentially geared governor to
 electromagnetic phenomena in Part II of "On Physical Lines of Force," where he noted that elements of

 this governor are capable of motions similar to those of the idle wheels in his cogwheel model (Maxwell
 1862, pp. 468-469).

 Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 468 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 Whether Maxwell was simply examining another type of governor (Siemens designed

 differentially geared governors were already in use on steam-engines), or, as Otto Mayr

 argues, Maxwell was more thoroughly checking that the mechanical system could be

 trusted to illustrate electromagnetic induction in preparation for building a physical
 model for the Cavendish, the fact that Maxwell used nearly identical Lagrangian

 analysis in his 1865 paper and this later discussion of a flywheel-like device appears to

 bolster the claim that Maxwell conceived of the dynamical relations in his "Dynamical

 Theory" in terms of the flywheel (Mayr 1971, pp. 218-219).

 Returning to the 1865 paper, almost as an aside, Maxwell now makes a statement

 that finally leads us into his discussion of electromagnetism:

 If the velocity of A be increased at the rate du/dt, then in order to prevent B

 from moving a force, r) = d/df (Mm) must be applied to it. (p. 538)

 This statement is key to understanding the connection between the mechanical illus

 tration and electromagnetism. At the risk of belaboring the point, I will unpack this

 quotation to clarify the analogical relationship that Maxwell unveils. So that we might

 better understand what Maxwell had in mind, let us investigate how these relations are

 reflected in the operation of the flywheel. Consider the diagram in Fig. 3. As a result

 of the increase in velocity at A there is an indirect force on B, ~(d/dt)(Mu), that is

 to be canceled by rj. Acceleration of the driving-wheel A causes an acceleration of the

 passive wheel B in the opposite direction. The force described that would "prevent B

 from moving" is then just the force we would have to apply to B to stop it accelerating

 as a result of the acceleration of A. The stopping force at B is the opposite of the force

 applied to B by our acceleration of the driving-wheel A.

 The force on B as a result of action at A is mediated (hence the term indirect

 above) by the flywheel C, which Maxwell comes to see as the embodiment of the

 electromagnetic field. When a force is applied at A it leads to an increase in the
 momentum Lu + Mv of the flywheel [cf. Eq. (9)]. This increase in the flywheel's
 momentum is defined as the reduced momentum of A. The flywheel's momentum

 then decreases over time as it acts on the passive wheel B. Fig. 3 illustrates how

 motion is transferred from A to B through the flywheel C. The force on B takes the

 form of a decrease in momentum of the flywheel in time, —(d/dt)(Mu). This process

 of force transferal through the flywheel is the mechanical analogue of electromagnetic

 induction; in the electromagnetic case, the field moderates the transferal of forces
 between circuits. Maxwell goes on to say that this effect on B, -(d/dt)(Mu), is
 consistent with the electromotive force on a circuit which arises from the increase in

 strength of a nearby circuit, namely it is the induced electromotive force. Just as the

 flywheel's momentum decreases as it acts on B, the electromagnetic momentum of
 the field decreases as a result of its action on a circuit. The induced current is such that

 it produces a force which acts counter to the change in current at A that produced the
 induced electromotive force. This is Lenz's law.

 Naturally there are some similarities between the flywheel analogy and the cog

 wheel model presented in Maxwell's 1862 paper. Both are capable of giving a
 mechanical account of electromagnetic induction; however, while this feature is the

 primary function of the flywheel analogy, it was merely an extension of the ear
 lier model involving secondary tangential forces of the idle wheels acting on the

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 469

 vortices (Siegel 1991, p. 71). Nevertheless, the mechanical analogy in the 1865 paper

 is significantly more general, providing an illustration of connections between the

 field, represented by the central body or flywheel, and objects in it, represented as

 driving-points, not a hypothetical mechanical model of the structure of the electro

 magnetic ether. Additionally, while the specific flywheel analogy deals with rotations,

 Maxwell's Lagrangian dynamics is concerned exclusively with linear velocities. Thus

 the mechanically grounded concept of electromagnetic momentum that is central to

 Maxwell's "Dynamical Theory" does not explicitly require considerations of rotation,

 in contrast to the crucial role played by torques in modeling electromagnetic induction

 in his 1862 paper (Siegel 1991, p. 73).

 Maxwell concludes his dynamical illustration with a warning. Nevertheless, this

 should not be taken as a threat to the project of elevating the relative status of flywheel

 analogy in the historical literature that surrounds his 1865 paper.

 This dynamical illustration is to be considered merely as assisting the reader to

 understand what is meant in mechanics by Reduced Momentum. The facts of

 the induction of currents as depending on the variations of the quantity called

 Electromagnetic Momentum, or Electrotonic State, rest on the experiments of

 Faraday, Felici, &c. (p. 538)

 As will be made clear in the following sections, the concept of electromagnetic momen

 tum which is so central to Maxwell's "Dynamical Theory" is itself grounded in the

 mechanical concept of reduced momentum, and its role in guiding Maxwell's math

 ematical analysis is governed by his exploitation of analogical links to the flywheel

 that suggest particular derivations of certain electromagnetic expressions. The facts

 of electromagnetic phenomena supplied by "the experiments of Faraday, Felici, &c"

 are necessary for the mechanical analogy to hold; without electromagnetic phenom

 ena similar in action to the mechanical processes there would be no analogical link

 through which the flywheel or even his abstract Lagrangian dynamics could affect
 Maxwell's investigation of electromagnetism, no "partial similarity between the laws
 of one science and those of another which makes each of them illustrate the other"

 (Maxwell 1855, p. 156). The accounts of Maxwell's mathematical analysis that follow

 serve to highlight the role of the mechanical foundations of his "Dynamical Theory"

 and the analogically grounded concept of electromagnetic momentum, a role that had

 previously been obscured in the literature by the choice to substitute electromagnetic

 momentum for the vector potential. By working within Maxwell's original formalism

 can we more immediately appreciate the significance of the mechanical analogy that

 guided his analysis.

 through the field

 2 Mobilizing the mechanical analogy to analyze the effects of circuits

 Before we proceed to examine the specific electromagnetic examples that Maxwell
 lays out, we need to make sure that we understand the basic connections between

 the mechanical flywheel and electromagnetism that constitute the analogical link.

 Maxwell begins anew on p. 539 with two conducting circuits A and B instead of

 driving-points, while keeping in mind the lessons laid out in the preceding section.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 470 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 The currents x and y in A and B take the place of the velocities at the driving-points,

 a reasonable substitution as currents also represent a change in time. L, M, and N

 now represent quantities that depend on the form and relative position of the circuits,

 L describing the form of circuit A, N of circuit B, and M the relative position of A

 and B. Insofar as these quantities were originally made up of gearing ratios and the

 summed weights of the central flywheels in the flywheel system, together expressing

 the driving-wheels' moments of inertia, a strong analogy holds between their use in

 the mechanical and electromagnetic case. Lenz's law in the electromagnetic case is

 drawn directly from the construction of the mechanical example and the way motion

 is transferred from one driving-wheel, through the gears and flywheels to the other

 driving-wheel, always resulting in an acceleration opposed to that which initially

 drove the system. If we continue to think in terms of the flywheel analogy, the C's

 of our expanded mechanical system, the weighted flywheels being acted on by the

 driving-wheels, can now be thought of as expanding into all space and representing the

 field. The quantity for which Maxwell coined the term electromagnetic momentum

 is analogous to the reduced momentum that existed in the flywheel or system of

 flywheels. If the analogy holds, then electromagnetic momentum extends from the

 wires throughout the unbounded field. As such, in accordance with the mechanical

 illustration, the reduced electromagnetic momentum of A is

 Ç, the electromotive force due to changes in A, be they changes in the strength

 of the current, the form of the circuit, or its relative position with respect to another

 circuit of current y, is given by

 Rx + ^(Lx + My), M (4) (12)

 dt

 Lx + My, (10)

 and that of B is

 Mx + Ny. (11)

 and the force, r], which arises from changes at B, by

 rj = Sy + -j-(Mx + Ny), M(5) (13)

 at

 where R and S are coefficients of resistance.

 In the sections that follow we investigate Maxwell's approach to more specific

 cases of circuits acting on passive circuits by way of the field. It will be helpful to

 keep in mind not only the basic electromagnetic properties discussed above, but also

 the analogous mechanical operations that underpin them.

 *2) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 471

 2.1 Induction of a current by another through the field8

 It is not trivial to grasp the idea that a current in one circuit should induce a current

 in some other passive circuit in the field. The mechanical analogy grounds current

 current interactions in clear physical concepts, illustrating the dynamical connection

 between components in the electromagnetic case. Through the flywheel analogy we

 may come to terms with Maxwell's statement that "since the two currents are in

 connexion with every point of the field, they will be in connexion with each other"

 (p. 537). Just as the driving-wheels are geared into the flywheel, so should we imagine

 the circuit being "geared into" the electromagnetic field.

 Consider the induction of a current in the passive circuit B by that of the active

 circuit A (p. 540). We are told that N remains constant, which is to say that circuit B

 is rigid. Additionally, without some initial current driving B (B is a passive circuit),

 the equation describing the electromotive force due to B vanishes, i.e., rj = 0. The

 product Ny vanishes as B does not impress a force on A through the field, nor can it

 initially self-induce a force. Thus, Eq. (13) reduces to

 Sy + = 0. (14)

 at

 As we can see from this equation describing the process of induction of B by A,

 there are two distinct ways in which this phenomenon can arise, depending on which

 variable is held constant, M or x. If M is held constant and x is allowed to vary,

 then a current y in B will be induced by the variation of the current in A, while

 both circuits remain fixed with respect to their relative positions. If we allow M to

 vary and hold x constant, then a current y in B will be induced by a change in the

 relative position of the two circuits, the current in A remaining constant. If we think

 in terms of the flywheel analogy, the distinction between these two types of induction
 becomes immediately apparent. The latter case, where M is said to vary, is analagous

 to a manipulation of both gearing ratios in the flywheel system, while the former is

 analagous to the acceleration of the driving-wheel A. The analogy suggests an inherent

 physical difference between these two causes of induction. One arises from a change

 in the free variable of the system (velocity of a driving-wheel), while the other requires

 a physical alteration of the setup of the system itself (altering gearing ratios). We will

 follow Maxwell's lead and analyze these two possible causes for induction separately.

 2.1.1 Induction of a current by the variation of another

 Consider the case that the only electromotive force acting on B is due to the increase

 in the current in A from 0 to x. In that case M is constant, meaning the circuits will not

 move relative to one another, and they will not change shape, otherwise this motion

 would produce an additional electromotive force.

 Section titles closely resemble Maxwell's own titles and proceed in the order given in Maxwell's

 "Dynamical Theory".

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 472 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 As M is constant, Eq. (14) gives

 dx M . .

 Sy + M— = 0 —» y = (15)

 (9

 A force arising from the change, dx/dt, in the current at A affects the field, and

 then acts on the current y through the coefficient of mutual inductance M that relates

 the relative positions of the two circuits. The electromagnetic momentum of the field

 is exhausted as its electromagnetic momentum is transferred to B. The analogous

 mechanical case has already been laid out by Maxwell in his stopping force example.

 If we again take refuge in the flywheel analogy, an increase in the velocity of A acts

 through the central flywheel to transfer momentum to B in accordance with the coeffi

 cient M. The negative sign is indicative of Lenz's law, such that the induced electromo

 tive force produces a current which will oppose the change that produced it. Maxwell

 goes on to integrate Eq. (15) getting what he calls the "total induced current" (p. 540),

 or the total charge passing through B due to the increase in current at A from 0 to x.

 2.1.2 Induction of a current by the motion of the circuit

 Next Maxwell investigates the induced electromotive force on B due to the two circuits

 A and B approaching one another. Such a motion will be represented by a change in

 the coefficient of mutual inductance, M. In this case, Eq. (14) gives

 dM xdM

 Sy + x—=0 — y = . (16)

 Again Maxwell finds that the induced electromotive force on B follows from a

 reduction in electromagnetic momentum in the field through its transfer to B, produc

 ing a current opposed to the change which produced it, in agreement with Lenz's law.

 Here the analogous mechanical effect would involve the increase in both gearing ratios

 which make up the M term, causing an increase in the momentum of the flywheel by

 the action of A, and subsequently a decrease in the momentum of the flywheel as this

 momentum is received by B.

 The work done by our importation of Maxwell's analogy to the flywheel in both of

 these cases of induction is twofold. First, it clearly delineates the two cases of induction

 by reference to specific elements in the mechanical case, as they "resemble[ ] rather

 the reduced momentum of a driving-point of a machine influenced by its mechanical

 connexions" (p. 539). Second, it provides clear physical concepts through which we

 may come to terms with these electromagnetic phenomena: "L, M, N correspond to the

 same quantities in the dynamical illustration, except they are supposed to be capable

 of variation when the conductors A or B are moved" (p. 539).

 2.2 Equation of work and energy

 To form the equation of total work in unit time (power) done by both circuits A

 and B (p. 541), Maxwell proceeds analogously to a mechanical system, multiplying

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 After dropping the terms Rx2 and Sy2, the energy lost as heat due to resistance,

 we can rewrite the right-hand side of Eq. (17) as:

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 473

 the electromotive forces f and rj [from Eq. (12) and (13)] by the currents x and y,

 respectively (in the mechanical case, the power, P, is given by the inner product, F • v)

 Çx + t]y = Rx2 + Sy2 + x-7- (Lx + My) + y— (Mx + Ny). M(8) (17)

 df at

 1 d (r 2 „2 \ 1 2 dM 1 dA 2 /A o\
 2dt ( +2Mxy + Ny) + ~x +—xy +--y . (18)

 When L, M, and N are constant, the last three terms in Eq. ( 18) vanish. What is left

 is "the whole intrinsic energy of the currents" or the change in the energy contained

 within the field due to the currents x and y. Maxwell makes a prescient but guarded

 follow-up point, noting that as the currents are time derivatives, this energy "probably

 exists as actual motion, the seat of this motion being not merely the conducting circuits,

 but the space surrounding them." This motion and the energy is in the field, although

 it is "in a form imperceptible to our senses" (p. 541). While the dynamical theory will

 make no specific claims about the field, Maxwell's analogical reasoning has effectively

 physicalized empty space. In the words of one commentator, "space is not an empty

 geometrical container but a coherent, connected physical system bearing the energy
 of motion" (Simpson 1997, p. 312). By analogy to the flywheel, the properties of

 the field resemble those of a moment of inertia, a physical concept adapted to the

 field, but stripped of the immediate perceptibility it had in the earlier mechanical
 illustration.

 The last three terms in Eq. (18) in which L, M, and N are variable describe the

 work done in unit time by the "alterations in the form and position of the conducting

 circuits A and B" (p. 542). Maxwell goes on to note that this impressed force must in

 fact be a simple mechanical force acting on a body, such as a conductor in one of the

 circuits, a very tangible action with electromagnetic consequences in the field. This

 equation then is taken to be the work done during these mechanical alterations of the
 circuit.9

 Maxwell concludes this section with a justification of the dynamical project which

 will follow in the next section on the "General Equations of the Electromagnetic Field."

 If the unresisted part of an acting electromotive force generates

 a self-persistent state of the current, which we may call (from mechanical

 analogy) its electromagnetic momentum, and [if] this momentum depends on
 circumstances external to the conductor, then both induction of currents and

 electromagnetic attractions may be proved by mechanical reasoning, (p. 542)

 Essentially Maxwell is outlining his plan of attack for the next section. If he has

 been justified in using the mechanical illustration and thus, as we have suggested,

 its accompanying flywheel analogy to investigate how electromotive forces arising

 9 Maxwell's comment on p. 542 that this mechanical force acts to maximize L,M,andN remains puzzling.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 474 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 from changes in circuits affect the electromagnetic field, then such reasoning should

 work equally well in reverse. In the "General Equations" section, Maxwell will draw

 on his mechanical analogy to the flywheel to inform his investigation of induced

 electromotive forces, i.e., his investigation of how electromotive forces arising from

 changes in the electromagnetic field "due to any system of magnets or currents" affect

 circuits (p. 555).

 3 General equations of the electromagnetic field: constructing

 a generalized induced electromotive force10

 As noted at the conclusion of the preceding section, the equations that Maxwell derives

 in the rest of his 1865 paper are no longer from the point of view of driving-wheels

 or circuits, rather they are primarily equations of induction, describing the action of

 the electromagnetic field on circuits. The primary focus of this section is to recon

 struct Maxwell's approach to deriving a fully generalized equation for the induced

 electromotive force on a conductor. Although there will be additional applications of

 the flywheel analogy within specific subsections, the most striking example of the

 way in which the analogy guides Maxwell's mathematics can be seen in the specific

 choices he makes in breaking up the analysis of induced electromotive force in a

 circuit. Maxwell builds the fully generalized induced electromotive force from two

 constituent parts, the induced electromotive force due to changes in the electromag
 netic momentum of the field and the induced electromotive force due to a motion of

 the circuit through the field. Dividing the analysis of the electromotive force in such a

 way is suggested by the flywheel analogy and the distinct physical difference it draws
 between the effects of the acceleration of a driving-wheel (changes in currents, which

 define the electromagnetic momentum of the field in most examples) and changes in

 gearing ratios (changes in the form and/or position of a circuit). This physical distinc

 tion between two different origins of the same force in the flywheel analogy carries

 over into the general equations section of this paper and ultimately guides Maxwell's

 analysis and assembly of the fully general equation for induced electromotive force on

 a moving conductor. As I will show in Sect. 4, Maxwell uses the flywheel analogy in

 a similar manner to the flow analogy he introduced in his 1855 paper, to generate dis

 tinctions between constituent elements of the induced electromotive force that guide

 his mathematical analysis.

 In his 1865 paper, Maxwell did not yet use the elements of vector calculus that

 later appears in his Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. To save ourselves from

 rewriting each equation for each component while at the same time maintaining the

 ease of comparison between our reconstruction and Maxwell's text, we will write

 vectors by putting their three components in parentheses, (x,y,z).

 10 We will skip Maxwell's extended attempt to "bring these results within the range of experimental

 verification" (p. 543) and pick up again at the beginning of Part III, "General Eqations of the Electromagnetic

 Field," on p. 554,

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 475

 3.1 Electromotive force (P, Q, R) and electromagnetic momentum (F, G, H)

 Analogous to Newtonian mechanics whereby the force is equal to the time derivative
 of momentum,

 F = jp or (Fx, Fy, Fz) = — (px, py, pz), (19)

 the electromotive force at an arbitrary point in the field will be equal to a change in

 momentum, albeit with a negative sign to denote that it is an induced electromotive

 force which arises through a decrease in electromagnetic momentum in the field in
 accordance with Lenz's law.11 Unlike what we have seen from Maxwell before, elec

 tromagnetic momentum expressed in this relation is localized at a point in the field

 and entirely general, insofar as it does not refer to any specific driving-points which
 create the field.

 where A, now called the "vector potential," plays the role of Maxwell's electromagnetic
 momentum.

 (.P, Q, R) = ~(F, G, H) M(29) (20)

 01

 In modern notation this equation may be rewritten:

 «--£ (2.)

 3.2 Electromagnetic momentum of a circuit

 Returning to his concept of reduced momentum, Maxwell's mechanical analogy
 informs his definition of the total electromagnetic momentum referred to the circuit.

 The total electromagnetic momentum referred to the circuit is represented by a line

 integral of the electromagnetic momentum (F, G, H) over the circuit. Although it may

 initially appear unjustified, this expression is a natural consequence of his mechanical

 analogy. The circuit should be thought of as "geared into" the field at every point

 around its entire length:

 In the case of electric currents, the force in action is not ordinary mechanical

 force...but something outside the conductor, and capable of being affected by

 other conductors in the neighbourhood carrying currents. In this it resembles

 rather the reduced momentum of a driving-point of a machine as influenced by

 its mechanical connexions, than that of a simple moving body like a cannon ball,

 or water in a tube. (p. 539)

 Based on the mechanical presumptions that ground Maxwell's approach, the circuits,

 like the analogous driving-wheels in the flywheel analogue, must be in dynamical

 11 See the end of Sects. 1 and 2 for more detailed discussions of this relation.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 connection with other structures through the field, in which case "currents are in con

 nexion with every point of the field" (p. 537) and the line integral of electromagnetic

 momentum around the circuit is the correct representation of the circuit's total elec

 476 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 tromagnetic momentum.

 (F, G, H) ■ dl. (22)

 / Jar ' circuit

 Using Stokes' theorem, we can rewrite this as,

 <f> (F, G, H) ■ dl = jf curl(F, G, H) • dS M(30) (23)
 J dS V «S

 / dH

 9G  dF

 dH

 dG

 dF\

 V9y

 dz '

 dz

 dx '

 dx

 By)

 (24)

 where S is a surface and 3S is the edge of the surface, coinciding with the circuit.

 As Maxwell's quantity of total reduced electromagnetic momentum is equivalent

 to Faraday's "Electro-tonic State," it is ostensibly a measure of the strength of the

 field, or "the number of lines of magnetic force which pass through it [the circuit]"

 (p. 556). Thus Maxwell is able to find support for his mathematical representation of

 the electromagnetic momentum of the circuit not only from his flywheel analogy but

 also from the physical geometry he had developed in 1855.

 3.2.1 Magnetic force (a, ß, y)

 Maxwell's investigation of electromagnetic momentum of a circuit yielded a measure

 of the strength of the magnetic field passing through the circuit. The magnetic force

 per unit area is thus the integrand of the surface integral on the right-hand side of Eq.
 (23)

 ß (a, ß, y) = curl(F, G, H), M(B) (25)

 where ß is "the ratio of magnetic induction in a given medium to that in air under an

 equal magnetizing force" (p. 556). In modern notation,

 B = curl A. (26)

 3.3 Electromotive force in a circuit

 The role of the flywheel analogy in the case of induced electromotive force in a circuit

 mirrors its use in the case of the reduced electromagnetic momentum of the circuit.

 Again we should think in terms of the flywheel analogy whereby the electromagnetic
 momentum referred to the circuit is related to the form and relative position of the

 circuit (gearing ratios in the mechanical case). Maxwell founds his construction of

 an equation for electromotive force on the expression for the total electromagnetic

 momentum in the circuit, a line integral of electromagnetic momentum over the circuit,

 set equal to another expression of total momentum,

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 477

 <f (F,G,
 Jd s

 H) • dl = Lu + Mv. M(33) (27)

 This other expression of total momentum, Lu + Mv, is just the expression for reduced

 momentum in the mechanical case that Maxwell derived in conjunction with the

 flywheel analogy. In the equation above, the total momentum referred to the driving

 point A [cf. Eq. (7)] is set equal to the total electromagnetic momentum of the field

 referred to the circuit A [cf. Eq. (23)].

 Note that Maxwell is mixing electromagnetic and mechanical terms in this equa

 tion. He forgoes including the equivalent electromagnetic quantities, choosing the

 velocities u and v instead of the currents x and y. We thus see that in this first step

 toward constructing a generalized equation of electromotive force, Maxwell grounds

 his analysis in the relations obtained in his mechanical analogy.

 It follows that f, the complete induced electromotive force on A arising from both

 self and mutual induction [the opposite of Eq. (9) in the mechanical analogue and the

 opposite of Eq. (12) without resistance forces in the electromagnetic case], is given in

 terms of the total momentum by:

 $ = --^(Lu + Mv), M(34) (28)

 at

 where the right-hand side is again expressed as a mechanically derived quantity. Using

 Eq. (27), we can also write the right-hand side in explicitly electromagnetic terms,

 -%-f(F,G,H)- dl. (29)

 at /3S

 With the help of Stokes' theorem, the line integral above can be rewritten as

 ~dtJJs CUrl(F' G' H) 'dS = ~ Us it CUrl(F' G' H) 'dS

 -IL

 curl A (F, G, H) ■ dS. (30)

 at

 The circuit should still be thought of as "geared into" the field at every point around

 its entire length justifying the use of another line integral to describe the total induced

 electromotive force "in a circuit." Thus, the left-hand side of Eq. (28) becomes

 <f (P, Ô,
 /as

 R) ■ dl. M(32) (31)

 Using Stokes' theorem again, we can rewrite this integral as

 curl(P, ß, R) ■ dS. (32)

 IL

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Substituting expressions (32) and (30) for the left and right-hand sides of Eq. (28),
 respectively, we find:

 478 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 J J curl(P, Ö, R) • dS = - J J curl (F, G, H) ■ dS. (33)

 It follows from this equation that (P, Q, R) should be equal to G, H) modulo
 a term V^r, since curl(Vi/0 = 0 for any V- Therefore,

 (P,Q,R) = ~(F,G,H)-V1r, M(35) (34)

 at

 or in modern terms

 E = -^-V<9. (35)

 And thus we have recovered Maxwell's "indeterminate" electric potential, the gra

 dient of i/t. While i/r cannot effect a current in a circuit, it is supposed to indicate "the

 existence of a force urging the electricity to or from certain definite points in the field"

 (p. 558). Factoring in circuits and currents and looking at the induced electromotive

 force around the length of the circuit A, as opposed to dealing with electromotive

 force at some arbitrary point in the field, changes Eq. (21), E = —jf, to Eq. (35),

 E = —jf — V<p (where <p is the electric potential).

 3.4 Electromotive force on a moving conductor

 Finally, to complete his project of constructing a generalized equation of induced

 electromotive force on an element in the field, Maxwell considers the effect of changes

 to the form and position of a circuit on the electromagnetic momentum of that circuit.

 Maxwell aims to find the induced electromotive force on a moving conductor by
 introducing correction terms for the expression of induced electromotive force on a

 rigid and stationary circuit given in Eq. (34). It may appear odd that Maxwell was driven

 to complicate this demonstration of the electromotive force on a moving conductor

 by also considering a change in form of the circuit. A modern course on electricity

 and magnetism and even the reconstruction of this paper in Thomas Simpson's guided

 study involve only the motion of a rigid circuit through the field or deal exclusively

 with the moving conductor and the field. Simpson's modernized derivation of v x B

 describes it as merely as "the expression for the electromotive force E induced in a

 conductor moving in a field of magnetic flux B with a velocity v" (Simpson 1997,

 p. 380). Why divide this analysis of a moving conductor up into elements "due to the

 motion of [the] conductor" and others "due to the lengthening of [the] circuit" (p. 559),

 and why begin with the total electromagnetic momentum of the circuit at all? Would

 it not be much simpler to just start with a rigid circuit moving through the field and

 then analyze the force on it by the field, or perhaps analyze the force on the moving

 conductor directly?

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 479

 v...*
 T...1

 <:
 « ; .

 I •>

 C ?

 y

 ""•A
 "••a

 A
 A
 • z
 : Z

 V

 Fig. 4 Total motion of the conductor and circuit

 To understand Maxwell's reasoning for complicating this problem, we must take a
 closer look at the system Maxwell investigates and the specific question he seeks to
 answer. A conductor which makes up the circuit and the circuit itself are allowed to

 move, putting not only the entire circuit in motion through the field, but lengthening

 the circuit as well (as pictured in Fig. 4).

 Let a short straight conductor of length a, parallel to the axis of x, move with a

 velocity whose components wce.dx/dt,dy/dt,dz/dt, and let its extremities slide

 along two parallel conductors with a velocity ds/dt. Let us find the alteration of
 the electromagnetic momentum of the circuit of which this arrangement forms
 a part. (p. 558)

 The motion of the short straight conductor, dx/dr, dy/dt, dz/dt, is an absolute motion

 in all directions simultaneously. The wires that make up the whole circuit are also in
 motion; however, Maxwell only provides the relative velocity of the conductor with

 regard to the circuit, ds/dt. Thus, the whole circuit not only possesses some absolute
 motion, it also expands in all directions as the conductor rolls along its wires, due
 to the difference between the circuit's motion and the motion of the short straight
 conductor. Initially at least, Maxwell is purely concerned with deriving the change
 in the total electromagnetic momentum [cf. Eq. (23)] of the circuit as a result of the

 absolute motion of the circuit, only later will he use this expression to determine the

 electromotive force on a moving conductor.

 From Maxwell's description of electromotive force, in this case the F-component,

 "representing] the difference of potential per unit of length in a conductor placed in the

 direction of x at the given point" (p. 555), we gather that a straight conductor parallel to
 an axis may only change the component of electromagnetic momentum corresponding

 to the axis to which it lies parallel. Using this, we consider a few special cases.

 First, as shown in Fig. 5, we examine the case of the short straight conductor moving

 along the axis of y with velocity dy /dt. The rest of the circuit is also moving in the

 y-direction and the relative velocity of the short straight conductor with regard to the
 circuit is ds/dt.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 5 Motion of the conductor and circuit in the ^-direction

 Due to its orientation, the conductor is only able to affect the x-component of elec

 tromagnetic momentum, F. The conductor will produce a change in electromagnetic

 momentum that corresponds to its changing position on the y axis.

 480 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 dFày

 a (36)

 9y dr

 The relative motion of the conductor along the y axis with regard to the circuit,

 d.y/dr, will naturally cause an expansion of the circuit. The wires of the circuit which lie

 parallel to the y axis will lengthen, dy /d s, altering the y-component of electromagnetic

 momentum G, per unit length in x}2 resulting in the expression:

 a = a . (37)

 d s dG dy dG dy
 df dx ds dx dt

 Maxwell is interested in the change in electromagnetic momentum of the circuit

 as a result of the absolute motion of the circuit through the field. To transform these

 changes in electromagnetic momentum due to the motion of the conductor and due

 to the change in configuration of the circuit into the expression for the motion circuit
 as a whole, we must subtract Eq. (37) from Eq. (36), the terms which result from

 the relative motion of the conductor with regard to the circuit from those which stem
 from the absolute motion of the conductor. This gives the change in electromagnetic

 momentum due to the total absolute change in position of the circuit:

 dF dy

 U dy df

 • a = a I I —. (38)

 dG dy (dF dG\ dy
 dx dt \ dy dx J df

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The factor in parentheses is just minus the z-component of curl(F, G, H), which by
 Eq. (25) is equal to the z-component of the magnetic field, ji (a, ß, y); hence, the
 right-hand side of Eq. (38) can be written as

 12 Here we are looking at the electromagnetic momentum of a circuit (not a single conductor as before)
 from a perspective such that the circuit is defined as the boundary of the area dydx. As the circuit lengthens
 in the y-direction, the area increases per unit length in a:. As such, the number of lines of magnetic force

 that pass through the circuit will also increase per unit length in a. If we remember that the number of these
 lines is a measure of electromagnetic momentum, the fact that the expansion is in the y-direction entails a

 change in G, the y-component of electromagnetic momentum, per unit length in x (cf. p. 15).

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 481

 dy

 ~a^Y~dt' (39)

 Now consider the case of motion in the z-direction. To imagine this we may simply

 switch the labeling of the axes in Fig. 5 to obtain Fig. 6 below.

 Working similarly with this orthogonal case of motion and expansion along the z

 axis, we find

 dF dz AH dz
 a-—- a — —
 dz At Ax At

 (AF AH\Az dz

 = <TdF-ïrjd7 = '""î57- <40)

 where in the last step we used that the expression in parentheses is the y-component
 of curl(F, G, H), which by Eq. (25) is equal to fiß.

 Finally, if we follow these same steps but for a motion of the conductor parallel
 to x and an expansion of the circuit along the x axis, there will be no change in the
 electromagnetic momentum of the circuit:

 dF Ax dF Ax

 dx At dx At

 a—— a-—— = 0. (41)

 To find the total change in electromagnetic momentum in the case of a simultaneous

 motion of the conductor parallel to the x axis in all three directions we add up the
 terms from Eqs. (39) and (40)

 dy „dz / dz dy\

 -aßr-+aße-=aß(ß--y-). (42)

 As Maxwell has been interested in determining the induced electromotive force

 (P, Q, R), or the decrease over time of the electromagnetic momentum of the field
 which is to be transferred to the circuit due to its motion [cf. Eq. (20)], he must use
 the opposite of Eq. (42), the total change in the electromagnetic momentum of the
 circuit, to form P. Although Maxwell began this investigation looking at changes
 to the electromagnetic momentum of the circuit due to the motion of the circuit, by
 definition the components of electromotive force (P, Q, R) only affect conductors

 lying parallel to the relevant axes, and thus P is the electromotive force on the moving

 conductor parallel to the x axis. Additionally, as (P, Q, R) is measured in unit length,

 we find that the x-component of the electromotive force on the conductor is given by

 -•> \

 <

 Fig. 6 Motion of the conductor and circuit in the z-direction

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 p = ßy^l-ßß^. M(36) (43)

 at at

 This is the ^-component of the cross-product of the velocity (i, y, z) and the B-field
 ß(oi, ß, y).

 482 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 In the cases of the conductor laying parallel to the y or z axes minor variations

 yield results for Q and R. Eq. (43) is a correction to Eq. (34) to account for the effects

 due to the motion of a conductor. The completed generalized equation of induced
 electromotive force (P, Q, R) is then

 9F_ 9Vr
 dt dx

 dG dé

 e="(',f ~yî)

 T,~Ty M(D)

 /dx dy\ dH dxß

 *)--*-*■ <44)

 In terms we recognize it is

 F = v x B — — — V(p. (45)

 dt

 Substituting in the relation between B and A that Maxwell established in his discussion

 of magnetic force, we may rewrite the equation (Darrigol 2000, p. 160):

 F = v x (curlA) — Vcp. (46)

 9A

 dt

 Returning to the question with which we began this discussion, why then did

 Maxwell complicate this derivation by changing the shape of the circuit and begin

 ning with the total electromagnetic momentum of the circuit if he ends up with the

 same equations for induced electromotive force as the much simpler alternatives?
 The answer to our question is that the analogical foundation of Maxwell's 1865

 paper suggests this more convoluted analytical route. The concept of electromagnetic

 momentum is at the heart of the dynamical analogy and although the line integral

 of electromagnetic momentum around the circuit has replaced the more evidently

 mechanical quantity of reduced/electromagnetic momentum, Lu + Mv, Maxwell's

 analysis still follows the path suggested by the dynamical analogy and describes the

 initial system in terms of the total electromagnetic momentum of a circuit. For a passive

 or driving-wheel the expression describing its total induced force from the flywheel

 contains both terms L (or N) and M, which in the case of the flywheel contains the

 gearing ratios of both wheels. In the case of electromagnetism, L refers to the form of

 the circuit and M to its relative position. The analogy itself suggests the grouping of

 analysis by types which are mechanically defined, but also indicates that changes in

 M necessarily impact L or N. Having already covered induced electromotive forces

 due to changes in the electromagnetic momentum of the field (in the mechanical case

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 483

 changes in the velocity of driving-wheels), the final step is to cover induced electro

 motive forces due to motion of a circuit through the field (changes in gearing ratios).

 In deriving the effect of the field on a moving circuit, the analogical foundations of this

 paper require an analysis of a change in form of the circuit in motion so we can remove

 its effect on the electromagnetic momentum of the circuit and isolate the change due

 to the absolute motion of the circuit itself. After a careful setup and analysis, Maxwell

 is able to remove the change in electromagnetic momentum due the alteration of the

 circuit's configuration and isolate the change due to the motion of the circuit (we get

 the same result starting with a moving rigid circuit); nonetheless, it is the flywheel

 analogy that suggests this roundabout approach to deriving the generalized equation

 for the induced electromotive force on a moving conductor.

 4 Similar methods: 1855 and 1865

 In the introduction to this paper I quoted a paragraph from Maxwell's "On Faraday's

 Lines of Force" demonstrating the balance he hoped to find between physical analogy

 and abstract mathematics. I have shown how "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromag

 netic Field" achieves a similar balance by demonstrating the significance of Maxwell's

 analogy to a mechanical flywheel as a complement to his abstract mathematics, the

 latter having already been widely explored in the literature. If such a balance exists

 in Maxwell's 1865 paper, the origin of this quote suggests that there is likely a strong

 methodological similarity between his 1855 and 1865 papers.

 Maxwell's "On Faraday's Lines of Force" achieved what Maxwell later described

 as a translation of "what I considered to be Faraday's ideas into a mathematical form"

 (Maxwell 1873, Vol. 1, pp. ix-x). In William Thomson's work on potential theory,

 Maxwell found a fitting mathematical expression to translate Faraday's lines of force

 carving up space into a symbolic form, one which would preserve the idea of "contin

 uous action in a medium" inherent in Faraday's geometrical concept and which would

 form the foundation of Maxwell's similarly geometric theory of the electromagnetic

 field (Harman 1998, p. 72). Maxwell would also borrow from the formal analogy that

 Thomson had created between the equations of electrostatics and heat flow, although

 he replaced heat with an imaginary incompressible fluid in part because by that time

 heat was no longer considered to be a substance. Norton Wise, Peter Harman, Francis

 Everitt, Olivier Darrigol, and the late Martin Goldman all give an account of the ways

 in which Maxwell makes this analogy "useful in exciting appropriate mathematical

 ideas" (Maxwell 1855, p. 157). Nevertheless, Wise's account of Maxwell's 1855 paper

 is not only the most comprehensive, it is also the only history to unequivocally charac

 terize the geometry and analogies within that paper as something more than abstract

 mathematical analogy.

 Wise first establishes two related uses of the flow analogy in Maxwell's first paper.

 Initially it serves to provide a physical distinction between electric and magnetic

 quantities and intensities beyond the purely geometrical distinction that Maxwell had

 derived from his interpretation of Faraday. This distinction is inherent to the flow anal

 ogy in the form of flux and pressure gradient; however, he must imagine that the fluid is

 incompressible (to preserve conservation of flux akin to Faraday's continuous lines of

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 484 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 force) and that it flows through a resistive medium (to obtain a pressure gradient). As

 Wise makes clear, "[t]he constant [of the medium of propagation] provides, at least in

 principle, an observational basis for the earlier purely geometrical distinction" (Wise

 1977, p. 188). What was once a "purely geometrical distinction between 'polarization

 along a line' and 'polarization over a surface'," was transformed by the introduction

 of this constant into "a highly physical one" (Wise 1977, pp. 188). The added "con

 stant pressure surfaces separated by unit pressure difference" not only completes the

 translation of countable geometrical elements into physical ones, "[b]ut this time the

 elements are explicitly 'unit cells' distinguished by the fact that 'the work spent in

 overcoming resistance is...unity in every cell in every unit of time.' Here is another

 physical aspect of the fluid analogy; it serves conceptually to distribute the 'potential

 of the system,' analogized to the total work per unit time done by the fluid; over all
 space" (Wise 1977, p 188).

 Additionally, Wise describes a third use of the flow analogy, working in tandem with

 Faraday's image of the "mutually embracing curves" of magnetic and electric lines,13

 that directs Maxwell's construction of his own version of Faraday's electrotonic state.

 The symmetry expressed by the "embracing curves" is clarified and bolstered by the

 flow analogy, insofar as both curves, current and magnetic lines, can be represented as

 fluxes (Wise 1977, p. 207). In search of the exact relation suggested by this symmetry,

 between electric intensity in induction and the change in magnetic quantity, to be

 described by the electrotonic state, Maxwell's approach reveals the guiding force of

 the flow analogy in his analysis: "the fundamental equation for continuous tubes of

 flow, Divergence a[quantity/flux] = 0, is what guarantees the possibility of the new

 [electrotonic] state" (Wise 1977, pp. 203-207). Faraday's Electro-tonic State would

 return in 1862 and, as we have seen, even more spectacularly in 1865, reconstituted as

 electromagnetic momentum. In each case it was birthed from Maxwell's exploitation

 of physical analogy.

 While the use of physical analogy proved to be a fruitful approach in "On Faraday's

 Lines of Force," Maxwell remained extremely cautious of overextending the relation

 ship throughout the paper. The accompanying flow analogy was intended as purely
 illustrative,

 [i]t is merely a collection of imaginary properties which may be employed for

 establishing certain theorems in pure mathematics in a way more intelligible

 to many minds and more applicable to physical problems than that in which

 algebraic symbols alone are used. (Maxwell 1855, p. 160)

 He reminded his readers that he was creating a physicalized geometry based on Fara

 day's ideas and informed by the flow analogy, but that he was by no means supplying

 a physical hypothesis.

 We find then that in both 1855 and 1865 Maxwell utilized very similar methods. The

 physical analogies in both papers provide clear conceptual foundations for otherwise
 unclear electromagnetic phenomena and guided Maxwell's mathematical analysis.

 In 1855, the flow analogy (and the accompanying physical geometry) grounds the

 13 For discussion of Maxwell's use of Faraday's "mutually embracing curves" see (Wise 1979).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 485

 electromagnetic concepts of quantity and intensity in the more accessible concepts of

 fluxes and pressure gradients, while in 1865 the analogy to a mechanical flywheel does

 similar work to ground electromagnetic concepts in mechanics, for example relating

 coefficients of self and mutual induction to moments of inertia. In both papers the

 analogies suggest fundamental reconsiderations of space. The flow analogy distributes

 the "potential of the system" across empty space, and the flywheel does the same

 for the "intrinsic energy of the currents." These two analogies help him distinguish

 particular electromagnetic phenomena by analogy to the corresponding physical case,

 providing a "natural physical partitioning," a systematic framework within which

 Maxwell's mathematical analysis could operate (Wise 1977, p. 136). These elements

 defined through the flow and flywheel analogies then suggest particular routes for

 Maxwell's mathematical analysis that allow for the construction of the electrotonic

 state in 1855 and a generalized equation for induced electromotive force in 1865

 respectively. Finally, in neither case does Maxwell go so far as to suggest that these

 analogies might be hypothetical models of reality, rather they are both regarded as

 illustrative, despite the crucial role each physical analogy played in the development

 of Maxwell's thoughts on electromagnetism.

 Before we move on, we should take note of a subtle difference between Maxwell's

 1855 flow analogy and the flywheel analogy in his "Dynamical Theory." Neither anal

 ogy suggests any particular microscopic construction of the electromagnetic ether;

 however, they do make different claims about the nature of electromagnetic systems.

 The earlier flow analogy is able to draw upon two distinct analogues, fluid flow and

 heat flow, and insofar as the latter sufficiently expresses the quantities and relations

 Maxwell exports to electromagnetism, there is no motivation to adopt a mechanically

 grounded interpretation of electromagnetism (as might be suggested by the fluid flow

 analogy alone) (Wise 1979, p. 1311). The direct transcription of dynamical quantities

 and relations from a differential system (of which the flywheel is just one example) to

 electromagnetism in Maxwell's "Dynamical Theory" lacks the agnosticism of the flow

 analogy. In 1865 there is, broadly speaking, only one analogue, dynamics. Electromag

 netism is just another dynamical system, containing the same mechanical quantities

 of energy and momentum as the flywheel. As such, the 1865 analogy represents a spe

 cial subset of physical analogy, it is a "dynamical analogy," as it necessarily involves

 dynamics on at least one side of the analogy, but it also borders upon "dynamical

 explanation," as electromagnetic energy and momentum do more than correspond to

 their mechanical counterparts, they are identical (Turner 1956, pp. 36-37).

 In this way, although the methodologies guiding these two papers are very simi

 lar and strike a similar balance between physical analogy and abstract analysis, they

 operate at different levels of physical theory. The theory built upon the physical geom

 etry and flow analogy in "Faraday's Lines" is more general than his later theory built

 upon dynamical analogy (and at times dynamical explanation) as the former makes

 no claims regarding the nature of electromagnetic systems. To borrow a phrase from

 Maxwell's Apostles Club essay, he has dialed up the "focusing glass of theory...to

 one pitch of definition, and [later] to another" (Maxwell 1990, p. 377).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 486 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 5 The flywheel as an "Experiment of Illustration"

 Maxwell's flywheel analogy continued to be used as a mechanical illustration of elec
 tromagnetic induction by theoreticians across Europe as well as electrical engineers
 in England, "throw[ing] light upon some scientific idea so that the student may be
 enabled to grasp it" (Maxwell 1871, p. 242). In 1890 Lord Rayleigh would reimagine
 Maxwell's flywheel, already in use at the Cavendish, as a system of weights and pul
 leys because he lacked access to differential gears (Rayleigh 1890, p. 434). Although
 Ludwig Boltzmann knew of the existence of Maxwell's flywheel through Rayleigh, he

 admitted, "unfortunately, I am not familiar with [it]" (Boltzmann 1891, p. 45). Thus
 when imagining his own system to illustrate electromagnetic induction, Boltzmann
 based his design on Rayleigh's "very simple apparatus" (Boltzmann 1891, p. 45). Nev
 ertheless, Boltzmann's device remains tied to Maxwell's flywheel not only through
 their shared purpose, but also through a shared mechanical lineage joined by Rayleigh.

 Boltzmann not only included an illustration of a significantly more complicated appa
 ratus or Bizykel in his 1891 "Lectures on Maxwell's Theory of Electricity and Light,"

 he also had a physical model built, one which he held very dear and often brought with
 him on trips (Boltzmann 1891, p. 21, Fig. 15; Eckert 2001). Boltzmann's flywheel is
 shown in Fig. 7.

 The relation of the components and operation of this flywheel to electromagnetic

 phenomena mirrors those described by Rayleigh and can be translated into the dif
 ferential gear analogy exploited by Maxwell. The added complications were inspired
 by a major flaw Boltzmann had made note of in Rayleigh's design (one common to
 Maxwell's flywheel), namely that "the parameters can not be changed in it which for

 Fig. 7 Boltzmann's flywheel,
 Fig. 7 Boltzmann's flywheel.
 (Boltzmann 1891, Fig. 15;
 (Boltzmann 1891, Fig. 15;
 reprinted and discussed in
 reprinted and discussed in
 Eckert 2001)
 Eckert 2001)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 487

 us is rather essential" (Boltzmann 1891, p. 45). Boltzmann's additions only deepened

 the connection to electromagnetism, allowing Boltzmann to alter the terms L, M, and

 N, thus providing a powerful mechanical demonstration of the effects of moving and

 morphing circuits (Boltzmann 1891, pp. 27-28, 45). Boltzmann also lent the model

 out to Arnold Sommerfeld and an image of the central mechanism of a differential gear

 flywheel made an appearance in Sommerfeld's textbook on mechanics (Sommerfeld

 1952, p. 255; Eckert 2001). There, it was again distinguished as an illustrative analogy

 through which students could conceptualize electromagnetic induction, although by

 this time Sommerfeld already thought the flywheel was "much more complicated than

 Maxwell's theory which it was intended to illustrate" and therefore was better served

 as "an exercise on the differential of an automobile" (Sommerfeld 1952, p. 225).

 Although Maxwell was judicious in his use of an analogy between mechanics

 and electromagnetism in the Treatise, certain English electrical engineers shared

 Maxwell's opinion that "[i]t is difficult, however, for the mind which has once recog

 nized the analogy between phenomena of self-induction and those of the motion of

 material bodies, to abandon altogether the help of this analogy, or to admit that it is

 entirely superficial and misleading" (Maxwell 1873, Vol. 2, p. 181; quoted and dis

 cussed by Gooday 2004, p. 180). One of those engineers, John Hopkinson, appealed

 explicitly to Maxwell's flywheel analogy in his lecture "On Some Points in Electric

 Lighting," delivered in 1883 to the Institution of Civil Engineers (Hopkinson 1883). In

 trying to give a theoretical account of the possibilities for alternating current machines,

 Hopkinson used the analogy to illustrate that electrical circuits acted as if they had

 inertia (Hopkinson 1883, p. 60; discussed by Gooday 2004, pp. 186-188). In this way,

 the flywheel analogy remained an important teaching tool until nearly the end of the

 19th century, entrenched by the underlying connections between the construction and

 operation of the mechanical device and Maxwell's formulation of his equations for

 electrodynamics.

 6 Conclusion

 In this study of Maxwell's 1865 paper "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic

 Field," I set out to demonstrate the significance of an analogy to a mechanical differen

 tial and the flywheel analogy in particular to Maxwell's approach in this culmination

 of his three major papers on electromagnetism. The received wisdom concerning
 this paper has emphasized the Lagrangian dynamics that Maxwell exploits to build

 his theory of electromagnetism, often entirely ignoring the complementary contri

 butions of the analogy to a flywheel. Given then that Maxwell leaned heavily on

 a mechanical analogy while constructing his 1865 paper, the prior work done to

 understand Maxwell's use of Lagrangian dynamics as well as his usage of analogy in

 general is necessarily incomplete. I have attempted to fill this gap in the literature and

 uncover the ways in which Maxwell's flywheel analogy worked alongside his abstract

 mathematics, particularly in those instances where the underdeveloped physics of elec

 tromagnetism was ill-equipped to direct his analysis. The flywheel analogy was shown

 to elucidate electromagnetic phenomena by providing clear physical concepts in which

 more complicated electromagnetic analogues could be grounded. At times the analogy

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 488 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 suggested, or at the least justified mathematical operations which proved crucial in

 Maxwell's journey toward building up a complete and fully generalized electromotive

 force. More importantly the flywheel analogy defined and generated distinctions in the

 mechanical case and by analogy in electromagnetism, guiding Maxwell in his group

 ing of particular phenomena and suggesting a particular route for his further analysis.

 As such, the gap between Maxwell's 1862 hypothetical model of the electromagnetic

 medium and his 1865 publication has shrunk considerably. They no longer represent

 the extremes of possible uses of physical analogy. The 1862 paper remains where it

 was, with Maxwell overcommitted to a hypothetical model of the ether; however, the

 1865 paper can no longer be described as driven entirely by an extension of Lagrangian

 dynamics. Instead the 1865 paper is characterized by a complementary relationship

 between a pictorial mechanical analogy and an extension of Lagrangian dynamics,

 moving it away from the purely mathematical extreme and closer in approach to "On
 Physical Lines of Force."

 Including the flywheel analogy in the story of Maxwell's maturing thoughts on

 electromagnetism allows us to note a striking similarity between Maxwell's use of

 illustrative analogies in his 1855 paper "On Faraday's Lines of Force" and in 1865's

 "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field." The flow analogy's role in 1855,

 as reconstructed by Wise parallels that of the flywheel, insofar as in both cases they

 not only provide clear physical conceptions, but also guide Maxwell's mathematical

 analysis. Nevertheless, the impulse toward mechanics inspired by the dynamical anal

 ogy highlights the greater generality of Maxwell's 1855 approach and suggests an
 interpretation of his "Dynamical Theory" as a compromise between the mechanical

 model of 1862 and the noncomittal flow analogy of 1855.

 In light of the importance of the flywheel analogy, Maxwell's approach in "A

 Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" is best seen not as a theory built

 purely on an analogy to Lagrangian dynamics, but rather as one that achieved a coop
 erative balance between physical analogy and abstract mathematics. The 1865 paper
 is an "effectual study of science" in the sense that Maxwell proposed in the intro
 duction to "On Faraday's Lines of Force." The success of Maxwell's "Dynamical
 Theory" is rooted in his ability to retain "sight of the phenomena to be explained"

 by grounding them in clear physical conceptions drawn from his mechanical analogy

 and to "obtain more extended views of the connexions of the subject" by using this

 mechanical analogy to guide his mathematical analysis. Similarly, the status of the

 flywheel analogy, not as a "physical hypothesis" but an illustrative analogy, guards

 Maxwell from "that blindness to facts and rashness in assumption which a partial

 explanation encourages." By 1865 Maxwell had again arrived at this methodological

 harmony, "which allows the mind at every step to lay hold of a clear physical con

 ception, without being committed to any theory founded on the physical science from

 which that conception is borrowed, so that it is neither drawn aside from the subject in

 pursuit of analytical subtleties, nor carried beyond the truth by a favorite hypothesis"

 (Maxwell 1855, pp. 155-156). As historians have pointed out, in 1865 Maxwell rid

 himself of commitments to any hypotheses about the physical makeup of the field;

 however, this does not mean that he made the opposite move and chose to deal exclu

 sively in the language of abstract mathematics. Maxwell makes liberal use of a strong,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gearing up for Lagrangian dynamics 489

 as he puts it, "illustrative" mechanical analogy to supply himself with clear physical

 conceptions and to fully extend the reach of his "Dynamical Theory."

 Acknowledgments I am grateful to Michel Janssen for his help in the development of the ideas and

 reconstructions presented in this paper. Additionally, I would like to thank the members of the University

 of Minnesota's "Physics Interest Group" for their thoughtful comments when this paper was delivered as a

 talk, Michael Eckert for pointing out that the flywheel analogy had at least two German speaking fans, and

 Ekaterina Titova for her encouragement and for always flipping through the pictures. Additionally, I find

 myself greatly indebted to the late Martin Goldman in whose book I first encounted the crucial quote from
 "On Faraday's Lines of Force" describing the balance between analogical and mathematical approaches.

 Finally, I want to thank Jed Buchwald for his help in editing this paper and pushing me to more critically

 examine my own understanding of Maxwell and his methodology.

 References

 Boltzmann, Ludwig. 1891. Vorlesungen über Maxwells Theorie der Elektricität und des Lichtes, vol. 1.

 Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth.

 Campbell, Lewis, and William Garnett. 1882. The life of James Clerk Maxwell: With a selection from
 his correspondence and occasional writings and a sketch of his contributions to science. London:
 Macmillan.

 Darrigol, Olivier. 2000. Electrodynamics from Ampere to Einstein. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Eckert, Michael. 2001. Sommerfeld und das Boltzmannsche Bizykel. (read 2001) Personal Communication

 by Michael Eckert.

 Everitt, C.W.F. 1975. James Clerk Maxwell: Physicist and natural philosopher. New York: Scribners.

 Goldman, Martin. 1983. The demon in the aether: The life of James Clerk Maxwell. Edinburgh: Paul Harris.

 Gooday, Graeme J.N. 2004. The morals of measurement: Accuracy, irony, and trust in late Victorian elec

 trical practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Harman, Peter M. 1998. The natural philosophy of James Clerk Maxwell. Cambridge: Cambridge University

 Press.

 Hopkinson, John. 1883. On some points in electric lighting, (read 5 April 1883) Original papers by the late
 John Hopkinson, D.Sc, F.R.S. Vol. 1,57-83. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901.
 Jeans, James. 1931. James Clerk Maxwell's method. In James Clerk Maxwell: A commemoration volume,

 1831-1931,91-108. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Lagrange, Joseph Louis. 1997. Analytical mechanics, Trans, and ed. Auguste Boissonnade and Victor N.

 Vagliente. Boston: Kluwer Academic.

 Maxwell, James Clerk 1855. On Faraday's lines of force, (read 10 Dec. 1855 and 11 Feb. 1856) Transactions

 of the Cambridge philosophical society. 10. 1864, 27-65. All page numbers refer to the reprint on
 Faraday's lines of force. The scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, Vol. 1,155—
 229. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1890.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1862. On physical lines of force, part I: The theory of molecular vortices applied

 to magnetic phenomena. Philosophical Magazine 21(139): 161-175 (Mar 1861); On physical lines of

 force, part II: The theory of molecular vortices applied to electric currents. Philosophical Magazine

 21(140): 281-291 (April 1861); On physical lines of force, part II: The theory of molecular vortices
 applied to electric currents. Philosophical Magazine 21(141): 338-345 (May 1861); On physical
 lines of force, part III: The theory of molecular vortices applied to statical electricity. Philosophical

 Magazine 23(151): 12-24 (Jan 1862); On physical lines of force, part IV: The theory of molecular

 vortices applied to the action of magnetism on polarized light. Philosophical Magazine 23(152): 85-95

 (Feb 1862). All page numbers refer to the collected reprint on physical lines of force. The scientific

 papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, Vol. 1,451-513. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1864. A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, (received Oct. 27.1864). In

 A dynamical theory. London: Libraries of the Royal Society.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1865. A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, (read Dec. 8 1864) Philo
 sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 155. Jan. 1865. 459-512. All page numbers

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 refer to the reprint a dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field. The scientific papers of James
 Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, Vol. 1, 526-597. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1890.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1868. On governors. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. 16. March 5,

 270-283. All page numbers refer to the reprint on governors. The scientific papers of James Clerk

 Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven, Vol. 2,105-120. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1890.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1871. Introductory lecture on experimental physics, (read Oct. 1871) The scientific

 papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W.D. Niven. Vol. 2,241-255. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, 1890.

 490 C. Lazaroff-Puck

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1873. A treatise on electricity and magnetism, 2 volumes, 1st ed. Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1879. Thomson and Tait's Natural Philosophy. Rev. of Natural Philosophy, by

 William Thomson and Peter Guthrie Tait. Nature. 20. 3 July 1879. 213-216. All page numbers refer

 to the reprint Thomson and Tait's Natural Philosophy. The scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell,
 ed. W.D. Niven. Vol. 2, 776-785. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1890.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1892. A treatise on electricity and magnetism, vol. 2,3rd ed, ed. J.J. Thomson. New

 York: Dover.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1990. The scientific letters and papers of James Clerk Maxwell, vol. 1, ed. Peter M.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 1995. The scientific letters and papers of James Clerk Maxwell, vol. 2, ed. Peter M.

 Harman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Harman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Harman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Maxwell, James Clerk. 2002. The scientific letters and papers of James Clerk Maxwell, vol. 3, ed. Peter M.

 Mayr, Otto. 1971. Victorian physicists and speed regulation: An encounter between science and technology.

 Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 26(2): 205-228.

 Rayleigh, John William Strutt, Baron. 1890. On Huygens's gearing in illustration of the induction of electric

 currents. (Read May 16 1890). Proceedings of the Physical Society of London. 10: 434-437.

 Siegel, Daniel M. 1991. Innovation in Maxwell's electromagnetic theory: Molecular vortices, displacement

 current, and light. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Simpson, Thomas K. 1997. Maxwell on the electromagnetic field: A Guided Study. New Jersey: Rutgers

 Sommerfeld, Arnold. 1952. Lectures on theoretical physics: Mechanics. Trans. Martin O. Stem. Vol. 1.

 University Press.

 New York: Academic Press.

 Turner, Joseph. 1956. Maxwell on the logic of dynamical explanation. Philosophy of Science 23: 36-47.
 Wise, Matthew Norton. 1977. The flow analogy to electricity and magnetism: Kelvin and Maxwell. PhD

 dissertation, Princeton University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI. (No. 77-14252).

 Wise, Matthew Norton. 1979. The mutual embrace of electricity and magnetism. Science. New Series

 203(4387): 1310-1318.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

