 

 

 

 

Geometry and arithmetic in the medieval traditions of Euclid's "Elements": a view from

Book II
Author(s): Leo Corry
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 6 (November 2013), pp. 637-705
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569599
Accessed: 19-05-2020 11:57 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:637-705
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0121 -5

 Geometry and arithmetic in the medieval traditions
 of Euclid's Elements: a view from Book II

 Leo Corry

 Received: 30 April 2013 / Published online: 18 July 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract This article explores the changing relationships between geometric and

 arithmetic ideas in medieval Europe mathematics, as reflected via the propositions of

 Book II of Euclid's Elements. Of particular interest is the way in which some medieval

 treatises organically incorporated into the body of arithmetic results that were formu

 lated in Book II and originally conceived in a purely geometric context. Eventually,

 in the Campanus version of the Elements these results were reincorporated into the
 arithmetic books of the Euclidean treatise. Thus, while most of the Latin versions of

 the Elements had duly preserved the purely geometric spirit of Euclid's original, the

 specific text that played the most prominent role in the initial passage of the Elements

 from manuscript to print—i.e., Campanus' version—followed a different approach.

 On the one hand, Book II itself continued to appear there as a purely geometric text.

 On the other hand, the first ten results of Book II could now be seen also as possibly
 translatable into arithmetic, and in many cases even as inseparably associated with

 their arithmetic representation.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 638

 2 Euclid's Elements: Book II and geometric algebra 641
 2.1 Elements Book II: an overview 641

 Communicated by: Len Berggren.

 L. Corry (E3)

 Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

 e-mail: corry@post.tau.ac.il

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Dedicated to my dear friend Sabetai Unguru on his 82th birthday.

 4 Book II in the early Latin medieval translations of the Elements 663
 5 Book II in other medieval texts 667

 638 L. Corry

 2.2 Geometric algebra: an overview 646
 2.3 Visible and invisible figures 649
 3 Book II in late antiquity and in Islamic mathematics 651
 3.1 Heron's commentary of the Elements 652
 3.2 Al-KhwàrizmT and Abu-Kamil 655

 3.3 Thâbit ibn Qurra 659
 3.4 Al-NayrTzT 661

 5.1 Abraham Bar-Hiyya 667
 5.2 Liber Mahameleth 675

 5.3 Fibonacci 677

 5.4 Jordanus Nemorarius 684

 5.5 Campanus 689
 5.6 Gersonides 693

 5.7 Barlaam 698

 6 Concluding remarks 700

 1 Introduction

 Book II of Euclid's Elements raises interesting historical questions concerning its

 intended aims and significance. The book has been accorded a rather singular role

 in the recent historiography of Greek mathematics, particularly in the context of the
 so-called "geometric algebra" interpretation. According to this interpretation, Greek

 geometry as epitomized in the works of Euclid and Apollonius is—at least in its

 fundamental aspects—nothing but algebra in disguise.1

 In 1975 Sabetai Unguru published an article in which he emphatically criticized

 the geometric algebra interpretation. He claimed that Greek geometry is just that,

 geometry, and that any algebraic rendering thereof is anachronistic and historically

 misguided (Unguru 1975). Unguru, to be sure, was elaborating on a thesis previously

 put forward by Jacob Klein in his classic Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin

 of Algebra (Klein 1968 [1934-1936]), about a great divide between ancient and mod

 ern mathematics around the basic conceptions of number and of geometry. Unguru's

 article ignited a harsh controversy with several well-known mathematicians with an

 interest in history, such as Bartel L. van der Waerden (1903-1996), Hans Freudenthal

 ( 1905-1990), and André Weil ( 1906-1998) (van der Waerden 1976; Freudenthal 1977 ;

 Weil 1978). In spite of the bitter debate, however, the controversy quickly receded and

 Unguru's view became essentially a mainstream interpretation accepted by most his

 torians. Unguru's criticism has since stood (at least tacitly) in the background of most
 of the serious historical research in the field.

 ' Beginning in the late nineteenth century, this view was promoted by prominent scholars such as Paul
 Tannery (1843-1904), Hieronymus Georg Zeuthen (1839-1930), Sir Thomas Little Heath (1861-1940),
 and Otto Neugebauer (1899-1990). Book II became a pivotal focus in the elaboration of the details of this

 historiographical perspective.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 639

 Still, once we have acknowledged the misleading way in which the geometric

 algebra interpretation explains the mathematics of the past by using ideas that were

 not present in Euclid's or in Apollonius's time, some additional, interesting questions
 arise that call for further historical research. Thus for instance, as an alternative to

 geometric algebra, one may ask for a coherent, purely geometric explanation of the

 aims and scope of the ideas originally developed in the Greek mathematical texts. This

 question has been illuminatingly addressed, for instance, by Ken Saito concerning

 Book II and its impact on Apollonius's Conies (Saito 2004 [1985]), and I will return
 to it below.

 A different kind of question that arises when one rejects the geometric algebra

 interpretation of Greek geometry concerns the origins and historical development of

 this very historiographical view. Thus, it is well known that beginning in late antiq

 uity and then throughout history, in editions or commentaries of the Elements, as well

 as in other books dealing with related topics, classic geometrical results were var

 iously presented in partial or full arithmetic-algebraic renderings. It is evident that

 this mathematical transformation later affected some of the retrospective historical

 interpretations of what Euclid had in mind when originally writing his own text. But

 what was the precise interplay between the changes at these two levels, mathematical

 and historiographical, in the different historical periods? A full exploration of this

 longue durée question, starting from Euclid and all the way down to the historians

 who vigorously pursued the geometric algebra interpretation in the late nineteenth

 century, is a heavy scholarly task. In the present article, I intend to address a partial

 aspect of it, by focusing on the ways in which mathematicians in Medieval Europe

 presented the propositions of Book II in the most widely circulated Euclidean ver

 sions, as well as in other texts that incorporated some of the propositions of that book.

 I suggest exploring the extent to which arithmetic and proto-algebraic ideas were

 absorbed in those texts and hence modified the original Euclidean formulation, and

 (to a lesser degree) whether and how these changes affected the historical conception
 of Euclid.

 Before entering the discussion, however, it is important to stress from the outset

 that I deliberately ignore the debate about the adequacy of using the term "algebra"

 in this or that historical context, and consider it a matter of taste. As I have explained

 elsewhere, the question about the "essence of algebra" as an ahistorical category seems

 to me an ill-posed and uninteresting one (Corry 2004, 397). Thus, I am not interested

 in adjudicating the question whether or not certain specific ideas found in Heron or

 in al-Khwàrizmï count as "algebra" according to some predetermined, clearly agreed

 criteria. Rather, I want to identify those mathematical ideas not originally found in

 Euclid's text and that were gradually incorporated into interpretations of it or even

 into the edited versions of the text itself. In this article, just for convenience, I refer

 to some of those ideas using the general umbrella terms of "arithmetic" or "alge

 bra," in their more or less agreed sense, and without thereby aiming at an essentialist

 perspective on these concepts. This in itself should not give rise to any debate or
 confusion.

 The core of the article is preceded by two relatively lengthy introductory sections.

 In Sect. 3,1 discuss some of the propositions of Book II and their proofs as they appear

 •f) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 640 L. Corry

 in the original Euclidean text known to us nowadays.2 I devote particular attention to

 II.5 which in most of the examples analyzed here serves well as a focal point that

 illustrates the issues considered.-^ I thus present the typical (anachronistic) algebraic

 interpretation of this result and I discuss its shortcomings. In Sect. 4,1 present some

 versions of the same propositions, as were introduced in texts of late antiquity and of

 Islam mathematics. This section is not intended as an exhaustive survey of such texts,

 but rather as a presentation of versions that were available to the medieval translators

 and interpreters of Euclid and that in many cases provided the source for contemporary

 renderings of propositions of Book II. These two sections, Sects. 3-4, are intended

 as a consistent synthesis which, while strongly relying on the existing scholarship,

 stresses some less noticed aspects and thus hopefully helps making a fresh reading of

 the history of Book II in its early phases.

 After these introductory sections, I move to the core part of the article, where I ana

 lyze propositions from Book II as they appear in medieval versions of the Elements

 (in Sect. 5) and in other contemporary books that incorporated such ideas (in Sect. 6).

 The period discussed comprises the first Latin translations of the Euclidean text in

 the twelfth century, and it also includes additional texts that circulated in Europe in

 manuscript versions before the first printed version of the Elements in 1482. Thus,

 I discuss the Liber Mahameleth, as well as additional texts by Abraham Bar-Hiyya,

 Fibonacci, Jordanus Nemorarius, Gersonides, and Barlaam. These works present us

 with a rather heterogeneous variety of approaches, within which propositions from

 Book II were handled with the help of both geometric and arithmetic ideas. Some of

 these treatises organically incorporated into the body of arithmetic the main results

 of Book II. Subsequently, and particularly in the Campanus version of the Elements,

 existing arithmetic versions of results from Book II were reincorporated into the arith

 metic books the Euclidean treatise, Books VII-IX. As a consequence, while most of

 the Latin versions of the Elements had duly preserved the purely geometric spirit of

 Euclid's original, the specific text that played the most prominent role in the initial

 passage of the Elements from manuscript to print—i.e., Campanus' version—followed

 a different approach. On the one hand, Book II itself continued to appear as a purely

 geometric text. On the other hand, the first ten results of Book II could now be seen

 also as possibly translatable into arithmetic, and in many cases even as inseparably

 associated with their arithmetic representation. Hence, when symbolic techniques of

 algebra started to take center stage in renaissance mathematics in Europe, the alge

 braic interpretation of results in Book II could became a natural, additional step to be
 followed.

 In the discussion below, as already indicated, proposition II.5 provides a significant

 focal point for the analysis pursued. Nevertheless, this focus allows only a limited

 2 The issue of the adequate use of direct and indirect sources in order to establish an authoritative version of

 the Euclidean text is a significant historiographical question still under debate nowadays. See (Rommevaux

 et al. 2001). I do not deal at all with this issue here, and I simply follow the widely accepted English version
 (Heath 1956 [1908]).

 2 Proposition 11.5 has also been used as focal point in other accounts about Greek mathematics or about

 changing views on geometry through history; see, e.g., Neal 2002, 123 ff.; Netz 1999, 9-11 ; Vitrac and
 Caveing 1990, 370-372.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 view on the broader issue at stake. On closer analysis, one realizes that another issue

 of crucial importance in this story is the way in which distributivity of the product

 over addition was handled in the various medieval texts that I study here. In consid

 eration with the already substantial length of this article, I have pursued that issue in

 a separate essay, soon to be published, and to which I refer in the relevant places as
 [LC2],

 A view from Book II 641

 Another remark related to the length of my article is the following: Since, of neces

 sity, the text below includes many detailed proofs that differ from each other in specific

 important points, yet in subtle and perhaps non-dramatic manners, I have followed the

 convention of writing some paragraphs using a di f f erent font. This is meant

 as an indication to the reader that these paragraphs comprise purely technical descrip

 tions of proofs and that they are intended as evidence in support of the general claims

 made in the corresponding sections. The paragraphs may be read with due technical

 attention, or they may be skipped at least temporarily without thereby missing the

 general line of argumentation.

 2 Euclid's Elements·. Book II and geometric algebra

 Book II of the Elements is a brief collection of only fourteen propositions. The first

 ten can be seen as providing relatively simple tools to be used as auxiliary lemmas in

 specific, more complex constructions later on. Euclid applied the results in the proofs

 of the last four propositions of Book II (II. 11, for instance, teaches how to obtain the

 mean and extreme section of any given segment), as well as in other books of the

 Elements. Later on, they can be found in important places such as Apollonius Conica.

 Each of the first ten propositions was proved by Euclid directly with the help of results

 taken from Book I, and without relying on any other result from Book II. It is easy to

 see, however, that once II. 1 is proved on the basis of 1.34, the other nine propositions

 could be proved by relying on II. 1. This is not what Euclid did in his text, but as we

 shall see, the possibility was acknowledged from very early on.

 2.1 Elements Book II: an overview

 Since I will be referring throughout the article to some propositions in Book II and to

 their proofs, I present now propositions II.1-II.6 and II.9-II. 10, with varying degrees

 of detail (according to what is needed in the discussion below). I also add some general

 comments at the end of the presentation (all the quotations are taken from Heath 1956
 [1908]):4

 II.1: If there are two straight lines, and one of them is cut into any number of

 segments whatever, then the rectangle contained by the two straight lines equals

 4 Recent scholarship has devoted increased attention to the ways in which diagrams appearing in critical

 editions of the Elements differ from those in extant manuscripts. See, e.g., (Saito and Sidoli 2012). Although

 considerations of this kind may be relevant to our analysis here, in this article I will refer only to diagrams

 as they appear in the available critical editions.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the sum of the rectangles contained by the uncut straight line and each of the

 642 L. Corry

 segments.

 Figure 1

 Here A is the first given straight line, and BC is the second one. BC is
 divided into three parts: BD, DE, EC (this is meant to indicate that
 BC is cut into "any number of segments whatever") . The construction is
 straightforward, setting BG equal to A, and perpendicular to BC, and
 then drawing DK, EL, and CH parallel to BG. All that is necessary to
 complete the proof is that DK be equal to A. This follows from the fact
 that BK is by construction a rectangle, and hence (by 1.34) DK, being
 opposite to BG, equals BG. For the same reason also EL and CH are equal
 to BG, and all the three parallelograms can be taken together to form
 the parallelogram BH.

 II.2: If a straight line is cut at random, then the sum of the rectangles contained

 by the whole and each of the segments equals the square on the whole.

 Figure 2

 II.3: If a straight line is cut at random, then the rectangle contained by the whole

 and one of the segments equals the sum of the rectangle contained by the segments

 and the square on the aforesaid segment.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 643

 II.4: If a line is cut at random, then the square on the whole is equal to the squares
 on the segments and twice the rectangle contained by the segments.

 Figure 3
 Figure 3

 C B

 H

 K

 Figure 4

 II.5: If a straight line be cut into equal and unequal segments, the rectangle con

 tained by the unequal segments of the whole together with the square on the straight

 line between the points of section is equal to the square on the half.

 The straight line AB is cut into equal segments at C and into unequal segments at
 D. The proposition says that the rectangle on AD, DB together with the square on CD
 is equal to the square on CB. The diagram is built by taking AK — AD, BF = CB.

 A C D B
 A C D Β

 K
 Κ

 M
 M

 N
 Ν

 H
 Η

 /  yp
 /  Λ

 E G
 Ε G

 Figure 5
 Figure 5

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the proof Euclid makes use of a gnomon, NOP, which is the figure obtained

 when joining the rectangles HF, CH, together with the square DM. Euclid's proof can
 be visualized as follows:

 644 L. Corry

 C D B A CD
 C D_

 H /
 H /  M

 L

 /

 K

 L

 EG F h m EG
 Ε G

 +n

 C D B A CD B
 C D

 wr«f«

 Κ L

 =>
 =>

 M

 ..f-....

 I

 E G F EG
 Ε G F EG

 C D

 Figure 6

 Schematically, Euclid's argument can be summarized as follows
 [Sq(CD) means "the square of CD" and R(CD, DH) means the rectangle
 built on CD, DH] :

 (a . 1) By 1.43: R ( CD, DH ) = R {HM, MF ) , and hence R ( CB, BM) = R ( DB, BF)
 (a.2) But R ( CB, BM ) = R ( AC, AK ) and hence R [AC, AK) — R {DB, BF)

 (a.3) Hence R( AC, AK) + R (CD, DH) =R (DB, DF) + R (CD, DH) , or,

 (a. 4) R (AD, AK) = Gnomon NOP or R ( AD, DB ) = Gnomon NOP

 (a.5) Hence R(AD,DB) +Sq(LH) =Gnomon NOP+Sq(LH) or,

 (a.6) R(AD,DB) +Sq(CD) =Sq(CB) □

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 II.6: If a straight line is bisected and a straight line is added to it in a straight

 line, then the rectangle contained by the whole with the added straight line and the

 added straight line together with the square on the half equals the square on the

 straight line made up of the half and the added straight line.

 The segment AB is bisected at C, and a segment BD is added to it in a straight line.

 The proposition says that the rectangle AD, DB together with the square on CB equals
 the square on CD. The diagram is built by taking AK = BD, DF = CD.

 A view from Book II 645

 C B D
 C Β D

 L
 L

 ( H
 ( H
 n y
 ν y

 qK
 oK

 M
 M

 / p
 / p

 Ε

 Figure 7
 Figure 7

 Like in II.5, also in this case, a key step in Euclid's proof is based on the use of a

 gnomon, NOP, and of 11.43 in order to assert that CH = H F.

 II.9: If a straight line be cut into equal and unequal segments, the squares on the
 unequal segments of the whole are double of the square on the half and of the
 square on the straight line between the points of the section.

 The straight line AB is cut into equal segments at C and into unequal segments at
 D. The proposition says that the squares on AD, DB are double of the squares on AC,
 CD.

 D B

 Figure 8

 The proof refers to the diagram above where GF = CD, EC = AC = CB, and
 wherein the angles AEB, ECA, ECB are easily shown to be right angles.
 The Pythagorean theorem (1.47) is thus applied several times, as
 follows :

 (b.l) By construction and by 1.47: Sq(AE) =2 · SQ (AC)
 (b.2) By construction and by 1. 47 : Sq(EF) =2·SQ(GF) =2■SQ(CD)
 (b. 3 ) Hence: Sq(AE) + Sq(EF) = 2 ■ SQ (AC) + 2 · SQ ( CD)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 646 L. Corry

 (b. 4 ) But by 1.47: Sq(AF)=Sq (AB) + Sq { BF)
 ( b. 5 ) Hence [from (b.3) and ( b. 4 ) ] : Sq ( AF) =2 · SQ (AC) + 2 ■ SQ ( CD)
 (b.6) But by 1.47: Sq ( AF) = Sq(AD) + Sg(DF) = Sq (AD) +Sq(DB)
 (b.7) From (b.5) and (b.6): Sq(AD) +Sq(DB) =2·Sq(AC) +2·Sq(CD)
 □

 11.10: If a straight line is bisected, and a straight line is added to it in a straight

 line, then the square on the whole with the added straight line and the square on

 the added straight line both together are double the sum of the square on the half

 and the square described on the straight line made up of the half and the added

 straight line as on one straight line.

 The segment AB is bisected at C, and a segment BD is added to it in a straight

 line. The proposition says that the squares on AD, DB are double of the squares on
 AC, CD.

 Figure 9
 Figure 9

 2.2 Geometric algebra: an overview

 Even a superficial glance at II. 1 immediately indicates why the algebraic interpretation

 readily suggests itself to a modern reader, who would identify here a particular case

 of the distributive property of multiplication over addition seen as an algebraic rule.

 Of course, this identification requires that we add some ideas that do not appear in the

 text as cited, such as equating area formation with multiplication of abstract quantities.

 But a reader who is willing to ignore the historical context will have no difficulty in

 doing so, even though what the texts displays is a purely geometric formulation and

 proof of a property of area formation.

 The situation becomes somewhat more complex and interesting if we look at II.5

 and II.6. In his well-known comments to these propositions, Heath gave the typi

 cal geometric algebra interpretation, by assigning algebraic symbols to segments in
 the diagram of II.5, as follows: AD = a, BD = b, hence CB = (a + b)/2 and

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 647

 CD = {a - b)/2 (Heath 1956 [1908], Vol. 1, 383). In these terms, the proposition

 can be interpreted as an algebraic identity, namely,

 One interesting feature of his interpretation is that the relevant expression for the

 proposition changes if we call the segments differently. In particular, the two propo

 sitions, II.5-II.6, can be made to represent one and the same expression, namely "the

 difference of the squares of two straight lines is equal to the rectangle contained by

 their sum and difference," or (a + b) ■ (a - b) = a2 - b2. This equivalent formulation

 obtains if the two lines in Fig. 10 below represent the two propositions, with a and b

 being CB and CD, respectively, whereas AD and BD are taken as their sum and their

 difference respectively. Thus:

 A\ 1 1 15
 A\ 1 1 15

 C D
 C D

 A\ 1 1 1D
 A\ 1 1 1D

 C B
 C Β

 Figure 10
 Figure 10

 Moreover, the two same lines could be taken to represent a putative algebraic

 interpretation common to II.9-II. 10: "The sum of the squares on the sum and difference

 of two given straight lines is equal to twice the sum of the squares on the lines" or
 (a + b)2 + (a - b)2 = 2· (a2 + b2) (Heath 1956 [1908], Vol. 1,394). This interpretive

 flexibility may be seen as either an advantage or a disadvantage, depending on what

 viewpoint we adopt, but it certainly raises some concerns that require being clearly
 addressed.

 Thus, if we remain close to the Euclidean text we have to admit that, particularly in

 the cases of II.5 and II.6, both the proposition and its proof are formulated in purely

 geometric terms. There are no arithmetic operations involved, and surely there is no

 algebraic manipulation of symbols representing the magnitudes involved. The entire

 deduction relies on the basic properties of the figures that arise in the initial construc

 tion or that were proved in previous theorems (which in turn were proved in purely

 geometric terms). Thus, for instance, the claim that "the complement CH is equal to

 the complement HF" corresponds to proposition 1.43 of the Elements. The gnomon

 NOP is a geometric figure built out of other figures, and similar gnomons appear in

 many other proofs in Greek geometry. It is clear that, while one might easily claim

 (albeit with little historical justification, but at least with some mathematical justifica

 tion) that rectangle formation is a geometric equivalent of arithmetic multiplication,

 no such natural, arithmetic equivalent can be suggested for "gnomon formation."

 Unguru's criticism of the geometric algebra interpretation laid stress on this kind of

 interpretive difficulties concerning the meaning of the operations. It also indicated the

 inherent difficulty to define a clear, general arithmetic of abstract magnitudes in Greek

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 648 L. Corry

 mathematics, of which the putative algebra would be a generalization (Unguru and
 Rowe 1981—1982a, b; see also Mueller 1981, 50-52).

 Whether or not one accepts this kind of criticism, it is pertinent to notice that when

 it comes to the arithmetical books of the Elements, Books VII-IX, the discussion may

 require some specific adaptations, since the arguments against the algebraic interpre

 tation of geometric situations cannot simply be extended without further comments.

 I discuss this issue more at length in [LC2]. Nevertheless, I want to stress here one

 point concerning the way in which numbers and operations upon them are represented

 in the arithmetical books of Euclid, while contrasting it with the case of the geometric

 books. This is a very important point for our discussion below on the medieval texts.

 The accompanying diagram for VII.5 is useful for our purposes here:

 Β
 B i

 fG
 "G

 --H

 D
 D

 F

 Figure
 Figure 11

 As in all diagrams associated with the arithmetical propositions in the Elements,

 lines represent here numbers while the operations of addition and subtraction can be

 represented by concatenation of lines. In this diagram, for instance, EF is the sum of

 EH, HF. This is not different from addition of two lines in the geometric context. When

 it comes to multiplication, however, we need to be more attentive to the differences

 between the two contexts. The number A, for instance, is "a part" of BC, which means

 that A, if added repeatedly to itself, yields BC. In the proof, Euclid simply counts and

 compares the "multitude" of times that one number is part of the other in the cases
 considered. I will be referring below to this kind of argument as "counting units."

 In the Euclidean texts, such arguments appear in the context of "arithmetic proofs,"

 where lines appearing in diagrams are used just to represent and to label arbitrary

 numbers and actual constructions are never performed on them. These lines are not

 multiplied with each other, but they can be multiplied in the sense of repeated addition.

 In contrast, in "geometric proofs" two lines may be "multiplied" in the sense of rec

 tangle formation. Whereas in the framework of the Elements, the separation is clearly

 kept between the geometric and the arithmetic books, and the kinds of proofs used
 in each, in the framework of Islam mathematics, and certainly later on in medieval

 European mathematics, we find proofs of both types mixed together in various con

 texts.5 Among the interesting changes that we shall notice below is that arithmetic

 proofs started to be increasingly used also for propositions originally appearing in
 Book II.

 5 The distinction between the two kinds of proofs has efficiently been used in (Oaks 2011 ) for the case of
 Islam mathematics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 649

 2.3 Visible and invisible figures

 A possible reaction to any criticism against the geometric algebra interpretation of

 Book II is to ask for a coherent, purely geometric interpretation of the meaning and

 usage of this collection of propositions seen as a whole. One illuminating such inter

 pretation has been suggested by Saito (2004 [1985]), and it is also relevant for our

 discussion below. Saito's interpretation is related to the twin-like relation already

 mentioned above between pairs of propositions such as II.5-II.6 or II.9-II.10. Simi

 lar relations can be shown to hold, respectively, for the pairs II.2-II.3, II.4-II.7, and

 II.1-II.8. We saw that in the algebraic interpretation, these pairs of twin propositions

 may be understood as representing one and the same algebraic expression. But this

 immediately raises the question why would the same expression require two different

 propositions to express it. This would seem to go against the gist of the algebraic

 perspective as known to us nowadays, in which precisely such repetitions become

 unnecessary. One of Saito's interesting insights is that the geometric context alone

 provides a very coherent and sufficient explanation for the existence of these twin

 propositions that obviates the need for an algebraic addition (Saito 2004 [1985], 157—

 160). Indeed, Saito points to several places in the Elements, in other books of Euclid,

 and in Apollonius' Conica, where two different, but strongly related, geometric sit

 uations are proved with the help of twin propositions from Book II. An example of

 this appears in propositions 111.35—111.36 of the Elements, which deal with areas of

 rectangles built on segments of lines that intersect with each other and with a circle.

 In ΙΠ.35, the lines intersect within the circle, whereas in 111.36 they intersect outside

 it. Two diagrams appearing in the proofs of the propositions and related to this point

 are the following:

 111.35: 111.36:
 111.35: 111.36:

 A/ \D

 yh

 B

 D

 Figure 12
 Figure 12

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 650 L. Corry

 In III.35, the line AC is cut into equal parts at G and into unequal ones on E, and thus

 11.5 can be applied. In 111.36, the line AC is bisected at F and DC is added to it, and thus

 11.6 can be applied. Notice then, that not only the relations between the lengths here

 are important, but above all their geometric arrangement. Thus, Saito concludes that

 Euclid considered lines and areas not as representations of abstract quantities that can

 be freely manipulated according to general rules, but specifically as geometric entities,

 the mutual arrangement of which is significant for the propositions considered.

 Saito's analysis shows that a purely geometric interpretation of Book II does full

 justice to Euclid as a conscious planner of the mathematical edifice of the Elements. In

 later books of the collection, we encounter geometric situations that require the support

 of lemmata such as those put forward in advance in Book II in order to complete the

 proof or the construction at stake. The very singling out of these results as worthy

 of separate consideration in advance appears in retrospect as an under-acknowledged

 token of Euclid's great insight. I say this, because these lemmata came to be used

 significantly not only where originally intended, but also (as Saito shows) in Euclid's

 Data and, somewhat later, in Apollonius's Conica. And as the mathematician Doron

 Zeilberger emphasized recently, "A Good Lemma is Worth a Thousand Theorems",

 precisely because, while trivial in appearance or easy to prove, once stated, the insight

 encapsulated in a good lemma allows for its application in a wide variety of unexpected
 contexts, and this was indeed the case with Book II.6

 Another aspect of Saito's analysis concerns the distinction between visible and

 invisible figures in the diagrams of the Elements. This important point is also connected

 with the issue of distributivity which I discuss in further details in [LC2]. Here I mention

 it only briefly. Recall that the geometric fact to be proved in II. 1 can be schematically

 stated as follows (referring to Fig. 1 above):

 R (A, BC) = R (A, BD) + R (A, DE) + R (A, EC). (1)

 The proof itself, on the other hand, is based on (i) taking a segment BG = A, (ii)

 constructing the parallelograms and proving on purely geometric grounds (using 1.34)

 that DK = A — EL, and (iii) then realizing that, according to the diagram:

 R (BG, BQ = R (BG, BD) + R (DK, DE) + R (EL, EC). (2)

 So, what is the big difference between (Eq. 1) and (Eq. 2) and in what sense does

 the latter prove the former? Notice, in the first place, that proving DK = A = EL is

 fundamental since otherwise the three rectangles in the figure cannot be concatenated

 into a single one in (Eq. 2). But what Saito draws our attention to, in particular, is

 the fact that the rectangles used in (Eq. 2) are all "visible" in the diagram, whereas

 those of (Eq. 1) are "invisible." Situations such as those of (Eq. 2) appear frequently

 in the Elements, and the distributivity of the construction of parallelograms is used

 6 See Doron Zeilberger, Opinion 82: "A Good Lemma is Worth a Thousand Theorems" (written: August

 14,2007; downloaded May 02,2012: http://www.math.rutgers.edu/~zeilberg/Opinion82.html): "Theorems

 are nice, but they are usually dead-ends. A lemma may be 'trivial', or easy to prove once stated, but if it is

 good, its value far surpasses even the deepest theorems."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 651

 H

 there without any further comment. A most prominent example appears in the proof

 1.47, whose well-known diagram is the following:

 ι

 Figure 13
 Figure 13

 A crucial step in the proof is that

 Sq (BQ = R {BD, DL) + R {CE, LE), (3)

 and this step is taken in Euclid's text without any special comment. In other words, sit

 uations embodied in (Eq. 2) and (Eq. 3) involve visible figures and hence do not require

 further justification other than what the figure itself shows. The situation embodied in

 (Eq. 1 ), in contrast, does require a proof precisely because the rectangles involved are,

 as indicated by Saito, invisible. In Book II, then, Euclid shows how the properties of

 invisible figures can be derived from those of visible ones "for one can apply to the

 latter the geometric intuition which is fundamental of Greek geometric arguments"
 (Saito 2004 [ 1985], 167). In the texts discussed below, the awareness to this clear dis

 tinction is not strictly kept, and the blurring of borders between the two kinds of figures

 runs parallel to the processes of blurring of borders between geometric, arithmetic,
 and proto-algebraic ideas.

 3 Book II in late antiquity and in Islamic mathematics

 Medieval readers, translators, and editors of the Elements were acquainted with various

 kinds of commentaries and additions, and not just with the original Euclidean text such

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 652 L. Corry

 as described above for the particular case of Book II. In this section, I present some

 versions of results related to Book II, written in late antiquity and in the mathematical

 culture of Islam, and that circulated in Europe since the twelfth century. The texts

 discussed here had a direct impact on the way that the results of Book II came to be

 interpreted, reproduced, and disseminated in mathematical texts in the middle ages.

 3.1 Heron's commentary of the Elements

 Alternatives to Euclid's proofs started to appear already within Greek mathematical

 culture itself. It has been speculated that arithmetical versions of some propositions

 in Book II circulated at the time of Diophantus and perhaps even earlier (Vitrac 2004,

 22). Also, a number of scholia to the Elements include an arithmetic rendering of
 II.5, with values AB = 10, AC = CB — 5, AD = 8, and DB = 2 (Heiberg
 and Menge 1883-1893, Vol. 5, 234-236), but their exact dating and authorship is a

 debatable matter (Vitrac 2003). What can be asserted with relative certainty is that

 Heron of Alexandria, who at the end of the first century A.D. wrote a Commentary

 of the Elements, presented original, alternative proofs to many propositions in Book

 II. These proofs provide a good illustration of how Euclid's arguments started to be

 transformed from quite early on. Since Heron's text was known, either directly or

 indirectly, to some of the medieval authors about whom we shall speak below, his

 proofs are worthy of examination here.

 Reconstructing the exact contents of Heron's text is not a straightforward task, since

 only very meager fragments have survived in Greek (Vitrac 2011 ). The main available
 substantial source for the existing reconstructions is found in a commentary to the

 Elements written by Abu'l Abbas al-Fadl ibn Hatim al-NayrTzT (c. 875-c. 940). This

 commentary (which I discuss below) was one of the earliest to be written in Arabic,

 and it preserved a considerable number of extracts from Heron's book (Heath 1981

 [1921], 309-310). The medieval authors discussed in this article became acquainted
 with Heron's ideas via al-Nayrïzï's commentary, and hence, it seems reasonable to

 rely on it for our discussion here. That being said, it is nonetheless important to keep

 in mind that more recent historical research has stressed the difficulties in asserting

 the ways in which the extant Latin and Arab manuscripts reflect the original text of

 Heron (Busard 1996b; Brentjes 2001a).

 As already mentioned, Euclid had proved each proposition in Book II separately on

 the basis of results of Book I alone. Heron followed a different approach. He asserted

 that II. 1 is the only one among the fourteen propositions that "cannot be proved without

 drawing a total of two lines." As for the remaining propositions, however, he stated

 that "it is possible that they be demonstrated with the drawing of one sole line," and

 he suggested alternative proofs that do not rely anymore on Book I. Rather, he relied

 in each case on propositions from the same Book II that he gradually proved as he

 went along (Curtze 1899, 88-89). Thus, II. 1 appears here as the basic statement of

 a general law of distributivity of area formation over addition, a law whose proof is

 purely geometric, and from which all other propositions in Book II can be derived.

 Propositions II.2-II.3 appear as particular cases of II. 1, and II.4 as directly derivable

 from it (see [LC2]). Hence, implicitly, also these propositions derive their validity

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 653

 from geometry, but at the same time, they embody situations which Heron saw as

 arithmetic and illustrated with numerical examples. Along the proof, he also referred

 to rectangles and squares constructed on the various segments (or, as he phrased it,
 "the surface that the two lines CD,DB enclose"), but such figures are truly invisible,

 in the sense of Saito, i.e., they are never actually drawn and it is left to the reader to
 imagine them. In addition, Heron stressed that each proposition can be proved in two

 different ways, namely by analysis and by synthesis. I will present now the details of
 Heron's proof of II.5, while focusing only on the second of these two components,
 namely synthesis.

 Heron's proof for II.5 relies directly on II.2-II.3, rather than on
 propositions in Book I, as in Euclid's original. Heron draws a line
 AB, with two additional points D and C indicated on it, and with C
 bisecting the line, as follows (Curtze 1899, 96) :7

 D C
 D C

 Figure 14
 Figure 14

 The core of the proof can be visualized in terms of two simple steps:
 (1) decomposing the square on BC into smaller pieces; (2) reassem
 bling the pieces into the rectangle on DA,DB and the smaller square
 on DC. Graphically this amount to the following (I am using figures
 that do not appear in the text):

 DC A B DC

 1 1

 Figure 15
 Figure 15

 Schematically, Heron's argument can be summarized as follows:

 (C.l) By II.2: Sq ( CB) = R ( CB, DB) + R ( CB, CD)
 (c . 2 ) But, by II.3 R ( CB, CD) = R ( CD, DB) + Sq ( CD) ( since BC = DB + CD)
 (c . 3 ) Hence Sq (CB) = R ( CB,DB) + (R ( CD, DB) + Sq(CD) )

 (c . 4) But AC — CB

 (c. 5) Hence Sq (CB) = R (AC, BD) + (R (CD, DB) + Sq(CD) )
 (c . 6 ) But by II.1 R(A C,DB) +R(DB,CD) =R(AD,DB)
 {c.l) Hence Sq(CB) = R (AD, DB) + Sq (CD) , □

 And for an English translation, see (Lo Bello 2009, 32).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Historians have identified Heron's proofs as early instances of using algebraic

 techniques in geometry, and this assessment remained unchallenged even in critical

 654 L. Corry

 analyses of "geometric algebra" (see, e.g.. Fried and Unguru 2001, 20-21). This way

 to interpret Heron's work, however, seems to me misleading, as I find it hard to see this

 approach as "algebraic" in any possible sense of this word. In the proof just presented,

 as well as in others in Book II, Heron added areas to areas or decomposed a square into

 geometric components, and then manipulated the parts in order to reconstruct a differ

 ent one. On the one hand, these are just legitimate geometric operations also found in

 other parts of the original Euclidean text. On the other hand, there is here an interesting

 twist of ideas whereby Heron extended the scope of Euclid's norms, in the sense that

 he applied to invisible figures manipulations that Euclid had legitimately applied only

 to visible ones. Indeed, as we saw above, the whole idea of Book II was to provide

 tools that created a sound basis for doing these kinds of geometric manipulations

 wherever needed, and now we find here the manipulation of invisible figures being

 done already within Book II. Moreover, one cannot overlook the important difference

 embodied in the fact that Euclid's proof is in essence constructive, while Heron's is

 operational: what I mean by this is that Euclid starts with an elaborate construction

 that needs to be completed before starting the apodictic part of the proof, whereas

 Heron proceeds straightforwardly from the divided line to the conclusion, simply by

 operating (i.e., adding and comparing areas) with squares and rectangles built on the

 segments appearing in the proposition (and using some previous propositions as well).

 In fact, it is quite clear that Heron's diagram alludes to those appearing in the arith

 metical books of the Elements, which typically comprise just collections of segments

 which are referred to in the proof but are not used for any kind of construction. Thus,

 Heron's proof are different from Euclid's in important senses, but not in the sense of

 being algebraic rather geometric. Indeed, they are not even "arithmetic proofs" in the
 sense explained above, since two lines multiplied give raise to a rectangle and not to

 a third line. Heron's proofs are not less geometric than Euclid's, but rather differently

 geometric, and in a meaningful manner at that.8

 Given this different geometric approach, some have speculated about the possi

 bility that Heron's proof had its sources in Pythagorean ideas from a time in which

 arithmetic and geometric practices were less clearly separated than what they came
 to be later on, as in the Euclidean text (Vitrac and Caveing 1990, 369). At any rate,

 it seems evident that the operational character of Heron's proof, even though it is

 geometrically operational, more conveniently prepares the road for a possible arith

 metic, and later algebraic, readings of the propositions in Book II. As we shall see

 below, this road was indeed taken by later readers of Euclid's text and of Heron's

 commentary. But it is important to stress these kinds of differences between two

 geometric approaches (Euclid's and Heron's) since it is precisely through this kind

 of nuances that we come to understand the slow process through which algebraic

 like thinking entered geometry and in particular the kind of geometry developed in
 Book II.

 8 (Vitrac 2005, 6 ff.) speaks about two contrasting styles of geometrical proof in Greek mathematics:
 "demonstrative" versus "algorithmic." Without wanting to make too much of word choice, and without

 the benefit of the much broader scope of Vitrac's analysis, I think that for the case of Book II, at least,

 the contraposition of "constructive" versus "operational" is more adequate to encapsulate the difference

 between Euclid's and Heron's proofs.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 655

 3.2 Al-Khwàrizmï and Abû-Kâmil

 The development of procedures for solving problems involving unknowns and their

 powers was a central contribution of the mathematicians in the culture of Islam. The

 terms "Islamic algebra" or "Arabic algebra" can be associated with this tradition.

 Their most well-known contributions are dated not before the beginning of the ninth

 century, but it is likely that some of the earlier ideas began as practical traditions

 that were cultivated and transmitted orally over many centuries (Hpyrup 1986). It is

 obvious, at any rate, that the Islamic context must be explored in any attempt to follow

 the incorporation of arithmetic, algebraic or proto-algebraic ideas into later versions

 of Book II. One must keep in mind, of course, that the transmission of the Arabic

 Elements involved a highly complex network of translations, editions, commentaries,

 and reception, about which knowledge continues to be somewhat limited and contested

 (Brentjes 1994, 1996, 2001a). The current scholarship typically refers to two basic

 Arabic translations of Books I—XIII that gave rise to separate textual traditions. One,

 composed before 805, is attributed to Al-Hajjjâj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar (fl. between 786

 833). A second one, composed by Ishâq ibn Hunayn (ca. 830-910/11), during the last

 third of the ninth century, was later edited by Thâbit ibn Qurra (ca. 830-901). I will

 discuss here ideas of Book II that appear in the works of al-Khwàrizmï, Abu Kàmil,

 Thâbit ibn Qurra, and al-Nayrïzï. In all these cases, these ideas appear in contexts

 that sensibly differ from the original Euclidean one. Moreover, in each case we find

 different approaches to the way in which the result can be used and interpreted from

 an algebraic or arithmetic perspective. These four mathematicians do not exhaust the

 variety of relevant texts from the Islamic tradition, but they were among the most

 commonly read in medieval Europe, and this is the reason for focusing here on their
 works.

 The famous Al-kitâb al-muhtasar fi hisâb al-jabr wa-1-muqâbala ("The Com

 pendious Book on Calculation by Restoration and Confrontation") was written by
 Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwârizmi (c. 780-850) in the early ninth century on the

 exhortation of the caliph al-Mamun. As it is well known, al-Khwàrizmî presented here

 rules for solving problems that involve squares of an unknown quantity, and he then

 added geometric proofs to justify some of the rules. Although it seems unlikely that he

 was not aware of some of the existing translations of Euclid's text, the fact is that he

 did never directly refer to or otherwise mention the Elements (Djebbar 2005, 34-36).

 Neither did he explicitly state or prove results of Book II in any of his works. Many

 of the geometric proofs found in his texts bear similarities with the Euclidean propo

 sitions, but they are used in a less rigorous and more intuitive or "visual" manner than

 in the original. A well-known example is the use of a result similar to II.5 in relation

 to the problem known as "the square and twenty-one numbers equal ten roots of the

 same square." Here, we find an early, interesting case of embedding the core of II.5

 in a typical Arabic "algebraic" context.

 Al-Khwàrizmï's procedure to solve this problem is described as fol
 lows (Rosen 1831, 11):

 Halve the number of the roots; the moiety is five. Multiply this by
 itself; the product is twenty-five. Subtract from this the twenty-one
 which are connected with the square; the remainder is four. Extract

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 656 L. Corry

 its root; it is two. Subtract this from the moiety of the roots, which
 is five; the remainder is three. This is the root of the square which
 you required, and the square is nine. Or you may add the root to the
 moiety of the roots; the sum is seven; this is the root of the square
 which you sought for, and the square itself is forty-nine.
 The diagram used to endorse the validity of this procedure is remi
 niscent but not identical to the Euclidean one for II.5. It involves

 a square AD, whose side AC represents the unknown magnitude. In the
 diagram there is also a rectangle HT, one of whose sides, HN, equals

 AC.

 M L K
 M L Κ

 H
 H

 R G
 R G

 A C
 A C

 T B D
 Ν Τ Β D

 Figure 16
 Figure 16

 The diagram accounts for the problem in the sense that rectangle HB
 and square AD together build a larger rectangle, HD, that represents
 10 times the unknown magnitude AC, while HB one is assigned the value
 21. Al-Khwârizmï's argument, from here on, can be schematically ren
 dered as follows:

 (d.l) Bisect HC at G, and construct square MT with side equal to
 HG. Since HG is of length 5, then the area of MT is 25.

 (d. 2) Construct KMHG with KG = GA. Here KR= Sq(GA) .
 (d.3) Now, we have cut HC into equal segments at G and into unequal
 segments at A. Euclid's II.5 can be applied here, so that:
 Sq ( HG ) = R ( HA, AC ) + Sq ( GA ) . Hence, MT — HB + KR.

 (d.4) Thus, the value of KR is 4, and its side is 2. And since
 GK = GA, it follows that AC is 3, and this is the side we were

 looking for.

 Al-Khwârizmï is thus using here the main idea behind II.5 in the framework of a

 specifically arithmetic case. He freely associates numerical values to what for Euclid

 are continuous magnitudes (line segments), and then he can obtain, with the help of II.5,

 another value that is associated to a certain square. Of course, this association crucially

 depends on the conceptions of number typical of Islam mathematics, and which differ
 from the classical Greek ones. For al-Khwârizmï, as for most of his successors, any

 kind of positive quantities arising from calculations, including fractions or irrational

 roots, would count as legitimate numbers. In the last step of the argument, the side is

 used to find the value of the unknown magnitude. This approach clearly deviates from

 Euclid's consistent separation between geometric and arithmetic contexts, and it will

 have significant consequences over later developments. At the same time, however,

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 657

 II.5 itself has not lost here its purely geometric character in any way. On the contrary,

 al-Khwârizmï is clearly implying that by reducing his problem to a geometrical context

 he is bestowing theoretical legitimacy to his solving algorithm. He may have wanted

 to appeal to certain readers with a more theoretical orientation, though perhaps not all

 of his readers would think of this as a necessary requirement. It should be noticed that,

 as in any algebraic solution of a quadratic equation, the crucial step in al-Khwârizmï's

 procedure is that of "completing squares", only that in this case, this completion is a

 purely geometric procedure, rather than a symbolic, algebraic one as it will be much

 later in the algebraic tradition of the seventeenth century.

 An interesting question that has been a matter of lively debate among historians

 concerns the sources of the ideas appearing in al-Khwârizmï's al-jabr wa-1-muqâbala

 and the degree of originality of his own contribution. This is true for both the algo

 rithms and the kind of geometric justifications illustrated above. In the past, it was
 common to assume Greek roots and a direct connection to the Elements, but more

 recently, historians also started to indicate more prominently Indian and Central Asian

 influences. Following a different direction, Jens Hpyrup has also suggested a possi

 ble connection with Babylonian traditions of problem solving that were alive and
 influential up until the European Renaissance (Hpyrup 1986, 2001). One way or

 another, ideas from Book II continued to appear repeatedly in later books of the

 Arabic algebraic tradition, typically as part of a geometric justification similar to what

 we have just seen with al-Khwârizmï. Of the highest relevance to our discussion here
 is the example of Abu Kâmil (c. 850-930) in his Kitâbfî al-jabr wa al-muqâbala,9
 a treatise written around 900. Abu Kâmil presented in a systematic way methods

 and results found in al-Khwârizmï, while at the same time incorporating a visible
 influence of the arithmetic books of the Elements (Moyon 2007; Oaks 2001). His

 treatise was widely read by European medieval mathematicians, and its influence is

 clearly visible, particularly concerning the questions that we are discussing in this
 article.

 Abu Kâmil started by discussing the six cases of problems with squares as intro

 duced by al-Khwârizmï. In providing geometric arguments to justify the validity of
 his methods of solution, however, he followed the Euclidean source and its standards

 much more closely than his predecessor. As a matter fact, in the text we find for
 most problems two geometric justifications for each case: one closer in style to al

 Khwârizmï and one relying directly on a result from Book II. This may reflect a desire

 to meet the requirements of two different kinds of readerships: one of "practitioners"

 and another one of "theoreticians." Still, in both cases Abu Kâmil assigned numerical

 values to lines and areas without any limitation, very much like al-Khwârizmï had

 done before him. Let us see the two proofs for the example of "the square and ten

 roots of the same square equal thirty nine numbers," where Abu Kâmil relied on II.6.

 This example, also taken directly from al-Khwârizmï, is historically important since

 9 A Latin version is extant which dates from the fourteenth century (Sesiano 1993). I will be referring to

 this Latin text, which most likely reflects what was available to the European mathematicians we shall be
 discussing below. There is also a Hebrew version with comments by Mordechai Finzi (died 1475) which

 seems to have been a translation from a Spanish version, but no such Spanish version has been preserved.
 See (Levey 1966; Weinberg 1935).

 *£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 it was repeated, with slight variations, by many mathematicians both in the Islam and

 early European algebraic tradition (Dold-Samplonius 1987).

 The accompanying diagram is the following (Sesiano 1993, 327-328):'®

 658 L. Corry

 R Y C

 c

 D
 D

 A
 A

 M
 M

 U
 υ

 G B H
 Β Η

 Figure 17

 In the first proof, the square ABGD represents the square of the
 unknown and to this the rectangle ABEU is attached and it is taken
 to represent ten roots. This means that the line BH represents the
 number ten since the rectangle share with square ABGD the line AB.
 Now, in the argument rectangles and squares, as well as line segments
 are taken to represent numbers, satisfying the conditions stipulated
 in the problem, namely the square of the unknown, ABGD, together
 with ten roots, ABEU, is thirty nine. Abu Kâmil's argument can be
 schematically rendered as follows:

 (e.l) R(AB,BE) + Sq(GB) =39=R(EG,DG).
 ( e. 2 ) But GD = GB, so that R ( EG, GB) =39.

 (e.3) Bisect BE at H. Accordingly, HB= 5, and Sq(CB) =25.
 (e.4) But BG is appended to HB in a straight line. Hence, [according

 to II. 6] :11 R ( EG, GB ) + Sq ( HB ) = Sq {HG ) .

 (e.5) Since R(EG,GB) =39 and Sq (HB) =25, then Sq (HG) =64.
 (e.6) Thus, HG — 8, and line ,HB= 5. Finally, GB= 3, and Sq (GB) =9.
 □

 The second argument relies on the equality of the rectangles RA and
 ME, which by construction are both equal to rectangle AH. Hence, since
 DE is 39, then the three surfaces, MB, BD, DY taken together are 39.
 In addition, AC is 25, since HB is 5, from whence it follows that GC
 is 64, and GB is 8, and, finally, GB is 3.

 In the first proof just described, the square HGCR and the segment YB are not even

 mentioned. Indeed, they are not needed. These are, as in Euclid's proofs, "invisible

 figures" that are only implicitly referenced (i.e., HGCR is the square on SG). Thanks

 to the use of II.6, one does not actually need to draw the entire diagram in order to

 follow the proof. The diagram is drawn in full, however, because in the second proof

 it is needed in order to follow the argument. Abu Kâmil describes this second proof as

 one that is meant to explain the problem "so that it becomes apparent to your eyes."
 Indeed, the fact that the three surfaces MB, BD, DY taken together are 39 can be

 10 See also Oaks 2011,255-256.

 " "... sicut dixit Euclides in secundo tractatu libri sui".

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 659

 seen directly on the diagram, based on the way in which it was constructed. The first

 proof, in contrast, is based on a proposition in Euclid which gives a rule that is applied

 "blindly," as it were. The first is perhaps stronger in logical rigor, but it lacks the visual

 transparency that characterizes the second proof.12

 There is a basic tension clearly reflected in these proofs, one which actually under

 lies the entire treatise. This is the tension arising from the combination, within one

 and the same text, of results and methodological approaches taken from the arithmetic

 parts of the Elements (as well as from other, earlier arithmetic traditions) with results

 and proofs originally meant to deal with continuous magnitudes, such as those of

 Book II. Arabic numbers were of a more general kind than those handled in Euclid's

 arithmetic books, so that the latter could not fully account for the rules of calculation

 for which Abu Kàmil was attempting to provide a theoretical account. The results

 of Book II helped Abu Kàmil complete the picture, but in doing so, he subsequently

 affected the way in which this collection of results was conceived, while broadening

 the scope of its intended applications (Oaks 2011). (And see also [LC2].)

 We have seen how in these two mainstream texts of early Islam mathematics,

 al-Khwàrizmf s and Abû Kàmil's, an intrinsic connection between the emerging tech

 niques of Islam algebra and the theorems of Book II was made explicit. As part of this

 fundamental connection, a clear conceptual hierarchy was implicitly reflected whereby

 geometry appears as a main source of mathematical certainty, whereas the newly devel

 oping proto-algebraic ideas receive full legitimation from geometry. Within this entire

 picture, and in spite of the broader scope of ideas within which it came to be applied,

 Book II appeared as an important source of mathematical reliability which did not

 thereby lose its essentially geometric character. It is also in this way that it would

 be eventually perceived by the many readers of these treatises in Europe medieval
 mathematical culture.

 3.3 Thâbit ibn Qurra

 Like al-Khwàrizmï, also Thâbit ibn Qurra worked in Baghdad under the patronage of

 the caliph. He was active in the second half of the ninth century, at a time when many

 Greek texts started to be translated and incorporated into the available body of mathe

 matics known in the Arabic culture. Ibn Qurra, who as already indicated had edited one

 of the early translations of the Elements, also discussed the solution of problems with

 squares of unknowns quantities in a treatise entitled Qawlfi tashîh masâ' il al-jabr

 bi'l-barâhîn al-handasîya ("Account of the Correctness of Problems of Algebra by

 Geometric Proofs"), which is of particular interest for our survey here. This treatise

 presented general solutions for three of the six standard cases previously treated by

 al-Khwârizmï (though without mentioning al-Khwàrizmï), and, like al-Khwàrizmf s

 text, it also provided geometric justifications for each of the procedures presented. Like

 Abu Kàmil somewhat later, Ibn Qurra referred explicitly to the propositions of Book

 12 Besides this method of solution for finding the thing, whose validity is proved in two different ways,

 Abu Kâmil also introduced a second method of solution directly yielding the value of the square. Although

 highly interesting in itself, it is beyond the scope of the present article. See (Sesiano 1993,329-330; Moyon
 2007,310).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 660 L. Corry

 II of the Elements as his basis for legitimation. But, unlike these two mathematicians,

 Ibn Qurra discussed various cases in an abstract manner that did not involve specific
 numerical instances (either in the formulation or in the solution). All the while, he

 translated each step of the procedures he discussed into a corresponding component

 of the geometric diagrams of II.5 and II.6. In this way he remained at the abstract level

 that involved reference to general squares, roots and numbers, rather than to specifi

 cally measured ones. This can be better understood by looking at the case he "verified"

 with the help of II.5, which is the already mentioned case: "square and numbers equal

 roots of the same square."

 In his presentation Thâbit referred to the following diagram (Luckey
 1941, 106-107) :

 D
 D

 B
 Β

 W
 W

 H

 Figure 18

 W

 Β

 Η

 The square of the unknown quantity is represented here by the square
 ABDG, while the line AH "is measured by as many units as there are
 roots" in the given problem. By completing the rectangle GH we obtain
 a figure that represents the number of roots, and if we subtract the
 square BG, then DH represents the "numbers" in the problem. From here
 the argument proceeds as follows:

 (f.l) DH equals AB times BH, whereas AH is also known. In other
 words, what we have is a given line AH, which is cut at B, in
 such a way that R(AB,BH) is known.

 (f .2) Bisect now AH at W. By II. 5, R (AB, BH) + Sq(BW) = Sq(AW) .
 (f .3) But AVI is known (since AH is known) and hence Sq(AW) is known,

 and also R (AB, BH) .

 (f .4) Thus, we also know now Sq(BW) , and hence we know BW.
 (f.5) If BW is subtracted from AW (as in the figure on the right)
 or added to AW (as in the left), then we obtain AB as a known

 quantity, which represents indeed the root we are looking for.

 Thâbit's algebraic procedure for solving this case is based, as we see, on complet

 ing a square and then adding or subtracting from the value of the number of roots
 in the problem. This is quite similar to what we saw in the two previous examples.

 When explaining the rationale behind the procedure in terms of geometrically com

 pleting the square on BW, the main trick comes from II.5. But Thâbit did not just use

 geometric methods in order to solve a specific problem, or to legitimate known proce

 dures. Rather, he essentially identified the two methods with one another by stressing

 that his arguments "are in accordance" with those developed by the "algebraists"

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 661

 (Luckey 1941, 95). This is a subtle step beyond the views implicit in al-Khwàrizmï's

 and later in Abu Kâmil's approach, and Thàbit's highly influential status within Islamic

 mathematics no doubt helped disseminate it. It thus seems reasonable to assume that
 it may have contributed to strengthening views of Book II as a collection of tech

 niques directly related to the gradually developing algebraic procedures, rather than

 just supporting it from outside.

 3.4 Al-Nayrîzï

 Another version of II.5 in the mathematical culture of Islam that is worthy of atten

 tion here is the one appearing in al-Nayrîzï's commentary to the Elements, dating

 from the early tenth century, which was one of the earliest such commentaries to be

 written in Arabic.13 In his text, al-Nayrîzï incorporated idiosyncratic additions and

 changes to the original text. Some of these comprised either a commentary on the

 Euclidean proof or an alternative proof. Al-Nayrîzï's attributed them to Heron's Com

 mentary. The most noticeable kind of additions to Book II were numerical examples

 that illustrated each proposition. In the case of II.5, for instance, the numerical exam

 ple is of a line AB representing the number 10, which is then divided into two equal
 parts, 5 and 5, and also into two unequal parts, 7 and 3. Thus, 5 χ 5 = 25 equals
 7 χ 3 + 2 χ 2.14

 A second important kind of addition that al-Nayrîzï incorporated into the Euclidean

 text appears in Book IX, where, as a series of comments to IX. 16, he included arithmetic

 versions of I.1-II.4 (Curtze 1899,204-207). It is evident that merely by placing these

 propositions in the context of one of the arithmetical books of the Elements, and

 by reformulating these four propositions in terms of numbers rather than in terms of

 lines, al-Nayrîzï was making a strong statement about the way in which the knowledge

 presented in Book II, particularly concerning distributivity, should (or at least could)

 be seen.15 But al-Nayrîzï went much further than that, and he gave fully arithmetic

 proofs of these four propositions, all of which embody properties of distributivity. He

 proved them simply by counting and comparing the numbers of units in each of the

 products involved (see [LC2] for details).

 One may speculate, of course, about the possibility that all or some of these additions

 and modifications were suggested to al-Nayrîzï directly by his own reading of Heron's

 13 This text in its various extant manuscripts and translations has had a somewhat convoluted history

 (Brentjes 2001b), which I will not delve into here. I will refer to the text as rediscovered and published in
 Latin translation in (Curtze 1899). For details, see also (Lo Bello 2003a, 2009); (Tummers 1994).

 14 In Curtze's late-nineteenth-century edition of this text, Al-Nayrizr's commentary was accompanied by

 a footnote in which he formulated the original Euclidean text together with an algebraic rendering of

 the proposition (Curtze 1899, 94). Even here this algebraic rendering is anachronistic. Reinterpreting a

 geometric result in arithmetic terms (as Al-Nayrizï did) is not yet the same as reinterpreting it algebraically.

 15 Neither Curtze nor—to the best of my knowledge—any other later commentator has called attention to

 the remarkable fact that al-Nayrizï's IX. 16 is an addition to, and indeed a generalization of, Euclid's IX. 15,

 and that, incidentally, an interesting feature of Euclid's proof of IX. 15 is its reliance on what seem to be

 arithmetic versions of II.3 and II.4 (Heath 1956 [1908]), Vol. 2,404-405). Campanus, following al-NayrizI,

 included arithmetic versions of propositions of Book II as additions to the same IX. 16.1 discuss this point

 in greater detail in [LC2],

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 662 L. Corry

 operational rendering of the Euclidean proofs in Book II. Heron's approach was, as

 already stressed, operational and yet fully geometric. But it lent itself quite easily to

 a direct translation into arithmetic, in a way that Euclid's proof did not. Al-NayrTzT

 may have as well been influenced by some other, unmentioned texts that circulated in

 late antiquity or in the Islam context. Thus, for instance, in an encyclopedic Arabic

 text published around 960 by the Ikhwân al-Safâ' fraternity, the Rasâ'il (or epistles),

 we find the same kinds of numerical examples (Goldstein 1965, 154-157). The text

 in this work betrays the clear influence of Nicomachus' Introduction to Arithmetic,

 written in the first century AD, and it also formulates the propositions of Book II

 directly as propositions about numbers, rather than lines. However, since there are

 no proofs at all in this text, we cannot say in more precise terms what the writer of

 the text had in mind concerning the nature of numbers and their relation to geometry.

 This text, moreover, was probably unknown to the medieval mathematicians discussed
 below.

 The important point, however, which can be asserted with certainty, is that al-Nay rïzï

 reached few, but influential medieval readers, and in important cases his examples and

 additions were cited in texts written by those readers. Indeed, al-NaynzT's text was

 translated into Latin by Gerard of Cremona (c. 1114-1187), who used the Latinized
 version of the name, Anaritius (Lo Bello 2003a).16 This Latin version does not seem

 to have been widely read in medieval Latin Europe, but we know that it was seriously

 studied by at least two important scholars: Roger Bacon (c. 1214-1294) and Albertus

 Magnus (c. 1206-1280) (Hogendijk 2005). Influenced by the text, Albertus wrote his

 own commentary of the Elements, comprising a paraphrase of Books I-IV as well as

 philosophical discussions (Lo Bello 2003b; Tummers 1980). These two authors, who

 played an important role in the spread of Greek and Arabic science in Western Europe,

 were certainly enthusiastic about mathematics, and Gerard's translation of al-Nayrïzï

 was an important source for their knowledge of geometry. But this knowledge of

 geometry was somewhat limited, and it can be said that both of them failed to appreciate

 the importance of al-Nayrîzï's text. And yet, al-Nayrïzï's original text became indeed
 influential, at least via Jordanus Nemorarius and Campanus de Novara, as we shall
 see below.

 These are a very few examples from among a much broader mathematical literature

 of the culture of Islam. They make it clear, however, that the ways in which the ideas
 of Book II were handled at the time created and helped disseminate an image of

 Book II in which the original, purely geometric character intended by Euclid had

 already been already broadened. This is not to say that the propositions of Book

 II lost their clearly geometric anchoring. Yet as they began to be incorporated in

 texts that suggested, either implicitly or implicitly, that they are about properties of

 numbers, at least to the same extent that they are of lines, the way was opened to

 additional, far-reaching changes, including possible "algebraic" interpretations. One

 may imagine that mathematicians of later times, say in the Renaissance, who learnt

 their Euclid from texts influenced by Islamic mathematics while being also trained

 in algebraic methods, might naturally tend to read the propositions of Book II as

 16 One interesting point of his Latin version is that in Al-Nayrfzt's additions to IX. 16, products of numbers

 are called "areas" (superficielles).

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 embodying essentially algebraic ideas. In the mathematical culture of the Latin Middle

 Ages, we still find a more fluid and less consolidated mixture of ideas of various kinds

 around Book II. An analysis of the ways in which its propositions were understood is

 very challenging and rewarding. The remainder of this article is devoted to such an

 A view from Book II 663

 analysis.

 4 Book II in the early Latin medieval translations of the Elements

 Euclid's Elements enjoyed a prominent position in the intellectual world of the Latin

 West. Within the history of the transmission of the Greek corpus, "no work—be it math

 ematical, astronomical, philosophical, or medical, no matter—had anywhere near the
 [same] number of Medieval versions" (Murdoch 2003, 370). "Versions", to be sure,

 is the right term to be used in this context, since a large number of variants of the

 Elements circulated in Europe that deviated in various degrees from what was con

 sidered the "faithful" translation. Moreover, many other contemporary mathematical

 treatises incorporated portions, sometimes even relatively lengthy portions, or results,

 of the Euclidean text. Thus, the story of the reception of the Elements in the Latin

 West is a very complex one, which has been thoroughly studied by scholars and which

 continues to offer a fruitful field of historical research to this day.

 It is generally accepted that prior to the twelfth century, only fragments of Euclid's

 text circulated in Latin Europe. The best known of these were attributed to a transla

 tion from the Greek by the late Roman philosopher Boethius (ca. 480-524). They

 circulated in relatively wide European circles, beginning in the ninth century, as
 part of a compilation usually known in the scholarship as Geometria I, and then

 in the eleventh century as part of a second compilation known as Geometria II.

 Only fragments of the original Boethian translation have been preserved, but it is

 known beyond doubt that it contained at least parts of Books I-V. The translations,

 at any rate, were far from unproblematic, and the texts did not contain proofs. Most

 likely, the significance of Euclid's contribution was not really appreciated at this time
 (Folkerts 1981).

 During the incipient intellectual revival associated with the Carolingian empire and

 in the centuries that followed, Boethius' treatises and his idea of the Latin quadrivium

 played a prominent role. The mediation of figures such as Cassiodorus (ca. 485-ca.

 585) and Isidore de Seville (ca. 560-636) was of crucial importance as well. What is

 of special interest for us here is that within the quadrivial image of the mathematical

 sciences, it was arithmetic, rather than geometry, that had absolute primacy in terms of

 disciplinary importance (Guillaumin 2012). In "Geometry II," for instance, Boethius

 described the knowledge of numbers as "the high point of all philosophy" (Folkerts

 1970,138). Cassiodorus, in turn, saw arithmetic as the "origin and source" of the other

 mathematical sciences, which "depend for their being and existence" on arithmetic

 (Eastwood 2007, 192). This theoretical primacy, moreover, was further enhanced by

 the contemporary incipient interest in the practical aspects of arithmetic in day-to-day
 life.

 In the early twelfth century, an unprecedented amount of Greek treatises gradu

 ally became available in Latin, many of them via Arabic translations. Their impact

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 664 L. Corry

 brought about significant changes in the world of learning at large, in its contents

 and in its institutions. This is the time when existing cathedral schools developed into

 universities at Bologna, Paris, and Oxford, and when new universities were created at

 Cambridge and Padua. While perhaps their overall centrality receded, the quadrivial

 arts continued to be taught at these new universities, side by side with the new sub

 jects and texts introduced into the curriculum (Kibre 1981). The disciplinary primacy

 accorded to arithmetic over geometry within the mathematical sciences, to be sure,

 remained unchanged.

 Translations to Latin from Arabic or Hebrew original works aroused no less enthu

 siasm than those of Greek texts. But whenever their texts were available, Greek authors

 were invariably seen as the main authorities and were considered to be more reliable

 than their Islamic counterparts. The latter were more often than not used as support

 or commentary with respect to questions of correct or false attribution to works of

 the ancient Greeks. In the words of Hpyrup (1998, 320): "Arabic texts, even when

 translations from the Greek, were treated as objects to be used, and not always very

 formally. Greek texts, on the other hand, were sacred objects and handled as such;

 they were normally translated de verbo ad verbum (so closely indeed that both the

 number of words and their order were often preserved ...)."

 Among the earliest translations of the Elements from Arabic, historians usually

 count those of Hermann of Carinthia (c. 1100-c. 1160) and of Gerard of Cremona

 (already mentioned above in relation to al-NayrlzT). These translations, however, were

 not frequently read and copied. According to the currently accepted scholarship,17 the

 texts that provided the basis for the main corpus of manuscripts that spread throughout

 Western Europe over the twelfth and thirteenth century were produced by Adelard of

 Bath (fl. 1116-1142), by Robert of Chester (fl. c. 1150), and, somewhat later, by

 Campanus de Novara (1220-1296). Robert's text is not a direct translation from the

 Arabic but rather a compilation of different texts, among them the translations of

 Hermann and Adelard. Campanus's text was the one that in 1482 appeared as the first

 printed version of the Elements and which became the standard source of reference

 for the Latin world until the sixteenth century when new versions were printed, based
 on direct translations from the Greek.18

 The issues that have attracted the attention of historians investigating the Euclidean

 tradition in the Latin Middle Ages must be understood against this background. A

 main such issue concerns the ways in which the Adelard-Robert versions and the

 Campanus version of the Elements (and their derivatives) differ from Euclid's original.

 Thus, unlike in Euclid's original, one often finds in these texts a careful labeling of the

 various sections of the proof (exemplum, dispositio, ratiocinatio, conclusio, exempli

 gratia, rationis causa, etc.), direct references to earlier propositions on which a proof

 is based, and hints about other propositions which are directly related to the one

 17 The introduction to (Busard 2005) contains a clear and well-organized summary of the rich and scholarly

 impressive literature that has dealt over the last thirty years with the issue of the Latin versions of the
 Elements. The reader may also consult the following: (Brentjes 1997/1998, 2001a); (Busard 1983, 1984,
 1996a); (Busard and Folkerts 1992); (Folkerts 2006—Section 111); (Murdoch 1968, 1971).

 18 Murdoch (1966) called attention to a very accurate twelfth-century translation of the Elements by an

 anonymous translator who also translated Ptolemy's Almagest from the Greek. However, there is no evidence

 of any substantial use of this translation. See also (Busard 1987).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 665

 considered. On the other hand, rather than explicit proofs many texts provide only

 hints to the main ideas on which the arguments are based. Differences in wording and

 in the level of detail created the impression, shared by many at the time, that Euclid

 was author only of the definitions, postulates, axioms and enunciations, whereas the

 proofs were considered to be just commentaries provided by translators or compilers
 (Busard and Folkerts 1992, 16).

 Murdoch (1971, 2003, pp. 372 ff.) has stressed three main concerns that were

 prevalent in the medieval versions of the Elements: didactic considerations, clarifi
 cation of the logical structure of the entire treatise, and the relation of the math
 ematical contents to more general philosophical questions and conceptions. Two
 topics that received special attention in this regard were incommensurable magni

 tudes and the nature of the continuum (Murdoch 1968, 90-93). Accordingly, the

 existing scholarship has dealt mainly with the ways in which the Latin medieval

 tradition handled the theory of ratios and proportions, and particularly in relation with

 Book X (see, e.g., Rommevaux 2008). The relevance of these topics to Book II and

 to the questions discussed in this article, in turn, has typically received much less
 attention.

 Of particular importance for our discussion here is the fact that the rigid separation

 between the realms of number and of continuous magnitudes consistently preserved

 in the Greek original was highly unsatisfactory for medieval mathematicians. This is

 interestingly manifest throughout the texts of the various Euclidean versions. Thus,

 for instance, while in his arithmetical books, VII-IX, Euclid strictly refrained from

 using the Eudoxian theory of proportions of Book V, we find instances of its use in

 the Latin versions, together with interesting comments related to them. We also find

 proofs of propositions about continuous magnitudes based on the use of particular

 numerical examples, for instance in Books V and X. We have already seen a similar

 use of numerical examples in the text of al-NayrlzT, but in the medieval versions,

 we also find arithmetic ideas used in the proof. Moreover, in some Latin versions of
 the Elements, the only argument given was that of a numerical example. Likewise,

 we can also find examples of geometric arguments and concepts being used when
 discussing some propositions in the arithmetical books (for details, see Murdoch 1968,
 86-90).

 And yet, in spite of the importance accorded to arithmetic in the medieval mathemat

 ical landscape, and the other kinds of differences with the Greek original mentioned

 above, most proofs of Book II found in the Latin versions remained very close to the

 original Euclidean ones, or at least to their Heronian variants. It is fair to say that in

 general, no arithmetic or algebraic ideas were introduced at the core of the proofs of

 Book II and that the purely geometric character of the propositions was essentially

 preserved (the Campanus version presents a very interesting turn in this regard, but I

 discuss his case separately).

 We can illustrate the situation by looking at how II.5 appears in the various texts

 in the Adelard-Robert tradition. First we can look at the so-called Adelard I ver

 sion, which is most likely the first complete translation from an Arabic version of

 the Elements. We find there exactly the same geometric proof as in Euclid, based

 on the use of the gnomon (Busard 1983, 75-76). Also the proof of II.5 appearing in

 the so-called Adelard II version—nowadays considered to be a compilation attributed

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 666 L. Corry

 to Robert of Chester—remains close to the purely geometric spirit of the Greek origi

 nal, albeit without repeating all the details found in Euclid. Many extant manuscripts

 of this version exist, and its enunciations were used by many other Latin commen

 tators or editors, including Campanus. Many of the proofs are typical examples of

 providing no more than general indications about the argument, and in some of the

 manuscripts there are only diagrams. For II.5, the guidelines refer to the following

 figure and stipulate the following steps (Busard and Folkerts 1992, 132):19

 Figure 19

 A square is constructed on the middle of the whole line. Through the point of the

 unequal section draw a line segment parallel to the side of the square, and then a

 diagonal in the square. Where these two lines intersect draw another parallel line

 [and use it to complete a rectangle]. Two equal complements are obtained, and

 [the rectangle] contained by the two unequal portions equals the whole gnomon.

 Hence, the residue between the two figures is manifestly the square [built on the

 segment between the two cuts].

 The general indications for proofs appearing in the Robert version were subse

 quently elaborated in various ways. Thus, for instance, in a thirteenth-century adap

 tation of the text, the proofs of Book II preserved their essentially geometric spirit,

 but were elaborated along the cut-and-paste approach introduced in Heron's proofs
 [see the proof of II.5 in (Busard 1996a, 102-103)]. The geometric proof based on

 the gnomon also appears in the translations of Hermann of Carinthia (Busard 1968,

 44-45), Gerard of Cremona (Busard 1984 43-44), and in the translation made directly

 from the Greek (Busard 1987, 58-59).

 And yet, in spite of this, some alternative to the proofs of Book II, and specifically,

 some arithmetically oriented proofs did circulate in the Medieval Latin world. We find

 them in books other than the Elements, or, interestingly, in the case of Campanus,

 as part of additions and comments to the three arithmetic books of the Elements.

 The next (and last) section of the article is devoted to these ideas, as they appear in

 the works of medieval scholars such as Abraham Bar Hiyya, Leonardo Fibonacci,

 Jordanus Nemorarius, Campanus, Gersonides and Barlaam.

 19

 Unless otherwise stated, translations from Latin, Hebrew, or German are mine.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 667

 5 Book II in other medieval texts

 5.1 Abraham Bar-Hiyya

 I start this survey with Abraham bar Hiyya ha-Nasi (ca. 1065-1145), also known
 as Savasorda. He was a Jewish sage born in Barcelona, and probably educated in

 Zaragoza. Little is known of his life, but the importance of his work for the transmission

 of Arabic science to the Jews in Spain and to the Christian Latin West in general

 is widely acknowledged. He wrote Hebrew treatises in various fields of knowledge,

 such as philosophy, astronomy and astrology. His treatise, Hibbûr ha-meshïhah we-ha

 tishboret (JVYQlWim nrPBtan ΎΙΤΠ), a title often translated as "Treatise on Measurement

 and Calculation," was a book on practical geometry (Lévy 2001,37-42; Sarfatti 1968,

 64-128). A Latin version by Plato of Tivoli appeared in 1145 under the title of Liber

 Embadorum. This Latin text introduced for the first time in Europe the techniques of

 Islamic algebra for solving quadratic equations, thus antedating Gerard de Cremona's

 Latin translation of al-Khwârizml's Algebra. The Liber Embadorum was widely read

 and it is known to have directly influenced Leonardo Fibonacci (Clagett 1978, 1265;
 Curtze 1902, 5-7; Millâs-Vallicrosa 1931).

 Bar Hiyya is the earliest representative of a tradition involving Jewish sages who

 assimilated important parts of the Greco-Islamic scientific culture and published their

 own works in Hebrew, mainly between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries. Such

 works were intended as a vehicle for transmitting Arabic science to Jewish audiences

 not conversant with the Arabic language. They often comprised compilations and

 systematic presentations of previous work, but in many cases they also presented

 original ideas (Lévy 1997a,b,c). Characteristic of many of these texts is the noticeable

 effort made by the authors to stress their nature as practical treatises that draw their

 contents from the "wisdom of the nations" (Q"1Jn ΠΜΠ) but which, at the same time,

 provide useful tools in the service of the teachings of the Jewish law. In the introduction

 to Bar Hiyya's Hibbur, for one, he explicitly stressed as a main motivation, what he

 saw as the existing incompetence typical of many sages of his generation when it

 came to implementing the Jewish laws of inheritance that involved calculations of

 areas and division of patrimonies (Guttmann 1912-1913, 3^1). One should keep in

 mind, however, that in many Hebrew texts of the time we find this kind of formulation

 used as a rhetorical device to justify the fact that a learned Jew is devoting his precious

 time and efforts away from the study of the Bible.

 As Tony Lévy has stressed, we do not currently posses an accepted critical version

 of the Hebrew text of the Hibbûr. Nor has the issue of Bar-Hiyya's sources been duly

 clarified. Still, it is remarkable that neither the term "algebra" nor the standard technical

 vocabulary normally used in the Islamic algebraic tradition appears in his text. On the

 other hand, the text does include much of the techniques for solving problems involv

 ing squares of the unknown and the kind of geometric justification that was standard

 since the time of al-Khwàrizmî. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that Bar-Hiyya

 knew well the relevant literature, but that he wanted to keep the technical vocabulary

 to a minimum so as to make his text easier for his intended readership to comprehend

 (Lévy 2001, 51-52). For the purposes of the present article, it seems sufficient to put

 aside the textual difficulties that future scholarly work will have to further elucidate

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 668 L. Corry

 (Lévy 2001, 45—47), and to refer, without further comments, to the Hebrew text pub

 lished in 1912-1913 in Berlin by Guttmann (1872-1942).20

 Bar-Hiyya's book has four main parts. In the first one, we find a collection of

 geometric definitions and some elementary propositions relating to them. These are

 intended as providing the tools for what will be done in the following parts of the

 book. Most of the results presented in this section paraphrase results drawn from

 the Elements, including Book II, as we shall see right below. In the second part of

 the Hibbûr, Bar Hiyya discussed questions related to measurements of lands, buildings,

 and fields having all kinds of shapes: quadrilaterals, triangles, circles, and some more

 complicated ones. This is, indeed, the most important part of the book. The third part

 deals with the division, into elementary figures, of those considered in the previous

 section. Finally, in the fourth part, Bar Hiyya extended some of the previously obtained

 results into volumes: prisms, cylinders, spheres, etc.

 Given the main focus of interest of the book as developed in its second part, it

 is not at all surprising that Bar Hiyya mixed in a very conscious and purposeful

 way ideas taken from both geometry (HSPWn ΓΙΠ3Π) and arithmetic (Τ"3ΒΠ ΠΏ3Π). Thus,

 while the first twenty definitions introduce basic geometric concepts, going from the

 point to the line (both of them following the Euclidean definition), and to the areas

 of various types of polygons, the following ones define the basic arithmetic concepts.

 The latter essentially repeat those of Euclid in the introduction to Book VII. This
 is the case, for instance, with BH-21,21 where unit and number are defined: "The

 unit is that thing whereby each thing in the world is called - one. And number is a

 collection of a multitude of units." But in some other cases, we also find minor, thought

 interesting differences that stress Bar Hiyya's basic intention to apply these concepts

 in a framework that mixes the geometric with the arithmetic. Thus, while Euclid had

 used term such as "plane numbers," "square numbers," or "cube numbers," in a rather

 metaphorical sense and while he never represented such numbers in his propositions

 other than as straight lines, Bar Hiyya, to the contrary, added to the corresponding

 definitions, a small diagram in the spirit of the Pythagorean figurate numbers. In this

 way, he prepared the ground for organically incorporating arithmetic into geometry.

 Thus, for instance, in the following two examples:

 BH-22: And the number that is multiplied by another number is the number that

 is added to itself as many times as there are units in the second number in which it

 is multiplied, like two times three or two times ten and it is called a plane number

 and this is its shape ::: and the number obtained by this addition is called a plane
 number.

 BH-23: And a square number is a number obtained by adding a number to itself

 as many times as there are units in it, and the first number is called the root of

 the square (ΙΏΠδΠ ΎΟ). For example the number nine is called a square number

 20 The Hebrew printed version of Bar Hiyya's text is accompanied by an introduction in Hebrew written

 by Guttmann, and it contains further comments, also in Hebrew, written by Zvi Hirsch Yaffe (1853-1927).
 The Guttmann edition also served as the basis for a translation of the text to Catalan (Millâs-Vallicrosa

 21 The paragraphs are numerated in the edition I am using here. 1 add the initials BH, for ease of reference.

 1931).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 669

 because it is obtained from adding three to itself three times, and the number three

 is called the root of the square and this is its shape ::: ,22

 Bar Hiyya also defined a cubic number pplVH ~IDDQ), but not merely in a figurative

 manner, as one whose units can be arranged as a cube. Rather he defined it as "a body"

 (φΛ) of equal length, breadth, and height.

 After this arithmetic preliminaries, Bar Hiyya moved without any clear separation,

 to work out several propositions which provide the main tools underlying the solutions

 for the problems discussed in the second section and in which arithmetic and geometric

 statements and arguments are freely mixed together. The connecting link is provided

 by a general comment, to the effect that the square of a segment is that figure built when

 another segment of the same length is set perpendicular to the given one and a square

 is thus built with four equal sides, while a rectangle is similarly built on two different

 segments. From here on, it is unproblematic to speak about geometric construction

 while associating numbers to the lengths of the segments. And this is indeed what

 Bar Hiyya did when presenting propositions II.4-II.10 (but not including II.7), all of

 which deal with ways of dividing a segment into two parts and constructing squares or

 rectangles on the parts obtained (BH.27-BH.32). It is worth examining in some detail

 how he formulated and proved these propositions, while paying special attention to

 the unique combination of arithmetic and geometric ideas that he adopted.

 Consider, for instance, BH-27, which corresponds to Euclid's II.4. Bar Hiyya speaks

 here about a line that is divided at an arbitrary point and about the squares that are built

 on the resulting segments. But to this purely geometric formulation he added: "and I

 give you an example with numbers" (T^an p fPQ7 ΠΤ31*7 7Π73 'UNI), which in this case

 is a line of length 12 divided into two segments of length 7 and 5. We can look more

 closely at the specific roles that Bar Hiyya assigned to geometry and to arithmetic

 in his presentation, by examining in closer detail what he does in the proposition

 corresponding to II.9 (BH-31). Let us first look at the proof as it appears in the text
 and then I will comment on it.

 The proposition is formulated in the standard Euclidean way and it
 is also exemplified by a line of length 12 which is divided at its
 midpoint and at another point into segments of lengths 7 and 5.23
 Two squares taken together, one of side 7 and one of side 5, make
 74. And on the other hand duplicating the square with side 6 and the
 square with side 1 (1 being the difference between the half, 6, and
 the long segment, 7) also makes 74. Having introduced this numerical
 example, Bar Hiyya moved to the proof, which interestingly differs
 from Euclid's, which-as seen above—relies in a non-trivial way on the
 Pythagorean theorem. Bar Hiyya's own wording is quite contrived but
 it is worth being presented here (with some simplification) . Below I
 will streamline his argument with the help of diagrams, which will
 make it easier for the reader to capture the main idea.

 22 Read from the point of view of current Hebrew usage, Bar Hiyya's terminology may give rise to some

 confusion, as was pointed out in (Sarfatti 1968, 82). I am following here Sarfatti's interpretation (e.g.,
 multiplication for "TUB", addition for "boo", root for "TO"). For a brief account of the differences between

 ancient and modern Hebrew mathematical terminology, see (Corry and Schappacher 2010,449-457).

 23 Actually, the text in Guttmann ( 1912-1913), p. 15, says: "Π byn by" (on 4 and on 5). But this seems to

 be a typo.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 670 L. Corry

 Take the line AB, of length 12, and divide it in its half at E, and
 also into two different segments, of length 7 and 5, at I.

 B IE
 Β IE

 G
 G

 H
 H

 M N
 Μ Ν

 K
 Κ

 CL D
 C

 Figure 20

 Construct AICD being 7 on 7, and BIGF being 5 on 5. Taken together,
 says Bar Hiyya, these two squares equal the sum of AEMK and EMJB
 (which is the same as taking twice the square on the half, that is
 twice 6 on 6), together with HNLC (which is twice the square of the
 difference, that is 1 on 2) . And why this is so? Because—tells us Bar
 Hiyya—FGHJ is placed under BIGF and on the same line with the square
 of half the segment, AEMK.24 And we count it in this way together with
 square AICD. Thus, both FGHJ and NKDL are like 5 on 1. And the reason
 for this is that AKD equals ΑΕΙ and both are 7 and on the other hand
 AFC equals AE which is 6, and hence what is left is KD which equals
 IE which is 1. But also DLC equals ΑΕΙ and if one subtracts CL which
 is 2, then one is left with LD which is 5. Hence NKDL is 1 on 5 and

 the same is true for FGHJ because MJ equals EIB which is 6, and the
 line BF equals BT and we are left with FJ and IE which are 1, and the
 length of JH equals that of BT. Here ends Bar Hiyya's proof.

 Now, just from this more or less literal transcription of the proof, we can already

 learn much about Bar Hiyya's overall approach. In the first place, in spite of his insis

 tence in repeating the numerical values of the segments at various places along the

 proof, these values play no role whatsoever in the argument and they are never arith

 metically manipulated in order to get any result. Rather, they only accompany the

 steps of an argument that fully relies on completing a geometric construction and on

 learning from looking at this construction. Indeed, the geometric construction is quite

 simple and what is said about it does not go beyond basic "cut and paste" considera

 tions. But in addition, since Bar Hiyya's wording for this particular proposition is so

 contrived (this is much less the case for other propositions in this section), one may

 even speculate that without introducing here the numerical values of the lengths Bar

 24 (Guttmann 1912-1913, 15) [In the quotation, I have replaced the Hebrew letters
 appearing in the original diagram with the letters I am using here in my diagram]:
 Nini AEMK τπνπ ipn n'ttnn yano oy Nam Nim BIGF )opn p9n yann 5y «pnyn FGHJ yanow '»η"

 un rniaa AICD mm 9mn p9n yann oy ronj

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 671

 Hiyya may have had some difficulty in working out the argument even for himself.

 More certainly, he may have thought that his readers would find the argument easier

 to follow in this way, and in any case, in the later sections of the treatise, he would be

 using the result only in its arithmetic version.

 But it is also important to notice that, perhaps because of the didactical character

 of this treatise, Bar Hiyya often relied on the diagrams in a stronger sense. That is,

 in constructing the figures that appear in the diagrams of many of his proofs, he left

 implicit several facts that he nevertheless used as part of the argument. The facts have

 to be inferred from the diagram while following the steps of the proof. Thus, in the

 case we are examining here, the diagram shows—but Bar Hiyya does not say so—that

 AK — BJ = AE, and hence HC equals IE. Also, part of the construction, as we learn

 only from the proof itself, is that HN equals twice IE.

 Keeping these general remarks in mind, we can now reformulate the core of the

 proof by looking at the diagrams and reasoning with them.

 With reference to the diagram, what we are asked to prove is just:

 AICD+ BIGF = 2-Sq(AE) + 2-Sq(JE).

 Bar Hiyya tells us that in his construction "CL is 2", and this means
 that HMN = 2-JE, and hence HNLC = 2· Sq(JE) .Thus, all what remains to
 be shown is that NKDL = FGHJ. And this is true, he says, because the
 long side of both rectangles equals BJ, while their shorter sides
 equal IE. Let us see why this is so, starting with the short sides,
 KD and FJ, and stating the idea in purely geometric terms:

 (g.l) By construction AKD — ΑΕΙ and AK = AE, hence AKD-AK = AEI-AE,

 hence KD = IE

 (g.2) Again by construction JHM = EIB and BF = BI. But BI = FG = JH,

 hence JHM-JH = EIB-BI, hence FJ = IE.

 (g.3) Hence [from (i.l) and ( i. 2 ) ] : KD = F J.

 And now I give the argument for the long sides, HJ and LD, using
 numerical values as Bar Hiyya's did, because in the last step one
 sees that, although there is nothing here but a simple geometric
 situation that holds true independently of the values, explaining it
 with the numerical values really makes it easier to follow:

 ( g. 4 ) By construction HD — BI (and both are 5-this is left implicit

 using the fact that "FGHJ is placed under BIGF") .

 (g.5) DLC — AEI and if one subtracts "CL which is 2", then "one is

 left with LD which is 5."

 "CL is 2" means, of course, that CL was built as twice the difference
 between the longer segment and the half of the given segment, even
 though this was not explicitly stated. But explaining the situation
 in these more abstract terms would make the argument longer, and
 apparently Bar Hiyya was happy with being able to make it shorter and
 easier to follow with the help of the numerical values.

 Notice that the main tool on which the proof relies (and this is true for various other

 proofs as well) is the distributivity of the product (or, more precisely, of rectangle

 formation), which as we know are embodied in II. 1-II.3. Bar Hiyya applied freely this

 property without in any way discussing it or even mentioning in the text.

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 672 L. Corry

 Bar Hiyya completed the first part of his book by discussing (in BH-33 to BH-41 )

 various propositions taken mostly from the Elements,2i and which deal with proper

 ties of circles, triangles, and other figures. And as already stated, part one is actually

 intended as providing tools for solving numerical problems involving an unknown

 quantity. Hence, I complete now this overview of Bar Hiyya's text by showing an exam

 ple of solving a quadratic equation (in BH-49) while using II.5 for justify ing the proce

 dure used. The problem is the following: "if the square is subtracted from four times the

 side the result is three" (pjo ja vnatwi robwn μπ» nrcbw "]T3 ixtzai vnufrx ymx).

 The solution is found by following a simple procedure: half the number
 of sides is 2 whose square is 4. Subtract from this the remainder
 three and you obtain one, whose square is one. Subtract this result
 from half the sides and you are left with one, and this is the side of
 the square, or add the result to half the sides and you get 3 which
 is also the side of the square. The side may be one or it may be 3,
 "because there are two different calculations for this question."26

 As in the Islamic tradition, Bar Hiyya also presented geometric "proofs" for justi

 fying the procedure used in solving the problem. It is worth seeing here some of the

 details of this proof that are highly reminiscent of Thâbit ibn Qurra.

 The proof is better understood by reference to the two figures
 that accompany the text, of which the following is the first one
 (ruiBtrinmittn):

 B G. E A
 1

 LB

 yj

 miu/Nin mran

 D

 C

 Figure 21

 In this figure, AB is taken to be four "amoth" (ΓΠΟΝ) , the "coeffi
 cient" of "sides" in the problem, whereas AC is the "side" of the
 square referred to in the problem. The argument then goes as follows:

 (h.l) Subtract from the parallelogram ACDB a square ACFE; the
 remaining parallelogram EFDB is three amoth, [this is actu
 ally the statement of the problem]

 (h.2) Cut now AB into two equal parts at G; since Ε divides AB into
 two unequal parts, it follows that the parallelogram on ΑΕ,ΕΒ
 together with the square on EG equals the square on AG, [this
 is II.5]

 26 In Sect. 49: "TtNiD ilbNWb IVOUYtn >)\y >D". In the text Bar Hiyya sometimes calls the number by its

 name and sometimes uses the alphabetic characters ...J i3 >N> to indicate them. For the side of the square

 or for the unknown Bar Hiyya uses alternatively 31) and Vbs, even within the same sentence. The text

 has many interesting linguistic aspects that I do not discuss here, starting with the very use of the word
 "thisboreth" (JinivyJi).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 25 These include, in the order in which they appear, versions of: III.35, 1.33, VI.4. 1.37, 1.38, 1.41, 1.35,
 1.36, and VI. 1.

 A view from Book II 673

 (h.3) But we know that the square on AG is 4 [since G cuts AB in its
 middle point], and if we subtract from it the parallelogram
 on AE, EB (namely, EFDB) which is 3, then we are left with 1,
 and this is the value of the square on EG,

 (h.4) Hence EG is one, and, since AG is two, EA is one, and this is

 the side that we are looking for.

 As part of the same proof, Bar Hiyya also indicated how the second
 solution is justified by reference to a second diagram(JVJûTI miMTl):

 G, E

 Figure 22

 The argument is similar to that of the first part, and we need not go
 here into all the details.

 This problem is similar to Abu Kâmil's treatment of "square and numbers equal

 roots of the same square." Also Abu Kàmil justified the procedure for solving this

 case with the help of II.5, and he accompanied his explanations with two diagrams

 similar to those of Bar Hiyya here. Curiously, however, Bar Hiyya presented his

 problem by subtracting the square, thus departing from the practice followed in Islamic

 texts (to state it in modern algebraic terms: Abu Kàmil used the typical formulation,
 x2 + b — ax, whereas Bar Hiyya formulated the problem as: ax — x2 = b). And, as

 did Abu Kàmil, Bar Hiyya indicated two solutions for the problem.

 Bar Hiyya's explicit and implicit references to results originating in Book II provide

 us with an illuminating, direct insight into one specific (and perhaps rather idiosyn

 cratic) way in which a reader with a significant knowledge of Islamic techniques of

 problem solving could read Euclid from an arithmetic and proto-algebraic perspective.

 Bar Hiyya understood the propositions of Book II as both an expression of properties

 of numbers and as the proper way to provide legitimation for algebraic techniques

 of problem solving. But he continued to read these propositions as ultimately based

 on geometric reasoning, even when he thought it convenient, possibly on didactical

 considerations, to accompany with numbers the text where he described this pure geo

 metrical reasoning. Products were seen here as square or rectangle formation, and the

 proofs were based on geometric properties of these figures.

 The readership of Bar Hiyya's Hebrew text, of course, was rather limited, and

 it thus had little direct impact on the wider Latin medieval mathematical culture

 in Europe. Nevertheless, as already indicated, the text also appeared in 1145 in a

 Latin version commonly attributed to Plato of Tivoli which did have an important

 impact, mainly through the work of Fibonacci. As Tony Lévy has indicated, one may

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 conjecture that in preparing the text, Plato worked with some Jewish collaborator,
 possibly (but by no means certainly) Bar-Hiyya himself (Lévy 2001, 53-55). The
 Latin version, at any rate, is not just a mere transcription, and it differs from the
 Hebrew text in various senses (omissions, additions, reformulations, etc.). Of inter

 est here are some differences pertaining to the interplay between geometry and
 arithmetic.27

 674 L. Corry

 Such differences appear, for instance, in the first part of the text. The Latin version

 contains no diagrams at all in this part, contrary to what is the case in the Hebrew

 one, but on the other hand, it follows much more closely the structure and wording of

 Euclid's Book I. Indeed, here as in other parts of the text, results from the Books I-IV

 which are introduced without proof and which are necessary for proving other results,

 are clearly not directly translated from Bar Hiyya. Tony Lévy (2001, 54; note 3) has

 suggested that they were taken from an Arabic version of the Elements, possibly of

 the more ancient ones associated with Hajjaj.

 As an example of the difference between Plato and the original text of Bar Hiyya,

 we can notice that the latter introduced parallel lines (□"TTD.in D'IpTI) quite early

 in the section and that he gave in the same paragraph two different definitions, namely

 as equidistant lines (i.e., as such lines that "the distance between them is constant

 also when they are extended") and as lines that do not intersect if extended infinitely

 (ηΐΌ Γ*1?). In the Latin version, in contrast, the definition appears at the end of the

 preliminary section (Curtze 1902, 15, BH-28), and exactly as in Euclid: These are

 lines that, while laying on the same plane, do not meet with each other when produced

 infinitely (ad infinitum).

 After the preliminary definitions, we find in the Latin version the five Euclidean
 postulates and a list of common notions. None of this appears in the Hebrew text.

 The common notions are not just the five Euclidean ones, but also some additional
 ones, such as "two things which are the double of the same thing are equal to each

 other", and the same for the half, or "a thing is the sum of its parts" and "two lines

 contain no area" (Curtze 1902, 15-17). Another important difference concerns the

 basic definitions of numbers and their properties, which in the Latin version basically

 repeat those appearing at the beginning of Book VII. At the same time, definitions such
 as BH-21, BH-22 of the Hebrew version (see above) are absent from the Latin text.

 In the Latin version, the propositions of Book II are only formulated and not proved,

 "since they were already proved by Euclid" (p. 19). Still, the geometric formulation

 of each proposition is followed by a numerical example. On the other hand, it is

 interesting to notice that in the second part of the treatise, the problems solved with

 the help of the propositions of Book II are essentially a verbatim translation of the

 Hebrew original.

 One can only speculate about the reasons for differences between these two versions,

 and to attribute them to the differences audiences and different purposes against the

 background of which they were conceived. One may also hope for new, critical edition

 of Bar Hiyya's text on the question of the complex relationships between the Hebrew
 and the Latin texts.

 27 Like with the Hebrew text, also here there are some open issues concerning the manuscripts. See (Curtze
 1902,4).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 675

 5.2 Liber Mahameleth

 Liber Mahameleth is a text on commercial arithmetic, presumably written in or near

 Toledo around 1143-1153. Anne-Marie Vlasschaert, who recently published a critical

 edition (Vlasschaert 2012), has suggested that Dominicus Gundisalvi (c. 1110-1181),

 or someone in his school of translators, may have been the author. The text bears

 some relation to an earlier Arabic text likely called Kitab al-mu'amalat ("Book of

 Transactions"). Most likely, however, Liber Mahameleth is not a direct translation

 from the Arabic, but rather a new work written in Latin in the context of the scholarly
 culture of Al-Andalus.

 The author evidently had a good command of Euclid's Elements and of Abu
 Kâmil's Algebra, and he constantly relied on their results within his own proofs.

 Liber Mahameleth can be seen as an attempt to provide a comprehensive synthesis

 of important contributions of these authors, as well as of Nicomachus, al-Khwârizmï,

 and some other classical Greek and Arabic authors. This synthesis, moreover, was

 specifically oriented toward providing a practical compendium of arithmetical tools,

 grounded on a systematically discussed theoretical basis for the basic operations, par

 ticularly those involving fractions. The core of the text deals with applications of these

 operations to problems related to commercial transactions, such as prices, profit shar

 ing, consumption of oil by lamps, of feed by animals or of bread by humans, etc., as

 well as of problems of a more theoretical kind.

 The first ten propositions of Book II of the Elements appear prominently in the pre

 liminary, theoretical section of Liber Mahameleth. Clearly influenced by Abu Kâmil,

 the author certainly went much further than him in positioning these propositions in

 a foundational role for arithmetic, and in explicitly stressing their indispensability for

 any prospective reader of the book. Indeed, the author stated that he was reformulating

 what in Euclid are propositions on "segments", and that he was rephrasing them now

 for "numbers" (p. 25). Still, on closer examination and in spite of this stated intention,

 most of the proofs provided for propositions taken from Book II retain a distinct geo

 metric flavor. This can be seen, for instance, in relation with the proof for II.5 (p.28),

 which essentially repeats Heron's cut-and-paste argument. As we saw, Heron operated

 upon areas of rectangles and squares (i.e., first separating them into components and

 then reassembling), and also here, in Liber Mahameleth, the argument explicitly relies

 on applying distributivity of rectangle formation over addition, such as embodied in

 the corresponding versions for II.2-II.3 (pp. 26-27). Also the accompanying diagram
 is similar to Heron's:

 a I 1 1 1 b
 a\ 1 1 1 b

 g d
 8 a

 Figure 23

 Again as with Heron, we do not find here actual geometric constructions made on

 the segments, but squares and rectangles are indeed implicitly constructed as part of

 the reasoning. In all respects, the proof qualifies as "geometric" in the sense that I

 have been using here, and in none of the steps there is anything like counting units

 comprised by any of the numbers involved.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 676 L. Corry

 What is of special interest in Liber Mahameleth in relation with Book II is that in

 laying down the foundational aspects of arithmetic, the author combined this kind of

 propositions and proofs with others that are purely arithmetic, thus giving rise to an

 original blend of approaches, in which distributivity of the product was assigned a

 pivotal role. Proposition 9 of the preliminary section (pp. 25-26), which is parallel to

 Euclid's II. 1, plays an important role in the presentation. Its proof is worthy of special

 attention, because it is based neither on geometric nor on arithmetic considerations,

 but rather on properties of proportions drawn from Books V and VII. I discuss this in

 greater detail in [LC2],

 It is also pertinent to see how the propositions appearing in the preliminary section

 of Liber Mahameleth are then used to justify procedures for problem solving in the

 main body of the book. Thus, for instance in the following example which uses a
 version of II.6 (pp. 410-411):

 A ladder of unknown length is leaning on a wall, and it is withdrawn from its

 bottom by a distance that, when the descent from the top is subtracted from it,

 the remainder is 4, and if we multiply those two lengths the result is 12. What is

 the length of the ladder?28

 The situation is represented in the following diagram:

 g

 Figure 24

 The proof starts with the data of the problem, namely ad· bg= 12 and
 bg—ad = 4. Now, the length hg is cut from bg, so that hg=ad. Hence,
 bh = 4. But also bg-hg= 12 (since hg—ad) . Finally, the point ζ bisects
 bh (i.e., hz = 2) . Here, we can apply II.6 ("sicut euclides dixit")
 and we obtain: bg-hg+hz2 = zg2 . Thus, clearly, zg — 4, and consequently
 also i>g= 6. Finally, ad= 2.

 This is certainly not an example of an application of the propositions of Book II to a

 "real-life problem," but what really concerns our discussion here is how the author of

 Liber Mahameleth, also in this more applied part of the text, combined the arithmetic

 and geometric ideas discussed in the preliminary section. Very much like the "didac

 tical" approaches followed in the contemporary versions of the Elements we find here

 continual cross-references between the two realms without the author emphasizing the

 possible differences. This creates a somewhat ambiguous but very interesting situation.

 28 A detailed analysis of this problem and its roots in Babylonian mathematics appears in (Sesiano 1987).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 677

 Indeed, notice that in my rendering of the proof above I wrote the products as arith

 metic, not geometric operations. Thus, for instance, I used II.6 as bg-hg + hz2 = zg2,
 rather than as I did with all previous authors, R{bg, hg) + Sq(hz) = Sq(zg). There

 were actually good reasons to choose the geometric rendering. For one thing, the entire

 situation is embodied in a diagram. For another thing, the wording for the product here

 is exactly the same as that used for rectangle formation in the first part of the treatise

 ("Quod igitur fit ex ductu bg in hg ci hz in se equum est ei quod fit ex ductu zg in se").

 Indeed, it is precisely this same wording which allows the use of the theoretical results

 proved in the first part for handling specific problems appearing in the second. Never

 theless, the choice of arithmetic rendering was guided by what seems to have been the

 author's own view, namely that he was dealing in this part with numbers. But the choice

 could have been in either direction, precisely in view of the very elusive and ambiguous

 attitude of the author toward what is geometric and what is arithmetic in his treatment.

 Thus, while the propositions of Book II are incorporated in Liber Mahameleth into an

 arithmetic framework, the essentially geometric conception of the meaning of these

 propositions is still very pervasive both in the first, theoretical part of the treatise, and

 in the second, more practical one. In particular, it is clear that the arithmetic ideas

 developed here do not in any way embody any kind of algebraic implications.

 5.3 Fibonacci

 Leonardo Pisano Fibonacci (c. 1170-c. 1250) is widely considered to be the most
 prominent and emblematic figure in medieval European mathematics. He was well

 acquainted with Greek, Byzantine, and Arabic sources and played a key role in com

 piling and helping disseminate in Western Europe innovative mathematical techniques

 and concepts, particularly the use of the Hindu-Arabic system of numeration and meth

 ods for solving equations. Fibonacci produced several works that reached relatively

 broad audiences and in which he combined theoretical aspects with very practical tools
 for land measurement and commercial calculations (Archibald 1913; Folkerts 2004).

 In fact, he promoted a new kind of scientific genre, the "practicae." These were brief

 works, written in a popular style intended for lay readers, and with a clear emphasis

 on applications (Hughes 2008, xvii-xxxv; Simi 2004).

 It is not completely certain what version of the Elements was available to Fibonacci.

 He may have simultaneously relied on several of the existing translations, including

 the one made directly from Greek (Folkerts 2004, 109-110; Hughes 2008, xix). At

 any rate, there is no doubt that Fibonacci was well acquainted with Euclid's text and

 that he mastered all the techniques taught there. This is certainly the case for Book II,

 whose propositions he cited and used explicitly as the geometric justification for the

 problem-solving techniques that he borrowed from Islamic sources. But it seems that it

 was the Liber Embadorum, Plato of Tivoli's Latin version of Bar Hiyya, which exerted

 the most influence on Fibonacci, particularly as manifest in De Practica Geometrie,

 discussed below. Curiously, Fibonacci did not explicitly mention Bar Hiyya as Plato's

 source, perhaps because he considered the name Savasorda as a title, rather than as a

 patronymic that might help identify the author (Hughes 2008, xxiii-xxiv). Influential

 for him was also the work on algebra of Abu Kâmil, which he may have known either

 directly or indirectly.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 678 L. Corry

 Fibonacci's specific use of the propositions of Book II appears in Liber Abaci and in

 De Practica Geometrie. Liber Abaci appeared first in 1202 and then in a second edition

 in 1228. This is perhaps the best known of Fibonacci's books and the main one through

 which his influence was felt over the next centuries in Europe, particularly in what

 concerns the development of techniques for calculating and operating with square and

 cubic roots, and for solving numerical problems. In Chapter 14, Fibonacci presented

 some formulas or "keys" (claves), of fundamental importance for the techniques taught

 in the book, comprising results "which are clearly demonstrated in Euclid's second

 book." As the author of Liber Embadorum, Fibonacci did not provide geometric for

 mulations for these results, but just numerical examples. Of special importance were

 those propositions corresponding to II.5 and II.6, since to them, Fibonacci explicitly

 wrote, "are reduced all the problems in algebra almuchabala" (Sigler 2002, 490). It

 is surely relevant for us, then, to examine how Fibonacci used these results within a

 book of arithmetical content. But in order to grasp the context properly, it is helpful

 to first add some general comments about the book.

 Geometric considerations appear in the book only after thirteen chapters of detailed

 explanations about the decimal system and its uses for calculating and for solving all

 kinds of numerical problems (but with nothing like symbolic notation or manipu
 lation). Still, it is clear that for Fibonacci such considerations were crucial from a

 theoretical point of view because only the geometric interpretation could provide the

 correct setting for handling surds. Thus, "according to geometry, and not arithmetic,

 the measure of any root of any number is found" (Sigler 2002,491). Fibonacci explic

 itly presented a procedure for finding such root: If you want to find the root of 10, for

 example, you need to find two numbers that multiplied together make 10, say 2 and

 5. You add them together and obtain 7, and "you will order this to be the measure of

 the line." This is done by arranging measured segments as in the following diagram:

 Figure 25

 Here ab represents 2, and be represents 5, and the circle is traced around the midpoint

 d, and eb is the perpendicular drawn on b. This segment is the root of 10, "as is clearly

 shown in geometry."

 Fibonacci's attitude toward the results of Book II was along these lines. He did not

 derive these results geometrically, and he continued to use, in the last chapters of the

 book, a purely arithmetic language wherever the problems or the calculations involved

 allowed for it. But he made it clear, in places where he relied on results of Book II, that

 it is their origin in geometry that makes them useful as a source of legitimacy for the

 arithmetical knowledge presented. The main place where this is done is in a section

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 679

 devoted to the "Solution of Certain Problems According to the Method of Algebra and

 Almuchabala, Namely Proportion and Restoration." The cases treated by Fibonacci

 are parallel to the six cases of al-Khwàrizml. He presented them by combining numer

 ical examples, a formulation of the general rule (in purely rhetorical manner), and a

 geometric justification of the procedure. Where necessary, Fibonacci used the Euclid

 ean results that he had already introduced, but without explicitly invoking them each

 time. I illustrate this with the example of the case "census plus a number will equal a
 number of roots."

 This case can be solved only if the number is equal or less than the
 square of half of the roots, and if this is so, then the solution is
 obtained as follows (Sigler 2002, 557):

 [If] it is equal, then half of the number of roots is had for the roots
 of the census, and if the number which with the census is equal to the
 number of roots is less than the square of half of the number of roots
 then you subtract the number from the square, and that which will
 remain you subtract from half the number of roots; and if that which
 will remain will not be the root of the sought census, then you add
 that which you subtracted to the number from which you subtracted,
 and you will have the sought census.
 In the numerical example Fibonacci considered the question "the cen
 sus plus 40 be equal to 14 roots". This is of course, the same case
 we met in Bar Hiyya's book, but formulated without using subtraction
 and of course using different numerical values. This case leads, as
 we know, to two possible solutions (by subtracting or adding the said
 square root), namely either 4 or 10. Fibonacci implied that for a
 given problem only one of these values will be the solution sought
 (the problems come later). What interests us here is, of course, how
 this procedure is justified with the help of II.5, and this is seen
 by referring to the figure that accompanies the text, which is the
 following:

 Figure 26

 Schematically, the steps of the argument are the following:

 (1.1) Take ab to be 14, and bisect ab at g. Also the point d cuts
 ab, and we build a square dz, which is the census referred to
 in the problem.

 (1.2) The segment zi is traced equal in length to ab. Since zb is
 "the root of the census dz"' and since ab is 14, hence az, the
 entire area, is 14 roots of the census, and hence the area ae
 is 40, as stipulated in the problem.

 (1.3) Now ae is ad times de, or, ad times db [remember, dz is a
 square]. It is here that II.5 can be applied: ae = R(ad,db) +
 Sq(gd) = Sq(gb) .

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 680 L. Corry

 (i.4) But gb is 7, as it is half of ab, and its square is 49. Hence,
 as ae is 40, it follows that the square on gd is 9, gd is 3,
 and db is 4, and this is the root of the sought census.
 A slight variation in the argument and in the figure leads to the
 second solution, 10. This proof is essentially the one already seen
 in Bar Hiyya's text.

 Notice that I used here the notation R(,) and Sq( ), only in step (i.3). This seems to

 me to reflect the way Fibonacci conceived the argument, namely an argument basically

 on numbers, which at a certain points invokes a geometric result taken from Book II,
 in order to reach the correct solution.

 Again, to put things in the right context, it must be stressed that the section that

 presents the six cases of solving quadratic equations (and where the above discussion

 appears) is a relatively brief one. But the techniques introduced in this section are

 subsequently used in the remaining chapters of the book, where Fibonacci discussed

 a long series of specific arithmetic problems and showed how to solve them using

 the techniques previously taught. Thus, we see how in Liber Abaci, a book which is

 devoted to presenting a broad panorama of arithmetic and its applications, Book II is

 used as a source of certain, geometric knowledge that is still needed for providing a

 sound justification of the methods presented.

 The second book of Fibonacci that interests us here is De Practica Geometriae,

 composed in 1220 or 1221, between the two editions of the Liber Abaci. In many

 respects the treatment of square and cubic roots, the references to Book II, and the

 possible use of its propositions for solving problems involving squares of unknowns

 are all quite similar to those of the Liber Abaci. But one important difference between
 the two books is found in an entire section of the Practica where Fibonacci cited

 twelve propositions from Euclid's Elements, the first nine of them being versions of

 propositions in Book II (II.8 is absent). He also provided proofs for some of these

 propositions which differ interestingly from Euclid's or Heron's. It is of interest for

 us here to see the details of at least one of these proofs, and I will focus on II.9.29

 Proposition PG-38 corresponds to II.9 and the accompanying diagram
 is the following (Hughes 2008, 30):

 S b a d
 8.

 Figure 27

 The line gd is divided into equal parts at point a and into unequal
 parts at point b, and the proposition states that the squares on gb
 and on bd are twice the two squares on da and on ab. The proof goes
 as follows:

 Since line ag was bisected at point b, the two squares on lines bg
 and ba with twice the product of ab by bg equal the square on line
 ga, that is, the square on line ad. Now the square on line ba with
 just one product of ba by bg equals ba by ag. Whence the square bg
 with the product of ba by ag and with that of ba by bg equals the
 square on line ad. Let the square on line ba be commonly adjoined.

 29 It would also be of particular interest to compare Fibonacci's proof of 11.5 with all the others discussed

 here, but in consideration with the length of this article 1 will focus on II.9 alone.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 681

 Then the two squares gb and ba with the products of ba by ga and ba
 by bg are equal to the squares on lines ad and ab. But the square on
 line ba with the product of ab by bg is as the product of ba by ag.
 Therefore the square gb with twice the product of ba by ga is equal to
 the two squared lines da and ab. When the square on line da with the
 square on line ab exceeds the square on line gb by twice the product
 of line ba by ga; that is, ba by ad. Likewise, because line bd was
 bisected at point a, the squares on lines da and ab with twice the
 product of ba by ad equal the tetragon or square on line bd. Therefore
 tetragon bd exceeds tetragons da and ab by twice the product of ba by
 ad. Therefore, by as much as tetragons da and ab exceed the tetragon
 bg, by so much are they exceeded by tetragon bd. Whence tetragons
 gb and bd are twice the squares da and ab.

 Interpreting the steps of the proof (particularly the last one)
 directly from the text is far from evident, so I render it schemati
 cally. What we get is the following:

 ( j . 1 ) Since ga = gb + ba and ga = ad: Sq (ad) = Sq ( ga) = Sq ( gb) + SQ (ha) +

 2 · R (gb,ba)

 (j.2) But, by construction, R(ga,ba) = Sq(ha) + R(gb,ba)
 (j.3) Hence Sq(ad) = Sq(gb) + R(ga,ba) + R(gb,ba)
 (j.4) Now, Sq(ad) +Sq(ba) =Sq(gb) +R(ga,ba) +R(gb,ba) +Sq(ba)
 (j.5) Hence [by (j.2)], Sq ( ad) + Sq (ba) = Sq (gb) + 2 · R ( ga, ba)
 (j.6) Or, equivalently : Sq ( ad) + Sq (ba) = Sq (gb) + 2 ■ R (ad, ba)
 (j.7) Now, since bd = ba + ad: Sq(bd) = Sq (ad) +SQ(ba) +2'R(ad,ba)
 (j.8) Hence [from (j.6) and (j.7)]: Sq(bd) +Sq(gb) =2·[Sq(ad) +
 Sq(ba)] □

 The conclusion in (j.8) is not transparent, and interpreting it with
 the help of diagrams makes it easier. This can be done as follows:

 Steps (j.l) - (j.3):
 Steps (j.l) ~ (j-3):

 Step (j.4):

 b

 +

 MEBl

 ij Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 682

 Steps (j.5)-(j.6):
 Steps (j.5)-G-6):

 Step (j.7):
 Step (j.7):

 Finally, step (j.8), combining (j.6) and (j.7):
 Finally, step (j.8), combining (j.6) and (j.7):

 i,
 %

 +
 +

 Figure 28

 If these diagrams do not really clarify how (j.8) actually follows
 from (j.6) and (j.7), we can further try to explain this argument
 by operating, in a proto-algebraic manner, with the various fig
 ures involved. Indeed, what Fibonacci says is that: "by as much as
 tetragons da and ab exceed the tetragon bg, by so much are they

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 683

 exceeded by tetragon bd. Whence tetragons gb and bd are twice the
 squares da and ab". Schematically, this is:

 Sq (ad) + Sg (ba) = Sq (gb) + 2 · R (ad, ba) Sq (bd) = Sq (ad) + SQ (ba) + 2 ■ R (ad, ba)

 And if we now subtract term by term the second identity from the
 first, we obtain

 [Sq (ad) + Sq (ba)] - Sq (bd) = Sq (gb) - [Sq (ad) + Sq (ba)].

 Hence:

 as requested.

 2· [Sq (ad) + Sq(ba)] = Sq(gjb) + Sq (bd)

 What has actually Fibonacci done here? As in the Liber Abaci, Fibonacci is build

 ing the legitimacy of his arithmetical techniques by reliance upon geometric results,

 and by stressing the geometric character of the underlying arguments. But rather than

 presenting the standard Euclidean proofs for those results taken from Book II, he has

 preferred to introduce his own, new kinds of arguments. The latter lack the trans

 parency and simplicity characteristic of the Euclidean original, and they are also less

 straightforward than Heron's, whose operational approach Fibonacci essentially fol

 lows. But the underlying line of thought is a rather innovative and original one. Indeed,

 Fibonacci has tried to incorporate into his geometric proofs techniques, or at least pat

 terns of thought, derived from the "algebra almuchabala" that he had come to master

 so well. This is most clearly evident in step (j.8) above, and the way it was derived

 from (j.6) to (j.7), as just explained. The kind of "balancing of an equation" that helps

 understand the derivation is indeed the kind of "balance and compensation" technique

 introduced in Islamic mathematics to reduce any given problem to the standard, known

 ones. In this case, Fibonacci did not have an equation in the sense of an expression

 with abstract symbols that could be operated upon, but he did have a situation simi

 lar to that found in the texts of Islam algebra, which rhetorically expressed relations

 between numbers, unknown quantities, and their squares, and he used the techniques

 of "algebra almuchabala" to simplify these expressions. Notice, moreover, that also

 some other steps followed in the two proofs described above seem more easily under

 stood from this perspective. Thus for instance, (j.4)—(j.5) find a more natural place in

 the arguments once we have conceded that Fibonacci followed techniques of "algebra

 almuchabala" as part of his derivations.

 It should be noticed that also the distributivity afforded by II. 1 (or its direct deriv

 atives, such as H.2-H.3) is crucial for all the arguments presented in De Practica

 Geometriae. I discuss this point in some detail in [LC2],

 This survey of the ideas of Book II as they appear in the works of Fibonacci affords a

 further, interesting perspective on the rather original and divergent ways in which those

 ideas could be handled in medieval mathematical treatises. Basically, Fibonacci con

 tinued to see in geometry a source of certainty which could account for situations where

 arithmetic appeared as insufficiently clear. At the same time, however, his way of using

 geometric results on behalf of arithmetic was far from uniform. He either took some of

 the results for granted, or just illustrated them with numerical examples, or introduced

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 new proofs for the Euclidean results in which he tried an innovative, proto-algebraic

 reasoning as part of the argument. This many-sided and rather flexible view of the rela

 tionship between geometry, arithmetic, and algebra certainly was conveyed, at least

 at the implicit level, together with the more concrete results and techniques explicitly

 taught in the treatises to the numerous readers of Fibonacci over the next centuries.

 684 L. Corry

 5.4 Jordanus Nemorarius

 Jordanus Nemorarius is another highly interesting figure in Europe medieval math

 ematics and mechanics. Little is known of his life with certainty, but most likely he

 lived in the early thirteenth century. Since Campanus mentions him in his version of

 the Elements, Nemorarius surely lived before 1260. At the same time, from the con

 tents of his treatises, it is clear that these were written after the various twelfth-century

 translations of the Elements. From a variety of scientific topics on which he wrote

 original treatises, his two most important arithmetical texts are De elementis arismet

 ice artis and De numeris datis. Some of the results in De elementis are applied in De

 numeris datis, which indicates that the former work was composed before the latter

 one (Busard 1992, 123). It is also of interest to mention that there were failed attempts

 to produce printed versions of these two works by both Regiomontanus (1436-1476)

 and Francesco Maurolico (1494-1575). Finally, only the Arithmetica (as De elementis

 came to be known) appeared in two printed editions of 1496 and 1514 by the French

 humanist Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples ( 1455-1536), also known as Stapulensis (Lefèvre

 d'Étaples 1946). In the early sixteenth century, this book continued to be used as a
 textbook in many European universities (Busard 1991, 7-11). Likewise, even though

 De numeris Datis was never printed, a large amount of extant copies, dating from

 the thirteenth and up to the sixteenth centuries and found all around Europe, testify

 to a continued interest among mathematical audiences (Hughes 1981, 20-21). Still,

 it seems that the influence of Jordanus on his contemporaries was relatively limited,

 possibly because the mathematical content of this work was deeper than, and deviated

 in style from, the more didactical and metamathematically oriented texts associated

 with the Adelard-Robert tradition (Hpyrup 1988, 341-343). Campanus de Novara,

 however, did read Jordanus and he incorporated many of his ideas into his version

 of the Elements, as we shall see right below, and in this way, Jordanus' ideas could

 indirectly be of great influence for the processes discussed here.

 Our focus here is on Jordanus' Arithmetica, a treatise that embodies an attempt to

 provide a comprehensive, and indeed pioneering, theoretical foundation for arithmetic.

 Many details of the presentation seem to derive from a conscious striving to develop

 arithmetic without relying on geometrical concepts or results of any kind, while at

 the same time retaining the model and the standards of rigor set for geometry in
 Euclid's Elements. In doing so, it comprised a rather exhaustive overview of the body

 of theoretical Euclidean and Boethian arithmetic as was known at the time (though,

 curiously, the Elements are never explicitly referred to in the text). The treatise also

 betrays the influence of ai-Khwârizmï, Abu Karnil, and Leonardo (Hoyrup 1988,

 310), and it is quite evident that al-NayrizI's text may have been among Nemorarius'

 main sources. In addition, in matters of overall style, if not of detail, the influence of

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 685

 Liber Mahameleth seems to surface at various places in the text. Yet, the Arithmetica

 was more than just a straightforward compilation of known results, and not only

 because it included many new propositions and new proofs of known propositions,

 but also because the style was highly original and because the synthesis thus produced

 presented a new overall image of a discipline that might have been systematically

 studied and further developed.30

 Nemorarius' presentation starts from fourteen definitions, which somewhat over

 lap, but are not identical with, those appearing in Book VII of the Elements. He also
 included three original postulates {petitiones) and eight axioms (communes animi

 conceptiones), from which he derived more than four hundred propositions organized

 in ten books (the total number of propositions varying across the different extant
 manuscripts. See Busard 1991, 12). As in the Adelard II version of the Elements, in

 Nemorarius' text we often find a sketch of the argument that the reader is supposed to

 complete. Unlike Boethius, Jordanus did not illustrate his arithmetic arguments with

 numerical examples.31 And unlike Euclid, only some of the propositions are accom

 panied by diagrams where lines represent the numbers. This is a rather noteworthy

 point. In simpler proofs, where few different numbers are referred to and little con

 fusion is likely to arise, Jordanus always preferred to refer to the various numbers

 involved in the argument using expressions such as "the first number," "the largest of

 the two," "the product of the whole by each part," etc., and where possible he avoided

 calling them by letters. It is only when the argument became somewhat more involved
 that he introduced letters that served as names for the numbers referred to in the

 proofs. Only in such cases did he add letters to the diagram to indicate the additional,

 named numbers (as we shall see in an example below). And of course, whatever letters

 appeared in the proofs, Jordanus never operated on them as on abstract symbols. In

 this sense, Arithmetica displays noteworthy similarities to Liber Mahameleth. And,

 as in that book, propositions from Book II (namely II.1-II.5), or variants thereof, play

 an important role here in creating the theoretical foundation on which Jordanus pur

 ported to build the entire edifice of arithmetical knowledge. This is particularly the

 case concerning distributivity, for which Jordanus presented a detailed and original

 treatment in the preliminary section of the book, while drawing, wherever possible,

 only on the definitions, the postulates, and the axioms presented at the beginning.

 I discuss this important issue in detail in [LC2].

 Here, the focus is on Jordanus' rendering of II.5 in the Arithmetica (which I call here

 A-I.19), which offers many interesting vistas to his overall approach. It is important,

 first of all, to explain the context where it appears as part of the preliminary section.

 After treating basic properties such as commutativity and distributivity in its various

 cases, Jordanus discusses Euclid's II.4 and several variants of it, namely general rules

 for separating a given number into two arbitrary parts and then finding the relation

 30 (H0yrup 2010, 16) has argued that the potential impact of the Arithmetica materialized only to a very

 limited extent. Here 1 want to focus on the way in which, via its reading by Campanus, it did have an

 important influence in the specific issue of the increasingly arithmetic-algebraic conceptions of Book II.

 31 The Stapulensis printed version of 1496 does include numerical examples. In this as well as in other
 respects, it is interesting to compare the printed with the original Jordanus' version. We shall leave this

 comparison for a future opportunity.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 686 L. Corry

 between the square of the number and the partial products of its parts (this is discussed

 in detail in [LC2]). Then come two propositions that take this situation one step further,

 namely separating a given number in two parts, but now in two different ways, and

 examining the relations between the possible partial products that arise thereby. The

 two propositions are formulated as follows (Busard 1991, 70):

 A.I-19: If a number is divided into two equal and into two unequal parts, then the

 product of one of the equals by itself equals the product of one of the unequals by

 the remaining one together with the product of the difference by the difference.

 A-I.20: If a number is divided into two parts in two ways whatsoever, the product of

 the greatest of the parts by the smallest together with the product of the difference

 of the [larger one] and one of the others by the difference of the same and the

 smaller equal the product of the two intermediate numbers.

 The accompanying diagrams of the propositions are, respectively, as follows:

 X X

 Figure 29

 In the first case, we are told that a and b are the greater and lesser portions respec

 tively, whereas c is "one of the two equal ones, both of which differ equally from
 b." The difference is called d, and the proposition proves that "the product of a by b

 together with that of d by itself equals the product of c by itself." In the second case,

 we are told that a and b are the greater and lesser portions, respectively, whereas c and

 d are, respectively, the greater intermediate and lesser intermediate ones. Here, e is the

 difference between a and c, while / is the difference between a and d. The proposition

 thus proves that "the product of c by d equals the product of a by b together with that

 of e and /." Clearly, proposition A-I.20 is a generalization of A-I.19, for the case

 where also the second separation is into unequal parts.32 This becomes more clearly

 apparent if we render them symbolically as follows:

 A-I.19·. If a + b — c + c, then a ■ b + {a - c) ■ {a - c) = c ■ c

 A-I.20: If a + b = c + d, with a > c > d > b, then a ■ b + (a - c) · (a — d) = c d

 A closer look at the proofs brings to the fore some additional points that are of the

 foremost importance for a clearer understanding of Jordanus, and the various kinds of

 ■·~ It must be stressed, however, that Jordanus included in his treatise another proposition, A-X.3, which

 is in fact equivalent to A-1.19 and that embodies the so-called Régula Nicomachi: given three numbers in
 arithmetic progression, a - b = b - c, then we have b2 - a ■ c = (a - b)2. Boethius has stated in his
 Arithmetica that this rule was discovered by Nicomachus (Busard 1991, 14). Jordanus' very short proof of

 A-X.3 simply invokes A-1.19. This apparent repetition reflects, so it seems to me, Jordanus' conscious view

 of A-I.19 as naturally belonging to the context of this preliminary type of results, where a given number is

 separated in two parts and the relations between the partial products, even if an equivalent form of it could

 appear in the context of a later book as well.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ideas involved in his treatise. For convenience I have rendered here the proofs schemat

 ically, without directly quoting them. This may give rise to some misrepresentation

 which I will nevertheless strive to avoid, among other things by translating word by

 word Jordanus' rhetoric, while even retaining his own symbols exactly the way they

 A view from Book II 687

 are used in the argument.

 The steps of the proof of A-I.19 are the following (square brackets
 enclose comments that do not appear in the original):

 (k.l) a + h= c+c; d=c — jb [or c = d + b]
 (k.2) ByA-1.15 [i.e., Euclid IX.4]: c2 = (d+ i>)2 = d2 + b2 + 2 · b-d
 (k.3) But 2-d = a—b [or b+2-d = a (but this is not explicitly said! ) ]
 (k.4) Hence by A-1.14 [i.e., Euclid II.3): b2 + 2-b-d=b-ct
 (k.5) Finally [from (k. 2) to (k. 4 ) ] : jb-a + d2 = c2 □

 In the proof of A-I.20 Jordanus invokes some additional results such
 asA-1.3, A-I.8 (commutativity of the product), and A-I.9 (distribu
 tivity). I do not comment here directly on these three propositions,
 as I say more about them in [LC2]. The steps of the proof of A-I.20
 are the following:

 (k. 6) By A-1. 3 : since a + b = c + d, then, a — c = d— b; and a — d= c-b
 (k.7) Hence, by A-I.9: c-d=c-b+ce
 (k.8) But by A-I.8: c ■ b + c ■ e = b ■ c + e ■ c
 (k.9) Again, by A-I.9: e · c = e · b+e · f

 (k. 10) But e ■ b = b ■ e, and also, by A-1.9, b-c+b-e = b- a
 (k.ll) Finally, c ■ d = b- a + e- f □

 Let me now draw attention to the following, remarkable point: the
 crucial step in the proof of A-I.19 is (k. 3): "since twice d is the
 difference of a and b". Curiously, however, Nemorarius simply states
 this relation and provides no explicit justification for it. How is
 then this step justifiable? On first sight, one may be tempted to see
 this identity as following from (k.l), via some kind of symbol manip
 ulation. This would involve something like the following putative
 steps :

 (k'.l) a + b = 2 · (d + b) ->· a = b + 2 ■ d -► 2 · d = a - b

 But notice that what is actually used in step (k.4) is the relation
 b+2-d= a, which is the midstep in this putative derivation and
 which I indicated in square brackets in (k.3). This would make the
 relation 2■ d = a — b irrelevant for the derivation. Why would Jordanus
 then write "twice d is the difference between b and a" rather than

 "a equals b and twice d", which is the rhetorical counterpart of
 the relation needed for step (k.4)? It seems, therefore, that we
 must look for the justification elsewhere, and as Jordanus remains
 silent, we can only speculate. My guess is that the sentence "twice d
 is the difference between b and a" refers to a situation that can be

 derived from a visual inspection of the diagram. This can be seen by
 imaginarily extending in the following way the situation described
 in the original diagram of A-I.19:

 d d
 d d
 -* * x
 -* * x

 Figure 30

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 688 L. Corry

 By directly inspecting a diagram like this one, it becomes clear
 that, indeed, "twice d is the difference between b and a", as stated

 by Jordanus.
 We can find a rather similar situation in relation with the proof of
 A-I.20. Let me first stress how the concluding step (k.ll) is actually
 reached. From (k.7) to (k.8), one obtains cd = bc+e-c, and then,
 using (k.9) we get c-d = b-c+ e-b+ e· f. From here, using (k.10) we get
 the desired result c-d = b-a + ef. But notice that Jordanus invokes

 A-I.9 in three of the steps, whereas in fact, in order to apply this
 result in each of the steps some additional relations are required
 that are not explicitly mentioned in the text. Thus, for instance,
 how do we know in (k.7) that d = b+e, in order to conclude that
 c-d=c-jb+c-e? Or how do we know in (k.9) that c = b + f, in order to
 conclude that e-c=e-b+e-f? Like in the case of A-I.19, we might, on
 first sight, suggest putative symbolic derivations that would help
 explain how Jordanus obtained the said relations, this time starting
 from (k.6). Thus, for instance, we might think of the following two:

 (k'.2) a — c = e(by def. ), but a — c= d — b; hence d — b= e and d = b+ e

 (k'.3) a — d = f(by def . ), but a — d= c — b: hence c — b = f and c = b + f.

 But the problem with such an assumption is that not only does Jordanus
 remain silent about any derivation of this kind, but also that we do
 not find any other similar one, as far as I can see, in other parts in
 his treatise. Thus, I suggest that my conjecture for A-I.19 will also
 work in this case, if we imaginarily adapt, in the following way, the
 situation described in the original diagram of A-I.20 (and which is
 not much different from what I suggested above for A-I.19):

 < e ^ ( /

 -K > 4 >4

 Figure 31

 As above, by directly inspecting these two diagrams, it becomes clear
 that, indeed, d=b+e and c=b+f, as implicitly used by Jordanus. More
 over, from the left-hand side, it also becomes clear that a=c+e, a
 relation which is implicitly used in (k.10).

 These two proofs illustrate important characteristics of Jordanus' approach. On the

 one hand, he goes to great pains in order to set clear the foundations of arithmetic and

 to abide by the standards set by Euclid in the case of geometry. On the other hand, he

 seems to have implicitly adopted some results that are necessary for completing the

 argument, without even commenting on them. I think that my conjecture above, about

 his possible use of diagrams as the source for these implicit assumptions, sheds some

 light on the situation. We already saw above several instances of implicit reliance on

 diagrams embedded in proofs. Thus was the case with Euclid's use of distributivity

 in the case of visible figures, or with some proofs of al-Khwârizml and Abu Kâmil.

 But what is of special interest in the case of Jordanus is that, unlike those mentioned

 previously, he seems to have been relying on properties of diagrams of the arithmetic

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 689

 type, i.e., where the lines are not part of a geometric construction but rather, just

 indicative of the numbers involved.33 I have also stressed this point by schematically

 rendering the proofs without reference to geometric constructions using R(,) and Sq( )

 as with other authors above. But beyond the validity of my conjecture about Jordanus'

 reliance on diagrams, it can be said with certainty that his arguments do not involve

 any kind of techniques that merit the adjective "algebraic." The proofs are not based

 on abstract manipulation of symbols. They do not even involve following rules of

 al-jabr and al-muqabala, as Fibonacci did in his proofs mentioned above. And yet

 at the same time, all the preliminary section of his treatise is devoted to developing

 general rules of arithmetic that can be applied in changing situations. This is indeed

 what makes the book interesting as part of our account here, since it shows the extent

 to which a foundation of arithmetic and an examination of the properties of the basic

 rules of calculating with numbers could be pursued without thereby moving into the

 territory of algebra. Specifically for II.5, it is interesting how Jordanus has moved it

 into a completely different realm from where it was originally conceived, and it was

 placed, in a truly natural way, within the framework of a rather thorough exploration

 of general, foundational rules of arithmetic. It is no wonder, then, that anyone who

 was exposed to this kind of treatment of II.5 could read this proposition, as part of

 Book II, as being about arithmetic (and in later periods even as being about rules of

 algebra). Some of this is already apparent in Campanus de Novara as we shall now

 see.

 5.5 Campanus

 I want to consider now the thirteenth-century Latin version of Euclid's Elements due to

 Campanus of Novara (c. 1220-1296), completed sometime between 1255and 1259. As

 already said, this is the text that dominated European mathematics until the sixteenth

 century, and more than one hundred manuscripts of it have survived (Folkerts 1989,

 38-43). Like other earlier translators and commentators discussed above, in preparing

 his text Campanus was also guided by clearly defined didactic considerations. He made

 considerable efforts to present Euclid's text as self-contained as possible and free from

 obscure or debatable points such as found in Robert's text (Busard 2005, 32). Indeed,

 Campanus repeated many of Robert's enunciations, but at the same time many of his

 proofs were original. More importantly, he also added significant amounts of material

 taken from sources such as al-Nayrïzï's commentary and Jordanus' Arithmetica. This

 is particularly remarkable in the case of Book IX, where Campanus incorporated into

 the original Euclidean text thirteen additions and comments comprising arithmetic

 versions of propositions from Book II. This is one of the main aspects that marks a

 clear difference between Campanus' version of the Elements and those that preceded

 it. Clearly all of this is highly relevant for our discussion here.

 33 It is pertinent to refer the reader in this regard to (Puig 1994). This seldom-cited, but highly original

 article makes a remarkable connection between the arithmetic results presented in Jordanus' De numeris

 Daiis and the diagrammatic aspects underlying the arguments of the proofs. I discuss this in some detail in
 [LC2],

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 690 L. Corry

 These additions are an interesting manifestation of the broader issue of Campanus'

 attitude toward the relationship between arithmetic and geometry. This relationship,

 in turn, is related to a more general medieval concern with the existence of parallel

 concepts and propositions in the Elements for handling separatedly magnitudes and

 numbers. In earlier versions of the Adelard-Robert tradition, this concern was sug
 gested in several places (Murdoch 1968, 88-89). In Campanus, it becomes more

 explicit and central, and his additions and comments reflect an active interest in trying

 to come to terms in original ways with this concern.

 Thus for instance, in his comment to VII. 12 (which corresponds to Euclid's VII. 11 ),

 Campanus asked why Euclid proved the more particular case of proportions with

 numbers in Book VII, if the general case for magnitudes had already been proved in

 Book V. The reason he gave for this is that the "propria principia" of the two books

 are different and, hence, corresponding propositions should be proved separately and

 based on those principles alone in each case. In particular, he stressed, as the principles

 of Book VII relate to numbers, they are closer to the intellect and hence are more

 easily comprehensible than those treated in Book V, affected as the latter are by

 the wickedness of the incommensurable quantities ("propter malitiam quantitatum
 incommunicatum") (Busard 2005, 240; Rommevaux 1999, 89-92).34

 Against this background, let us consider more specifically the way in which Cam

 panus presented the ideas of Book II. In the first place, I note that in Book II itself

 Campanus generally followed Euclid's original approach and thus remained within a

 completely geometric context. For propositions II.2-II.4, moreover, Campanus also

 presented alternative proofs along the lines of Heron's approach (which he proba

 bly learnt from al-Nayrîzï's commentary). The most interesting sentence in the entire
 Book II, however, appears at the end of the proof of II. 10. Clearly intended to mark a

 separation between the first ten and the last four propositions of the book, Campanus

 stated that "this and all the previous propositions, are true for numbers as well as for

 lines" (Busard 2005, 103: "/tec autem et omnes premise veritatem habent in numeris

 sicut in lineis"). This statement clearly allowed and justified using the first ten results
 of Book II in the context of the three arithmetic books of the Elements, as we shall see

 now.

 Campanus's treatment of Euclid's three arithmetic books contains many modifi

 cations, additions, and comments to the original propositions.35 In Book VII, for

 instance, he added numerical values to lines in the diagrams that accompany several

 of the propositions, apparently as a means to helping the reader figure out the situation

 more easily.36 In addition, in some propositions unity is explicitly indicated in the

 figure either with its value 1 or with the word "unitas." None of the numerical values,

 however, is used or mentioned in any way in the proofs of those propositions.

 But as already stated, the most interesting additions appear as thirteen comments

 to a proposition in Book IX, namely IX. 16, which Campanus took from Jordanus'

 34 See also Campanus' comments to V11.6 (p. 236), which is compared with V. 13 (i.e., Euclid V.12).

 35 All of these are very interesting in themselves, but discussing them would be beyond the scope of this
 article. See (Rommevaux 1999, 93-100).

 36 The only other place where we find such additions to the diagram is in the very last arithmetic proposition,
 1X.39.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book li 691

 Arithmetica,37 Eight of these comments are arithmetic formulations of propositions of

 Book II,38 but they do not comprise numerical examples such as found in al-Nayrïzï's

 text. Campanus provided proofs for all of them, and they are highly original and

 interesting. In those proofs that concern properties of distributivity (i.e., those related

 to II.2-II.4), we find further evidence of Campanus' focus on the relationship between
 Books V and Books VII (I discuss this in some detail in [LC2]). Here, I want to focus

 on the proof of II.5, whose argument substantially deviates from that of either Heron,

 or al-NayrlzT or Jordanus.39 What is of particular interest is that Campanus' proof is

 fully arithmetic not only in the sense that it is evidently formulated as a property of

 numbers, but also in the sense that he uses an argument which is unlikely to have

 arisen in the kind of geometric context that Euclid originally devised for II.5. Let us
 see the details.

 Campanus' arithmetic version of II.5 appears as comment 7 of IX.16.
 The proof relies on comment 6, which is equivalent to Euclid's II.4.
 The accompanying diagram is the following (p. 293):

 a 1 1 b

 c d

 Figure 32

 As usual, the segment ab is divided in equal parts at c and in unequal
 parts at d, and the argument of the proof reads as follows:
 By the previous statement [i.e., II.4], the square of cb equals the
 square of cd and the square of db and twice the product of bd in cd.
 The products of bd by itself and by cb equal that by cb by the first
 comment here, and hence it equals that by ac. Hence, the product of
 bd by itself and twice that by cd equals that of bd by ad. And for the
 same reason the square of cb exceeds by the square of cd the product
 of bd by ad.
 Schematically, the argument is the following:

 (1.1) By II. 4: cb2 = cd2 + db2 + 2 ■ db ■ cd
 (1.2) By II.3: bd2 + bd-cd= bd-cb
 (1.3) But cb = ac; hence bd2 + bd - cd= bd - ac
 (1.4) Hence : bd2 + 2 ■ bd ■ cd = bd ■ ac + bd ■ cd = bd ■ ad
 (1.5) Hence, by (1.1) and (1.4): cb2 = cd2 + bd ■ ad □

 The step that requires special attention here is (1.4). It is based on a tacit addition of

 bd cd to both sides of an identity, followed by an application of II.3. This is the step that

 betrays the purely arithmetic context in which Campanus conceived the argument of

 his proof. Indeed, it would be highly unnatural, and certainly alien to Euclid's practice,

 to imagine a diagram that could graphically represent the passage from (1.3) to (1.4),
 that is, from bd2 + bd-cd = bd ac to bd2 + 2- bd ■ cd = bd ■ ac + bd ■ cd. Because

 37 See (Busard 2005, 291), and also, proposition A-IV.19 of Jordanus in (Busard 1991, 103). Campanus'

 proof is somewhat different from (and more detailed than) Jordanus'.

 38 These are comments 4-12. Comments 1-3 correspond to Jordanus' A-I.9-A-1.11, whereas comment 13
 corresponds to Euclid's V.l 1. See (Busard 2005, 33).

 39 The difference is directly noticeable by comparing steps (1.1 >—(1.5) here below with steps (c.l)-(c.7) for

 Heron, with (k. 1 Hk.5) for Jordanus, or with the algebraic interpretation that (Curtze 1899,96) provides in
 a footnote for Al-Nayrîzï.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 692 L. Corry

 of the squares, it is even difficult to imagine how this derivation could be represented

 in an arithmetic diagram of the kind that I conjectured above for Jordanus' argument

 (and of course I have not rendered here the products as rectangle formation). Nor is

 it natural, I think, to interpret this kind of reasoning as embodying ideas derived from

 "algebra almuchabala," as we have seen above for the case of Fibonacci. Rather, the

 passage from (1.3) to (1.4) is more naturally seen, I think, as arising from a direct

 application of the kind of general arithmetic rules that Jordanus worked out in his

 Arithmetica, and the kind of possible manipulations of numbers arising from it.40

 At this point, we have arrived at one of the most significant milestones of this histor

 ical journey, given the decisive influence of Campanus in the process of transmission of

 the Elements to the printed world of the European renaissance and its subsequent dis

 semination. A typical reader of this version of the Elements would become acquainted

 with Campanus' discussion about the double presentation of the theory of proportions,

 once for numbers and once for general magnitudes, and about the different nature of

 these two kinds of entities. Then, he would confront the results of Book II presented

 as comments to a result of Book IX, and bearing a purely arithmetic character in

 both their enunciations and the various steps of the proofs. And at the same time, of

 course, he would also read the same results in their fully geometric presentation, in the
 framework of Book II. With these two versions in front of him and with the increas

 ing attention devoted to algebraic methods from the sixteenth century on, the reader

 might lay the stress on the essential differences between the two ways of presenting

 the same results as pertaining to two essential separate domains (one arithmetic and
 one geometric), but he might as well conflate both presentations as expressing two

 faces of one and the same mathematical idea. Thus, for a historian trying to understand

 the ways in which the results of Book II were typically read and understood on the

 wake of the Campanus' version, the assumption that these results were conceived in

 arithmetic or algebraic terms, rather than as purely geometric ones, will not involve

 anymore the kind of anachronistic interpretation that was involved in making a simi

 lar judgment about the way in which the same results were conceived at the time of

 Euclid, and even by most other later authors whose works we have been investigating

 thus far. After Campanus in a definite manner, and perhaps also somewhat earlier in

 less clear-cut ways, the possibility of interpreting the results of Book II in terms of

 general rules for operating with numbers did not require the reader to incorporate into

 the text any mathematical idea not itself contained in the very text of the Elements

 that was available to him. At the same time, as we shall see now, not every reader of

 the Elements, posterior to Campanus, would necessarily adopt an entirely arithmetic

 reading of these results, and geometry was not quickly discarded as the source of

 certainty and legitimacy to be relied upon.

 40 Though I would not like to lay excessive stress on names, I feel it is improper to claim, as in (Busard
 2005,39), that "the algebraic method which Campanus used for proving Campanus IX. 16 add. 4-12 agrees

 with the method which Anairitius used for proving 11.2-11.10." For one thing. I already indicated that both

 the "method" and the line of argumentation actually differ from that of Al-Nayrîzï. But also, using the

 term "algebra" in this context may be misleading since nothing here is manipulation of abstract symbols

 according to formal rules, not even in the manner intended in Islamic mathematics. Rather, Campanus

 simply operates on numbers (which are indicated with letters that serve as names) according to general,
 arithmetic rules.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 693

 5.6 Gersonides

 Levy Ben Gerson (1288-1344), also known as Gersonides, was the most prominent

 figure in the tradition of Jewish medieval sages with a keen interest in mathematics.

 If Bar Hiyya was the initiator of this tradition, Gersonides was certainly the first to

 contribute truly original mathematical ideas. He wrote treatises in various fields of

 interest, scientific as well as of Biblical exegesis. The most mathematically interesting

 of them, dating from 1321, is Sefer Maaseh Hoshev ( 31Ρ1Π πttWB 1D0), a title that can be

 translated as "The Work of the Calculator." Gersonides also wrote a commentary on

 Books I-IV of the Elements and a separate treatise on geometry, from which one may

 perhaps infer the extent and sources of his knowledge. Thus, as Tony Lévy has carefully

 documented (Lévy 1992,87-92), there are some similarities between Gersonides' text

 and some of the ideas found in al-Nayrîzï's commentary. Gersonides may have been

 acquainted with the latter either in its Arabic original or in Gerard of Cremona's Latin

 translation, or perhaps also via the Campanus edition. Still, other extant manuscripts

 raise the possibility of alternative sources and ways of transmission of Euclid's texts

 to Jewish mathematicians. In his commentary on the Elements, Gersonides dealt with

 purely geometric questions such as a possible proof of the fifth postulate. Of Book

 II, he only discussed Proposition 11.13. However, arithmetic versions of propositions

 from Book II do appear in Maaseh Hoshev and they are of interest for us here.

 Maaseh Hoshev is a book on arithmetic and combinatorics in two parts.41 The

 Hebrew wording of the title embodies a thoughtful word play which opposes two

 terms: one stressing the "practical" aspect of the treatise (ntttyn) and the other stressing

 the "theoretical" one (3ΙΡΊΠ). Gersonides explained in the introduction that the purpose

 of his treatise was not just to teach the practical rules for solving arithmetic problems,

 but also the theory underlying those rules, since mastery of the former necessitates a

 full understanding of the latter. Gersonides also suggested that the prospective reader
 of his book should first master the contents of the three arithmetic books of the Ele

 ments, since proofs for propositions in those books would not be repeated the text. But

 the image of arithmetic that Gersonides presented was much broader than what the

 Elements contained, and some of the proofs in the text go well beyond Euclid. Maaseh

 Hoshev, for instance, discussed many additive properties of the natural numbers as

 well as combinatoric results. He also followed ingenious arguments that came very
 close to mathematical induction (Rabinovitch 1970).

 Gersonides started by proving some elementary properties of addition and multi

 plication, in a manner that reminds us of the preliminary section of Jordanus' Arith

 metica discussed above. This preliminary section comprises results on distributiv

 ity and associativity of the product, as well as on identities involving the squares

 of a number separated into two parts. But Gersonides was much less systematic or

 exhaustive than Jordanus in his treatment. He included propositions that would be

 needed for proving more complex propositions later on in the text, as well as some

 41 Here, I refer to the text as is appears in (Lange 1909), which is where the Hebrew text first appeared in
 print in modern times, together with a German translation. See also (Simonson 2000a,b) for a description

 of the contents, for some important remarks concerning the existing manuscripts and versions, and for

 additional parts not appearing in the Lange edition.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 694 L. Corry

 others that are not even used, but it is not easy to discern a clear criterion for this
 choice.

 Arithmetic versions of the first six propositions of Euclid's Book II appear among

 these preliminary results. Propositions II. 1-II.4 are proved by straightforward arith

 metic argument, namely by counting units in each case. (I say more on this in [LC2].)

 But when we read Gersonides' versions of II.5-II.6 (which are, respectively MH-I.8

 and MH-I.5), we find a more interesting and complex picture. Let us start by looking
 at Gersonides' text for MH-I.8, which reads as follows:42

 The area obtained by multiplying half of a given number by itself equals the

 area obtained by multiplying a part of that number by the remainder together

 with the square of the difference between the part and half of the given number.

 Therefore let AB be the given number and let it be halved at point C, and divided

 at some other point D. I say that the square on the number AC equals the area

 obtained by multiplying the number AD by DB together with the square on CD.

 D C
 D C
 B\ \—h
 B\ 1—1 1 A

 Figure 33

 Proof: the square on AC equals the area of AC on CD together with the
 area of AC on DB, but the area of AD on DB equals the area of AC on DB
 together with the area of CD on DB. If we subtract the area of AC on
 DB which is common to them, then what remains from square AC equals
 the area of AC on CD, which equals the area of CB on CD, whereas what
 remains from the area AD on DB is the area CD on DB. But the excess

 of the area CB on CD over the area CD on DB equals the square on CD.
 Therefore, the square on AC equals the area of AD on DB together with
 the square on CD, and this is what we wanted.

 Like Heron, also Gersonides bases the proof on using the elementary distributivity

 results of Book II in order to decompose, transform, and then compose again, the basic

 figures obtained. He may have learnt this approach from al-Nayrîzï. But besides this

 basic similarity, his argument evidently takes a longer and rather less transparent path.

 This argument is more clearly understood when rendered symbolically, as follows:

 (m.l) Sq(AC) = R(AC, CD) + R(AC, DB) [by II.2]

 (m. 2 ) On the other hand, R(AD, DB) = R(AC, DB) + R(CD, DB)

 (m. 3 ) Hence Sq(AC) - R(AC, CD) = R(AC, DB) = R(AD, DB) - R(CD, DB)

 (m.4) But AC= CB [and hence R(AC, CD) = R(CB. CD)]

 (m. 5 ) Hence Sq(AC) - R(CB. CD) = R(AC, DB) = R(AD, DB) - R(CD, DB)

 (m. 6 ) But R(CB, CD) = R(BD, CD) + Sq(CD) [by II.1] [and therefore Sq(AC) -

 R(BD, CD) - Sq(CD) = R(AD, DB) - R(CD, DB)]

 (m. 7 ) Hence Sq(AC) = R(AD, DB) + Sq(CD), □

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42 This is the version appearing in (Lange 1909, 5). It is remarkable that the proposition was not included
 in the second edition. See (Simonson 2000a,b, 297).

 A view from Book II 695

 If we wanted now to visualize the argument in terms of a diagram we
 could start with steps (m.l)-(m.2) as follows:

 Step (m.3) introduces a kind of derivation that we had not seen so
 far, and in which the two above figures are compared by way of sub
 traction of areas, as follows:

 D C
 Β DC

 % ':;

 k-~

 Ik ^ ?

 Figure 34

 Figure 35

 In step (m.4) the equality CB = AC is invoked to obtain the identity
 in step (m.5):

 D C
 Β DC

 D C.
 D C

 ,

 D C
 Β DC
 ι
 —i

 Dj

 Figure 36

 This step implies going even further than in step (m.3) since, unlike
 there, the areas that are subtracted here are not in the given figures
 to begin with. A further decomposition in (m.6) allows reaching in
 step (m.7) the identity to be established:

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 696 L. Corry

 D C
 Β D C

 :

 _

 Β D ί

 D C
 Ο C

 :.v

 AN
 JX : ■
 S8

 K Hr ~ V

 1

 Figure 37
 Figure 37

 As with other cases above, also in this case one might raise the question whether

 this geometric rendering of the text is the correct one, or whether we should rather
 follow an arithmetic rendering. That is, we might ask whether Gersonides conceived

 the argument while thinking about construction and manipulation of geometric figures

 as suggested in the diagrams above, or whether, on the contrary, he thought in terms

 of general rules of multiplication and addition for numbers. The inclusions of steps
 such as (m.3) and (m.5) make this question of particular interest. I think that in this

 case there are good reasons to attribute Gersonides a more geometric kind of thinking,

 at least for this specific proposition. One reason for this is the language he used, in
 which a product is always dubbed "area" (ntattf) or "square" (ΙΏΉΟ). This is of course
 inconclusive evidence, and we saw above some examples to the contrary, but it is at

 least indicative. Also, he did not choose here the arithmetic counting of units that he
 followed in other cases. But a more important consideration is that, while we have
 not seen other examples where areas are subtracted as part of a geometric argument,
 we have not seen either any example where this is done for numbers as part of an

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 697

 arithmetic one. And indeed, I find it unnatural to see how some of the crucial steps

 of the argument could have been conceived as part of a purely arithmetic derivation.

 Thus, for instance, it is not clear what could be the arithmetic idea behind a putative

 arithmetic rendering such as the following:

 (m'.3) AC2 -ACCD = ACDB = ADDB-CDDB

 Moreover, the geometric rendering also seems appropriate for the argument of MH-I.5,

 whose proof is based on repeated applications of distributivity properties, and which

 is accompanied by the following diagram:

 B C
 Β C

 D\ 1 1 1A
 D\ 1 1 1A

 Figure 38

 Here, the "number AB" (Gersonides's term) is bisected at C and the "number BD"

 is added. The proposition then states, as in II.6, that the area of AD by DB together

 with the square on CB equals the square on CD.

 Gersonides' proof is as follows:

 ( η. 1 ) R(AD, BD) = R(CD, DB) + R(AC, DB)
 (n. 2 ) But R(AC, DB) = R(BC, DB)
 ( η. 3 ) [ Hence R(AD, BD) = R(CD, DB) + R(BC, DB) ]
 (n.4) Hence by adding Sq(CB),

 R (AD, DB) + Sq (CB) = R(CD, DB) + R(BC, DB) + Sq (CB)

 (n. 5 ) But Sq(CD) = R(CD, BD) + R(CD, CB)
 (n. 6 ) But R(CD, CB) = R(CB, BD) + Sq(CB)
 (n. 7) Hence Sq(CD) = R(CB, BD) + R(CB, BD) + Sq(CB)
 (n. 8) Hence Sg(CD) = R(AD, BD) + Sq(CB), □

 In this case we find no subtractions as in the previous example, but
 here the steps are more straightforward and one can simply imagine
 them as being similar to those followed by Heron in his "operational"
 geometric proof.

 Summarizing this section, then, one can say that Gersonides' version of these two

 propositions is not easily classified as either geometric or arithmetic. On the one hand,

 it is clear that for him the two propositions are meant (like all other propositions in

 the book) to express properties of numbers, and not of geometric figures. On the other

 hand, while for other propositions in the book which were also arithmetic versions

 of propositions in Book II, he had provided arithmetic proofs, here he proceeded in

 ways that remind one of those of al-Khwârizml and of his Islamic followers; that

 is, he provided a geometric justification for a result related to numbers. It is evident

 that lacking a flexible language in which the various steps of the proof (as stated

 above) could be conceived and formulated in arithmetical, or proto-algebraic terms,

 an operational approach to geometric manipulation of areas, such as implicit in Heron's

 proof, offered a blueprint of a proof that could be more easily adapted to the arithmetic

 spirit of the book. Euclid's proof would have also worked here, of course, but it would

 have been much less akin to the arithmetic spirit of the proposition as conceived by

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gersonides. In this sense, Gersonides' proofs do reflect a well-developed ability to

 manipulate abstract relations between numbers, albeit without having at hand a fully

 developed symbolic language. Of course, the proofs discussed here are not among the

 most complex ones that Gersonides handles in the treatise, and yet I think that this

 conclusion applies broadly beyond the specific cases considered. In terms of historical

 development, at any rate, since Maaseh Hoshev had little or no visible influence on

 later mathematical developments in Europe, this highly original version of II.5 soon
 fell into oblivion.

 698 L. Corry

 5.7 Barlaam

 The last text that I want to consider here is a highly original collection of results
 embodying arithmetic versions (not a commentary) of Euclid's propositions II. 1—

 11.10, and commonly attributed to the fourteenth-century Basilian monk and scholar

 Barlaam de Seminara (ca. 1290-1348).43 Barlaam is mentioned in passing in Heath's

 edition of the Elements (Heath 1956 [1908], Vol. 1,74), as well as in some other places

 in the secondary literature, but it seems that there exists no serious historical research

 on him and on his startling Euclidean text.

 In the text, we find no preliminary explanations about the background, or about what

 exactly the author had in mind when composing it. Rather, the text itself opens with

 arithmetical definitions similar in spirit and in wording to those found in Book VII:

 multiples of numbers, plane numbers, parts of numbers. More generally, the wording of

 the propositions and, especially, the accompanying diagrams resemble those found in

 Books VII-IX: They are not geometric constructions needed to support the argument,

 but rather indications, with the help of various lines drawn one next to the other, of

 the various numbers mentioned in the proof. Still, in some places Barlaam's use of the

 lines appearing in the diagram deviates in important senses from standard usage. Let

 us see the details of his proof of II.5.

 Barlaam's proof of this proposition relies on the use of II.1, and
 also, in an original way, of II. 4. The accompanying diagram is as
 below (Heiberg and Menge 1883-1893, Vol. 5, 730-732):

 al 1 1 1 b -\b

 Figure 39

 The standard line appearing in all diagrams of proofs of II.5 also
 appears here, with ab representing a number (Barlaam stresses that
 this is an even number) , that is divided into two equal numbers ag,gb

 4 ! The full original Greek text appears in (Heiberg and Menge 1883-1893, Vol. 5), as Appendix Scholiorum

 4.1 thank Michael Fried for help on translating parts of it.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book ii 699

 and into two unequal numbers ad,db. But the additional three lines
 are quite unusual. They are defined as follows:

 • e represents "the square on gb"
 • zh is "the plane number from ad,db"
 • hq is "the square on gd"
 • kl is "the square on bd"
 • nj is "the square on dg"
 • lm, mn are each "the plane number obtained from bd,dg"

 According to the diagram (but not mentioned anywhere in the text)
 kj = kl + lm + mn + nk. Notice then, that by virtue of II.4 and by
 referring to the meaning attributed to each of the four segments,
 Barlaam implicitly takes kj to represent the square on bd+dg. This is
 nothing but the square on bg, which by definition is e. Also according
 to the diagram (and not mentioned anywhere in the text) zg = zh + hq.
 Thus, it is clear that the aim of the proof must be to show that also
 zg=e. The steps of the argument for reaching this conclusion can be
 schematically rendered as follows:

 (o.l) By definition, kl = bd ■ bd and lm = gd-bd. Hence km — gb-bd

 [since km = kl + lm and gb= gd+ db\

 (o.2) But gb=ga, hence km=ga-bd
 (o.3) But by definition also, mn = gd-bd. Hence by (o.1-0.2),

 kn = ad ■ bd

 [since kn = kl + mn and ad= ag+ dg)

 (o.4) But also zh = bd-ad. Hence [by (ο. 3 ) ] zh = kn
 (o.5) But hq=nj, since both were defined as cd-cd. Hence kj = zq

 [since kj = kn + nj and zg = zh + hq]

 (o. 6) But kj = e [by II. 4 ! ! ] , so that [by (o. 5) ] zg = e
 (0.7) But also zq=ad-db+dg2 [since in the diagram zq= zh + hq]
 (ο. 8) Hence, zq= ad- db+ dg2 and zg= e, so that ad■ db + dg2 = gb2 □

 Barlaam's proof presents another interesting example of an argument which is

 certainly based on operating with numbers and relies on general properties of these

 operations, but without thereby involving abstract manipulation of symbols. Nor does

 there seem to be any kind of reliance on geometry. On the other hand, some of the

 information necessary for completing the proof derives from the diagram alone and

 is not explicitly mentioned in the text. Likewise, all the numbers involved are repre

 sented by straight lines, but some lines represent given numbers, while other represent

 numbers that arise from operations on the given numbers. The two kinds are treated

 differently. Worthy of special attention is the use of II.4 in step (o.6), since Barlaam

 tacitly completes the step by referring to a number for which only the diagram indi

 cates the four factors that add up to it and that hence allow using the result previously

 proved, II.4. Even the wording attached to the use of II.4 is different, since it states

 that "since the number bg has been divided into two numbers gd,db, therefore the

 square on bg, namely e, is equal to the squares on bd,dg together with twice [the plane

 number from] bd,dg."

 Notice that, while the proof is stated in purely arithmetic terms and while some

 of its steps amount to counting the units in each of the terms involved, it still seems

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 700 L. Corry

 that in some crucial places the geometric background to the original propositions did

 underlie the line of argumentation. Thus, like Gersonides, Barlaam produced a version

 of II.5 which was intended to assimilate this result into the body of arithmetic and

 indeed, one might say, of Euclidean arithmetic. Their proofs, however, were different

 as was also the fate of their works. Contrary to Gersonides' book, Barlaam's text

 was well known in the sixteenth century to authors of influential books, and some
 of them, such as Petrus Ramus (1515-1573) or Christopher Clavius (1538-1612),

 followed his formulations and his approach when handling II.5. Likewise, Sir Henry

 Billingsley (c. 1545-1606), who in 1570 published the first full English version of the

 Elements, explicitly relied on Barlaam's text (Billingsley 1570, Folio 62). Explaining

 the details of Barlaam's influence on these authors, however, is beyond the scope of

 the present article. We can say, at any rate, that this rather remote text appears to have

 been instrumental in furthering the possibility of looking at II.5 from perspectives that

 departed from the original, purely geometric one that underlies Euclid's conception.

 6 Concluding remarks

 The first printed version of the Elements appeared in 1482 in Venice, based on Cam
 panus' translation, and it is usually known as the Erhard Ratdolt edition. The first

 published translation into Latin from a Greek text of the Elements appeared in 1505,

 also in Venice. The Greek text had its origins in a slightly modified edition of Theon

 of Alexandria. By comparing this Greek text with Campanus' versions, its sixteenth

 century translator into Latin, Bartolomeo Zamberti (c. 1474—after 1539), excluded
 sections that in his opinion had been added by Theon [Rose 1975,51 (note 56)]. Zam

 berti was an influential humanist who played a somewhat paradoxical role in promoting

 certain conceptions about the Elements at the time. On the one hand, he supported a
 view, commonly associated with Proclus, that stressed the "marvelous" nature and

 unity of the Elements. According to this view, the Euclidean text could not possibly

 be rearranged or improved by means of new demonstrations without serious damage

 to its perfection. On the other hand, Zamberti was also instrumental in popularizing a

 view according to which, the choice of definitions, postulates, and propositions in the
 Elements were Euclid's, whereas the demonstrations were Theon's. This alternative

 view opened the way to editions in which the Euclidean text was altered, summarized,

 divided, or published without the proofs (Goulding 2010, 152-159).

 In 1516, Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples attempted to reconcile the numerous discrepan

 cies between existing translations of the Elements and came up with a unified edition

 in which the Radtold's and the Zamberti's text appeared side by side. Eventually, these

 two traditions, one stemming from Arabic sources (via Campanus) and one from Greek

 sources (via Zamberti), merged in the last third of the sixteenth century. In 1572, the
 edition of Federico Commandino (1509-1575), based on this new merging of tradi

 tions, appeared in print, marking an important milestone in the process of assimilation
 of the Elements as it came to be considered and understood in Europe.

 The Euclidean traditions within the world of the printed text, which were inaugu

 rated with the 1482 edition and consolidated with the Commandino edition of 1572,

 differed in important senses from the medieval ones that I have been discussing along

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 701

 this article. This is certainly the case for the question of the changing relationship

 among geometric and arithmetic ideas. For one thing, a main starting point of these

 traditions was the Campanus' text, and the peculiar way in which Book II and the ideas

 related to it had been handled there. For another, new and vigorous trends of symbolic

 algebraic techniques began to attract increased attention and were incorporated into

 the text of the Elements. These new algebraic trends fitted in a relaxed manner into,

 and offered a natural continuation of, the kind of generalized arithmetic that Cam

 panus, especially under the influence of Jordanus, had already made appear as the

 fundamental way to look at the results of Book II. Within the renaissance traditions

 of the Elements, then, Book II came to be understood in ways that went well beyond

 the purely geometric one that had informed Euclid's original conception. A detailed

 analysis of this topic is well beyond the scope of this article, and I intend to pursue it

 at a future opportunity.

 Acknowledgments I want to pay my debt of gratitude to several friends and colleagues who read previous

 versions of this text, or parts of it, answered queries and sent me reading material, raised questions, and

 suggested ideas and advanced critical views: Fabio Acerbi, Sonja Brentjes, Karine Chemla, Menso Folkerts,

 Jan Hogendijk, Jens Hpyrup, Tony Levi, Anthony Lo Bello, Mark Moyon, Jeffrey Oaks, Sabine Rommevaux,

 Ken Saito, Shai Simonson, and Roy Wagner. Special thanks I owe to my friends Michael Fried and Miki

 Elazar for help and patience with translations of difficult passages from Latin and Greek, and to Veit Probst

 in Heidelberg, without whose kind mediation I would have had a much harder time in gathering all the

 material needed to complete this work. Last, but not least, hearty thanks go to Len Berggren, to whom I

 submitted this article for publication. His very detailed reading and thoughtful editorial suggestions helped

 me significantly improve (and somehow shorten) the entire text.

 References

 Archibald, Raymond C. 1913. Euclid's book on divisions of figures with a restoration based on the Woepcke's

 text and on the practica geometriae of Leonardo Pisano. Cambridge: The University Press.

 Billingsley, Henry. 1570. The elements of geometrie of the most auncient philosopher Euclide of M égara.

 London. Imprinted by Iohn Daye.

 Brentjes, Sonja. 1994. Textzeugen und Hypothesen zum arabischen Euklid in der Ûberlieferung von al
 Haggâg b. Yusuf b. Matar (zwischen 786 und 833). Archive for History of Exact Sciences 47: 53-92.

 Brentjes, Sonja. 1996. The relevance of non-primary sources for the recovery of the primary transmission
 of Euclid's Elements into Arabic. In Tradition, transmission, transformation: Proceedings of two con

 ferences on pre-modern science held at the university of Oklahoma, ed. F. Jamil Ragep, Sally P. Ragep,
 and Steve Livesey, 201-225. Brill: Leiden.

 Brentjes, Sonja. 1997/1998. Additions to Book I in the Arabic traditions of Euclid's Elements. Studies in

 History of Medicine and Science 15(1-2): 55-117.

 Brentjes, Sonja. 2001a. Observations on Hermann of Carinthia's version of the Elements and its relation to

 the Arabic transmission. Science in Context 14(1-2): 39-84.

 Brentjes, Sonja. 2001b. Two comments on Euclid's Elements? On the relation between the Arabic text

 attributed to al-Naynzt and the Latin text ascribed to Anaritius. Centaurus 43: 17-55.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1968. The translation of the Elements of Euclid from the Arabic into Latin by

 Hermann ofCarinthia (?). Edited with an Introduction. Leiden: Brill.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1983. The first Latin translation of Euclid's 'Elements', commonly ascribed to

 Adelard of Bath. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1984. The Latin translation of the Arabic version of Euclid's 'Elements', commonly

 ascribed to Gerard of Cremona. Leiden: Brill.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1987. The medieval Latin translation of Euclid's Elements made directly from the

 Greek. Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1991. Jordanus de Nemore, De elementis arithmetice artis: A medieval treatise on

 number theory, 2 vols. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1992. The Arithmetica of Jordanus Nemorarius. In Amphora: Festschrift for Hans

 Wussing on the occasion of his 65th birthday, ed. S.S. Demidov, et al„ 121-132. Basel-Boston-Berlin:

 Birkhauser Verlag.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1996a. A thirteenth-century adaptation of Robert of Chester's version of Euclid's

 Elements. Munchen: Institut fur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 1996b. Einiges iiber die Handschrift Leiden 399,1 und die arabisch-lateinische

 Ûbersetzung von Gerhard von Cremona. In History of mathematics: States of the art, ed. J. Dauben, M.
 Folkerts, and H. Wussing, 173-205. San Diego: Academic Press.

 Busard, Hubertus L.L. 2005. Campanus of Novum und Euclid's Elements, 2 vols. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner

 702 L. Corry

 Busard, Hubertus L.L., and Menso Folkerts. 1992. Robert of Chester's (?) redaction of Euclid's Elements,

 the so-called Adelard II Version, 2 vols. Basel-Boston-Berlin: Birkhauser Verlag.

 Clagett, Marshall. 1978. Archimedes in the Middle Ages. Volume Hi: The fate of the medieval Archimedes,

 1300-1565. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.

 Corry, Leo. 2004. Modern algebra and the rise of mathematical structures, 2nd ed. Basel-Boston-Berlin:

 Verlag.

 Birkhauser.

 Corry, Leo. forthcoming. The law of distributivity in the medieval traditions of Euclid's Elements: Between

 geometry and arithmetic. (Cited throughout as [LC2]).

 Corry, Leo, and Norbert Schappacher. 2010. Zionist internationalism through Number Theory: Edmund

 Landau at the opening of the Hebrew University in 1925. Science in Context 23(4): 427^171.

 Curtze, Maximilian. 1899. Anaritii in decern libros primos elementorum Euclidis commentarii ex interpre
 tatione Gherardi Cremonensis in ct'tdice Cracoviense 569 servata, Leipzig: Teubner (Euclidis Opera

 Omnia, I.L. Heiberg et H. Menge (eds.), supplementum).

 Curtze, Maximilian. 1902. Der Liber Embadorum des Abraham bar Chijja Savasorda in der Ûbersetzung
 des Plato von Tivoli. Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften 12: 1-183.

 Djebbar, Ahmed. 2005. L'algèbre arabe. Genèse d'un art. Paris: Vuibert.
 Dold-Samplonius, Yvonne. 1987. Developments in the solution to the Equation ex2 4- bx — a from al

 Khwarizmi to Fibonacci. In From deferent to e quant: A volume of studies in the history of science in
 the ancient and medieval Near East in Honor ofE.S. Kennedy, vol. 500, ed. David A. King, and Georg
 Saliba, 71-87. New York: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.

 Eastwood, Bruce S. 2007. Ordering the heavens: Roman astronomy and cosmology in the Carolingian

 Folkerts, Menso. 1970. Boethius "Geometrie II ": ein mathematisches Lehrbuch des Mittelalters. Wies

 renaissance. Brill: Leiden.

 baden: Franz Steiner.

 Folkerts, Menso. 1981. The importance of the Pseudo-Boethian Geometriu during the Middle Ages. In
 Boethius and the Liberal Arts: A collection of essays, Berne, ed. M. Masi, 187-209, (Reprinted in Menso
 Folkerts 2003), Essays on early medieval mathematics: The Latin tradition. Aldershot: Ashgate).

 Folkerts, Menso. 1989. Euclid in medieval Europe. Winnipeg: The Benjamin Catalogue.

 Folkerts, Menso. 2004. Leonardo Fibonacci's knowledge of Euclid's Elements and of other mathematical

 texts. Bollettino di Storia delta Scienze Matematiche 24: 93-114.

 Folkerts, Menso. 2006. The development of mathematics in medieval Europe: The Arabs, Euclid. Regiomon

 Freudenthal, Hans. 1977. What is Algebra and What has it been in History. Archive for History of Exact

 tanus. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited.

 Sciences 16(3): 189-200.

 Fried, Michael N„ and Sabetai Unguru. 2001. Apollonius of'Perga's Conica: Text. Context, Subtext. Leiden:

 Goldstein, Bernard. 1965. A treatise on Number Theory from atenth century Arabic source. Centaurus 10:

 Goulding, Robert. 2010. Defending Hypatia: Ramus, Savile, and the renaissance rediscovery of mathemat

 ical history. Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York: Springer.

 Guillaumin, Jean-Yves. 2012. Boethius' De institutione arithmetica and its influence on posterity. In A

 companion to Boethius in the Middle Ages, ed. Noel H. Kaylor, and Philip E. Phillips, 135-162. Leiden:
 Brill.

 Guttmann, Yehiel Michael HaCohen. 1912-1913. Chibbur Hu-Meschicha WeHa-Tischboreth: Lehrbuch

 der geometrie des Abraham bar Chija. vol. 2. Berlin: Schriften des Vereins Mekize Nirdamim.

 Brill.

 124-160.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 703

 Heath, Thomas. 1956 [1908], The thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements. New York: Dover.

 Heath, Thomas. (1981) [1921], History of Greek mathematics, vol. 2. New York: Dover.

 Heiberg, Johan Ludvig, and Heinrich Menge. 1883-1893. Euclidis opera omnia. Ediderunt et latine inter

 prétât! sunt I. L. Heiberg et H. Menge, vol. 12. Lepzig: Teubner.

 Hogendijk, Jan P. 2005. Al-Nayrîzî's influence in the West. (Downloaded February 14, 2010, from http://

 Hoyrup, Jens. 1986. Al-Khwârizmî, Ibn Turk, and the Liber Mensurationum: On the origins of Islamic

 www.jphogendijk.nl/publ/naywest.pdf).

 Algebra. Erdem 2:445-484.

 Hpyrup, Jens. 1988. Jordanus de Nemore, 13th century mathematical innovator. Archive for History of

 Exact Science 38: 307-363.

 Hpyrup, Jens. 1998. A new art in ancient clothes. Itineraries chosen between scholasticism and baroque in

 order to make Algebra appear legitimate, and their impact on the substance of the discipline. Physis,
 Nuova Se rie 35: 11-50.

 Hpyrup, Jens. 2001. On a collection of geometrical riddles and their role in the shaping of four to six

 'Algebras'. Science in Context 14(1-2): 85-131.

 Hpyrup, Jens. 2010. Hesitating progress: the slow development toward algebraic symbolization in abbacus
 and related manuscripts, c. 1300 to c. 1550. In Philosophical aspects of symbolic reasoning in Early

 Modern Mathematics (Studies in Logic, 26), ed. Albrecht Heeffer, and Maarten Van Dyck, 3-56. London:
 College Publications.

 Hughes, Barnabas. 1981. Jordanus de Nemore. De numeris dads. A Critical edition and translation.

 Berkeley-Los Angeles-London: University of California Press.

 Hughes, Barnabas. 2008. Fibonacci's De practica geometrie. New York: Springer (Sources and Studies in

 the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences).

 Kibre, Pearl. 1981. The Boethian De institutione arithmetica and the quadrivium in the thirteenth century

 University Milieu at Paris. In Boethius and the liberal arts: A collection of essays, ed. Michael Masi,

 67-80. Bern/Frankfurt: Peter Lang.

 Klein, Jacob. 1968. [1934-1936], Greek mathematical thought and the origin of Algebra (Translated by Eva

 Brann. With an appendix containing Vieta's Introduction to the analytical art, translated by J. Winfree

 Smith). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 Lange, Gerson. 1909. Sefer Maassei Chosheb. Die Praxis des Rechners. Ein hebraisch-arithmetisches Werk

 des Levi ben Gerschom aus dem Jahre 1321. Frankfurt am Main: Louis Golde.

 Lefèvre d'Étaples, Jacques. 1496. Arithmetica decern libris demonstrate. Paris: Johannes Higman and

 Wolfgang Hopyl.

 Levey, Martin. 1966. The Algebra of Abii Kâmil. Kitâb fî al-jâbr wa'l-muqâbala, in a commentary by

 Mordecai Finzi (Hebrew Text, Translation and Commentary with Special Reference to the Arabic Text).
 Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

 Lévy, Tony. 1992. Gersonide, commentateur d'Euclide: Traduction annotée de ses gloses sur les Elements.

 In Studies on Gersonides: A Fourteenth-Century Jewish Philosopher-Scientist. Collection de Travaux
 de L'Académie Internationale d'Histoire des Sciences, vol. 36, ed. Gad Freudenthal, 83-148. Leiden:
 Brill.

 Lévy, Tony. 1997a. Les 'Eléments' d'Euclide en hébreu (XIHe-XVle siècles). In Perspectives arabes et

 médiévales sur la tradition scientifique et philosophique grecque, ed. M. Aouad, A. Elamrani-Jamal,
 and A. Hasnaoui, 79-94. Leuven: Peeters.

 Lévy, Tony. 1997b. Une version hébraïque inédite des 'Eléments' d'Euclide. In Les voies de la science

 grecque, ed. D. Jacquart, 181-239. Geneva: Droz.

 Lévy, Tony. 1997c. The establishment of the mathematical bookshelf of the medieval Hebrew scholar:

 Translations and translators. Science in Context 10(03): 431-451.

 Lévy, Tony. 2001. Les débuts de la littérature mathématique hébraïque: la géométrie d'Abraham bar Hiyya

 (Xle-XIIe s.). Micrologus 9: 35-64.

 Lo Bello, Anthony. 2003a. Gerard of Cremona's translation of the commentary of Al-Nayrîzï on Book I

 of Euclid's Elements of geometry. With an introductory account of the twenty-two early extant Arabic
 manuscripts of the Elements. Leiden: Brill.

 Lo Bello, Anthony. 2003b. The commentary ofAlbertus magnus on Book I of Euclid's Elements of geometry.

 Leiden: Brill.

 Lo Bello, Anthony. 2009. The commentary of al-Nayrlzl on Books II-IV of Euclid's Elements of geometry.

 With a translation of that portion of Book I missing from MS Leiden Or. 399.1, but present in the newly

 discovered Qom manuscript ed. Riidiger Arnzen. Leiden: Brill.

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Luckey, Paul. 1941. Tâbit b. Qurra fiber den geometrischen Richtigkeitsnachweis der Auflôsung der

 quadratischen Gleichungen. Siichsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig. Mathematisch
 physische Klasse. Berichte 93: 93-114.

 Millas-Vallicrosa, José Maria. 1931. Abruam bar Hiiu, Llibre de geometriu. Hibburhameixihci uehatixboret.

 Barcelona: Editorial Alpha.

 Moyon, Mark. 2007. La tradition algébrique arabe du traité d'Al-Khwârizmî au Moyen Âge latin et la place

 de la Géométrie. In Histoire et enseignement des mathématiques. Rigueurs, erreurs, raisonnements, ed.
 Evelyne Barbin, and Dominique Bénard, 289-318. Lyon: INRP.

 Mueller, Ian. 1981. Philosophy of mathematics and deductive structure in Euclid's Elements. Cambridge.

 704 L. Corry

 MA: MIT Press.

 Murdoch, John. 1966. Euclides Graeco-Latinus: A Hitherto unknown medieval Latin translation of the

 Elements made directly from the Greek. Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 71: 249-302.

 Murdoch, John. 1968. The medieval Euclid: Salient aspects of the translations of the Elements by Adelard

 of Bath and Campanus of Novara. Revue de synthèse (ser.ll) 1: 64-94.

 Murdoch, John. 1971. Euclid: Transmission of the Elements. Dictionary of Scientific Biography 4:

 437-459.

 Murdoch, John. 2003. Transmission into use: The evidence of Marginalia in the medieval Euclides Latinus.

 Revue d'histoire des sciences 56(2): 369-382.

 Neal, Katherine. 2002. From discrete to continuous: The broadening of the number concepts in Early

 Netz, Reviel. 1999. The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics: A study in cognitive history. Cambridge:

 Modern England. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

 Cambridge University Press.

 Oaks, Jeffrey. 2001. Geometry and proof in Abu Kâmil's Algebra. In Actes du lOème Colloque Maghrébim
 sur l'Histoire des Mathématiques Arabes, 234-256. Tunis: L'Association Tunisienne des Sciences Math
 ématiques.

 Oaks, Jeffrey. 2011. Al-Khayyâm's scientific revision of Algebra. Suhayl: Journal for the History of the

 Exact and Natural Sciences in Islamic Civilisation 10: 47-75.

 Puig, Luis. 1994. El De Numéris Datis de Jordanus Nemorarius como sistema matemâtico de signos.

 Mathesis 10: 47-94.

 Rabinovitch, Nahum L. 1970. Rabbi Levi ben Gershon and the origins of mathematical induction. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 6: 237-248.

 Rommevaux, Sabine. 1999. La proportionnalité numérique dans le Livre VII des Éléments de Campanus.

 Revue d'histoire des mathématiques 5: 83-126.

 Rommevaux, Sabine. 2008. The transmission of the Elements to the Latin West: three case studies. In

 The Oxford handbook of the history of mathematics, ed. Eleanor Robson and Jackie Stedall, 687-706.

 Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Rommevaux, Sabine, Ahmed Djebbar, and Bernard Vitrac. 2001. Remarques sur l'Histoire du Texte des

 Eléments d'Euclide. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 55: 221-295.

 Rose, Paul Lawrence. 1975. The Italian Renaissance of mathematics: Studies on humanists and mathemati

 cians from Petrarch to Galileo. Genève: Librairie Droz.

 Rosen, Frederic 1831. The Algebra of Mohammed ben M usa. London: Murray.

 Saito, Ken. (2004) [1985], Book II of Euclid's Elements in the light of the theory of conic sections. His

 toria Scientiarum 28: 31-60 (Reprinted in Jean Christianidis (ed.). Classics in the History of Greek
 Mathematics, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 240, Dordrecht-Boston: Kluwer,
 pp. 139-168).

 Saito, Ken, and Nathan Sidoli. 2012. Diagrams and arguments in ancient Greek mathematics: Lessons

 drawn from comparisons of the manuscript diagrams with those of modern critical editions. In The

 history of mathematical proof in ancient traditions, ed. Karine Chemla, 135-162. Cambridge: Cambridge

 Sarfatti, Gad B. 1968. Mathematical terminology in Hebrew Scientific Literature of the Middle Ages

 0»J'J/7 »> ΤΡΊΙΪΙΠΓΡΙΠΟΠ Π)ΊΒ02 ΠΡ'ΰΰΠα TO»· Jerusalem: Magnes Press.

 Sesiano, Jacques. 1987. Survivance médiévale en Hispanie d'un problème né en Mésopotamie. Centaurus

 University Press.

 30(1): 18-61.

 Sesiano, Jacques. 1993. La version latine médiévale de l'Algèbre d'Abû Kâmil. In Vestigia Mathematica.
 Studies in Medieval and Early Modem Mathematics in Honour of H. L. L. Busard, ed. Menso Folkerts,

 and Jan P. Hogendijk, 315-452. Amsterdam et Atlanta: Rodopi.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A view from Book II 705

 Sigler, Laurence Ε. 2002. Fibonacci's Liber Abaci. A translation into Modern English of Leonardo Pisano's
 Book of Calculation. New York: Springer (Sources and Studies in the History of Mathematics and
 Physical Sciences).

 Simi, Annalisa. 2004. L'eredità della Practica geometriae di Leonardo Pisano nella geometria del basso

 Medioevo e del primo Rinascimento. Bollettino di Storia della Scienze Matematiche 24: 9-43.

 Simonson, Shai. 2000a. The missing problems of Gersonides—A critical edition. Historia Mathematica

 Simonson, Shai. 2000b. The missing problems of Gersonides—A critical edition. Historia Mathematica

 27(3): 243-302.

 27(4): 384—431.

 Tummers, Paul M.J.E. 1980. The commentary of Albert on Euclid's Elements of Geometry. In Albertus

 Magnus and the Sciences: Commemorative Essays, ed. J.A. Weisheipl, 479^498. Toronto: Pontifical
 Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

 Tummers, Paul M.J.E. 1994. Anaritius' commentary on Euclid. The Latin translation I-IV

 (Artistarium Supplementa IX). Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers.

 Unguru, Sabetai. 1975. On the need to rewrite the history of Greek mathematics. Archive for History of

 Exact Sciences 15: 67-114.

 Mathematica 1: 1-49.

 Mathematica 2: 1-62.

 Sciences 15: 199-210.

 275-292.

 Unguru, Sabetai and David Rowe. 1981—1982a. Does the Quadratic Equation have Greek Roots? Libertas

 Unguru, Sabetai, and David Rowe. 1981—1982b. Does the Quadratic Equation have Greek Roots? Libertas

 van der Waerden, Battel L. 1976. Defense of a 'Shocking' point of view. Archive for History of Exact

 Vitrac, Bernard. 2003. Les scholies grecques aux Éléments d'Euclide. Revue d'histoire des sciences 56:

 Vitrac, Bernard. 2004. A propos des démonstrations alternatives et autres substitutions de preuves dans les

 Éléments d'Euclide. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 59: 1-44.

 Vitrac, Bernard. 2011. Faut-il réhabiliter Héron d'Alexandrie? Montpellier: France. (Downloaded May 02,

 2012, from http://hal-parisl.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00454027).

 Vitrac, Bernard, and Maurice Caveing. 1990. Euclide d'Alexandrie. Les Éléments. Traduit du texte de

 Heiberg (Vol. I. Introduction générale par Maurice Caveing. Livres 1-1V: géométrie plane. Traduction
 et commentaires par Bernard Vitrac). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

 Vlasschaert, Anne-Marie. 2012 .Le Liber Mahameleth: Édition critique et commentaries. Stuttgart: Franz

 Weil, André. 1978. Who betrayed Euclid? Archive for History of Exact Sciences 19: 91-94.

 Weinberg, Josef. 1935. Die Algebra des Abu Kâmil Sogâ 'ben Aslam. Miinchen: Druck der Salesianischen

 Steiner Verlag.

 Offizin.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

