 

 

 

 

Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought in the Transmission of Theodosius' "Spherics"

from Antiquity to the Renaissance
Author(s): Michela Malpangotto
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 1 (January 2010), pp. 75-112
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342412
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:42 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:75-1 12
 DOI 1 0. 1 007/s00407-009-0054- 1

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought
 in the Transmission of Theodosius' Spherics
 from Antiquity to the Renaissance

 Michela Malpangotto

 Received: 27 July 2009 / Published online: 29 October 2009

 © Springer- Verlag 2009

 Abstract Spherical geometry studies the sphere not simply as a solid object in itself,

 but chiefly as the spatial context of the elements which interact on it in a complex three-

 dimensional arrangement. This compels to establish graphical conventions appropriate

 for rendering on the same plane - the plane of the diagram itself - the spatial arrange-

 ment of the objects under consideration. We will investigate such "graphical choices"
 made in the Theodosius' Spherics from antiquity to the Renaissance. Rather than

 undertaking a minute analysis of every particular element or single variant, we will

 try to uncover the more general message each author attempted to convey through his

 particular graphical choices. From this analysis, it emerges that the different kinds of

 representation are not the result of merely formal requirements but mirror substantial
 geometrical requirements expressing different ways of interpreting the sphere and

 testify to different ways of reasoning about the elements that interact on it.

 1 Introduction

 Spherical geometry allows numerous choices in representing the element under
 study, since it involves the sphere not simply as a solid object in itself, but chiefly
 as the spatial context of the arcs, line segments and circles determined on it by
 the intersection of different inclined plans in a complex three-dimensional spatial

 arrangement. This allows one to choose the representation and to establish graphical
 conventions appropriate for rendering on the same plane - the plane of the diagram

 Communicated by A.E. Shapiro.

 M. Malpangotto (C3)
 CNRS, UMR 8630 "Systèmes de référence temps-espace",
 Observatoire de Paris, 61 Avenue de l'Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France

 e-mail: Michela.Malpangotto@obspm.fr

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 76 M. Malpangotto

 itself - the combined, and sometimes complex, spatial arrangement of the objects

 under consideration. We will investigate such "graphical choices" made in Theodosius'

 Spherics from antiquity to the Renaissance.

 The Sphaericorum Elementorum libri tres , composed in the first century ВС by

 Theodosius of Tripoli, contains a logically structured set of 59 propositions divided

 into three books of increasing interest and difficulty. The first book explains the funda-

 mental properties of circles lying on the sphere. The second book studies the relations

 between circles which are parallel or tangent or intersect one another and analyses
 the interactions between them. The third book, whose often long and particularly
 complex enunciations are nearly all concerned with great circles, considers ratios and

 proportions between diameters and arcs determined by certain criteria.

 Theodosius' work is a fundamental account of spherical geometry: it develops the

 subject on the basis of the plane and solid geometry of Euclid's Elements . The principal
 reason for its broad diffusion, however, was probably its usefulness as an introduc-

 tion to astronomy. Being a part of the Little Astronomy ,' the collection of books put

 together by the Greeks as useful for understanding Ptolemy's Almagest , it shared the

 same process of transmission common to the principal mathematical works of ancient
 Greece.

 The Spherics was studied and transmitted in the Greek world for at least ten centu-

 ries and has left some manuscript evidence of this transmission.2 In the ninth century,
 it was translated into Arabic,3 entering the emerging Arabo-Islamic culture, which,

 nourishing an interest in astronomy, translated the Greek Little Astronomy and enriched

 this corpus with new contributions, transforming it into the Middle Books , that is to

 say, the books between Euclid's Elements and Ptolemy's Almagest, where Theodosius'
 Spherics was still found.4

 Theodosius' work entered the scientific heritage of the Latin West after the twelfth

 century exclusively from the Arabic redactions in two different versions: A translation

 due to Gerard of Cremona, in which the text is largely faithful to the Greek tradition;5

 1 This collection is preserved in Greek manuscripts. It included Aristarchus' The Sizes and Distances of
 the Sun and Moon , Autolycus' On Rising and Settings and On the Moving Sphere , Euclid's Catoptrics ,
 Data , Optics , and Phenomena , Hypsicles' On Ascensions , Theodosius' On Geographic Places , On Days
 and Nights , and Spherics. Menelaus' Sphaericorum libri tres was also part of this collection, but it is lost

 in Greek, and it is only known in Arabic and Arabo-Latin versions. For a detailed description of the Little
 Astronomy and its role in Greek culture see Evans (1998, pp. 89-91).

 2 The oldest manuscript known is in the Vaticanus Graecus 204 (tenth century). Heiberg (1927) lists a
 total of 24 manuscripts containing the Greek text of Spherics and made his edition by collating six of
 them: Vaticanus Graecus 204 (tenth century); Parisinus Graecus 2390 (thirteenth to fourteenth century);
 Vaticanus Graecus 203 (thirteenth century); Vaticanus Graecus 202 (fourteenth century); Parisinus Graecus
 2448 (fourteenth century); Parisinus Graecus 2342 (fourteenth century). Czinczenheim (2000) adds the
 Vaticanus Graecus 191 (thirteenth century) and the Parisinus Graecus 2364 (fifteenth century).

 For the study of diagrams the manuscript Laur.Or. 124 has been directly examined.

 4 Lorch (1996, pp. 164-165).

 5 Gerard of Cremona's translation was transmitted in manuscript form and was not printed until the
 present time. The faithfulness of Gerard's version to the Greek one is based on our analysis of
 Q.69 sup. in Milan Biblioteca Ambrosiana, but it is confirmed by Czinczenheim (2000, pp. 195, 200): "Par
 conséquent, à défaut de pouvoir accéder directement aux deux premières traductions arabes, la traduction

 de Gérard de Crémone représente, après les manuscrits grecs, l'apport le plus précieux à la recherche d'un

 état ancien du texte. ... les traductions arabo-latines permettraient alors de remonter à une branche disparue

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 77

 and a version usually ascribed to Plato of Tivoli,6 which presents a heavy reworking

 of Theodosius' three books. In the scientific renaissance of the sixteenth century no
 less than six editions were printed.

 The many versions of the Spherics in existence today allow us to follow the com-

 plete tradition of the work and to trace its change from Antiquity to the Renaissance.

 Throughout this long period the contents had been gradually enriched with the intro-

 duction of new properties and results that mark progress in the knowledge of spherical

 geometry and rendered the demonstrations simpler. The iconographie apparatus also

 underwent changes and alterations that compel us to try to understand the reasons for

 these modifications and to clarify the function that the diagrams had among different

 cultures in various epochs. From our analysis, it emerges that the different styles of

 representation are not the result of merely formal requirements but reflect substantial

 geometrical requirements expressing different ways of interpreting the sphere and

 testify to different ways of reasoning about the elements that interact on it.

 In the sixteenth century, printers, guided principally by commercial demand, usually

 preferred to publish those texts that had broad manuscript circulation to ensure a profit
 in the immediate future. In Venice in 1518, both Lucantonio Giunta and Ottavianus

 Scoto's heirs chose to print the version by Plato of Tivoli, which then becomes the edi-

 tto princeps of Theodosius' Sphaericorum elementorum libri. These nearly identical

 printed editions presented a very corrupt and imprecise text: Whole phrases or sen-
 tences are omitted or repeated, probably because of copyists' imprecision; incorrect

 references to the diagram's lettering occur; diagrams are sometimes printed without

 letters marking their points; some figures are missing entirely; and some diagrams do

 not refer to the proposition in whose vicinity they are printed.

 In order to produce a text free from these blemishes, the Viennese mathematician
 Johannes Voegelin decided to correct the existing edition7 using two manuscripts
 to bring the Spherics back to its "original splendour": "Iccirco comparatis duobus
 vetustis exemplaribus, altero ex Viennensis Gymnasii bibliotheca, altero ex Musaeo
 Collimitii ...Theodosium ...pristino restitui nitori."8 He claimed a philological care

 that, although honestly expressed, remained far from restoring the ancient text of the
 Greek tradition. At any rate, in 1529 Voegelin published in Vienna a more correct
 edition of Plato of Tivoli's version than that already printed.9

 Footnote 5 continued

 de la tradition grecque, qui pourrait fournir des leçons authentiques au même titre que les manuscrits grecs
 conservés." For further informations about Gerard of Cremona's works see Boncompagni (1851b).

 6 This attribution was first made by Jean Pena (1558) (see n. 13). His authority was then followed in
 Boncompagni (1851a, pp. 251-252) and Heiberg (1927, p. VIII). In contrast Lorch (1996) advances the
 hypothesis that this Latin version is due to Campanus of Novara. This opens the problem of the actual
 attribution of the changes made to the original text. See n. 29. We will follow tradition and refer to this
 version as Plato of Tivoli's.

 7 The description given by Voegelin precisely describes the real inaccuracies of the Spherics ' edition of
 1518: "... sunt aliquot lacunae, sunt et verba interdum, interdum etiam integrae sententiae praetermissae;
 schematibus etiam linearibus et multa insunt, et multa desunt, quae lectoris animum perplexum faciunt"

 (Voegelin 1529, c. sign. A iij).

 8 Voegelin (1529, c. sign. A iij recto- verso).

 ^ Voegelin explicitly declares his original contributions to the text: "Addidi praeterea paucas adnotatiuncu-
 las, ut a divinae Matheseos studiosis legi atque intelligi melius possit" (Voegelin 1529, c. sign. A iij verso).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 78 M. Malpangotto

 The year 1558 was a turning point in the Spherics tradition because in that year the

 printed versions of the text ended their dependence on the medieval heritage and par-

 ticipated in the Renaissance of mathematics, reflecting its two fundamental aspects, a
 critical philological approach to manuscript sources and mathematical analysis of the

 contents of the ancient works. In Paris, Jean Pena, motivated by philological interest,

 prepared the Greek editio princeps of the Spherics and restored the ancient work to

 its original form and language, followed by a faithful Latin translation.10 The French

 mathematician considered his own contribution an important "conquest"11 because,
 at last, anyone who wanted to compare the medieval Arabo-Latin version of Plato of

 Tivoli with the Greek text could clearly recognise how much easier and shorter the
 original was: "... si quis ilium Theodosium ex Arabico versum et Venetiis excusum,
 cum Graeco conférât, incredibile discrimen non modo facilitatis, sed etiam brevitatis
 inveniet."12

 In his preface, Pena initiated a concern with the transmission of Theodosius' work.

 For the first time in the European tradition, he presented the history of the transmis-

 sion starting from its renown among the Greeks and arriving at the Venetian edition
 of 1518. Relying on an anonymous work about burning mirrors, Pena ascribed the
 edition to the Arabo-Latin translator Plato of Tivoli: ". . . earn versionem annis ab hinc

 quadraginta Venetiis excuderunt, quam a Platone Tiburtino factam fuisse asseverai

 author libelli De speculis ustoriis, quisquís ille sit."13 In this way, it was natural for
 Pena to assign the origin of all the modifications characterising that version to Arabic
 mathematicians.14

 In Messina, in the same year, 1558, Francesco Maurolico interpreted the recovery
 of the mathematical tradition in a completely different way and published the Sph-
 aericorum elementorum libri tres ex traditione Maurolyci. Persuaded of the dignity
 of mathematical knowledge, Maurolico regretted the silence that had fallen on the

 ancient works of Euclid, Archimedes, Theodosius, Menelaus, Apollonius, and Ser-
 enus, as well as the corruption of their texts.15 Hence, he carried out a program of

 Footnote 9 continued

 These contributions were placed at the end of the demonstrations and introduced by his name "Voegelin".
 Some of them are intended to clarify the mathematical demonstrations, while others pertain to astronomy
 (see also n. 30). Since none of these additions became a proposition, their number is the same in the two
 editions of 1518 and 1529.

 10 Before the edition of Jean Pena, the only Latin translation of the Greek text was made by Giorgio Valla
 who published only a selection of 24 propositions of Theodosius' Spherics in the geometrical section of his
 De expetendis et fugiendis rebus opus (Valla 1501).

 1 1 Jean Pena likens his work on the Spherics to the French conquest of Calais made in the same year, 1558
 (Pena 1558, с. sign, a ij recto-verso).

 12 Pena (1558, с. sign, a iiij).

 13 Pena (1558, с. sign, a iij verso-a iiij).

 Pena (1558, с. sign, a iiij): "Primo enim Theodosius sex septemve definitionibus tantum contentus fuit.
 At Arabes alias septem easque fere supervacaneas adiecerunt. Theodosius multitudinem theorematum cons-

 ulto vitavit, et totum Sphaericum negotium sexaginta propositionibus absolvit. At Arabes hune numerum
 tríente auxerunt, et pro sexagenis octogenas cumularunt."

 15 F. Maurolico in his letter to Pietro Bembo, sent from Messina in May 1536 says: "Cur silet Euclides
 praestantissimus? Cur silet Archimedes ac Theodosius? Cur Menelai, Apollonii, Sereni praeclara nusquam

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 79

 restoring the ancient works so that the knowledge they contained - set free of errors,

 gaps and imperfections - should shine again.16 Far from pursuing a philological and

 faithful reconstruction made by strictly adhering to the manuscript sources, Maurolico

 was guided by an interest in the enrichment of scientific knowledge. Hence, he inte-

 grated the original works with various contributions made throughout the centuries17
 and presented the works' content following a rigour that he regarded as proper to
 mathematics.

 2 Aims and method

 This article presents the results of an analysis that focuses attention on the graph-
 ical aspect of four versions of Theodosius' Spherics : (1) the Greek version, taking
 the manuscript Vaticanus Graecus 204 as a characteristic representative of the orig-
 inal tradition; (2) the medieval version of Plato of Tivoli, which, from the graph-

 ical point of view, still follows the ancient tradition; (3) the Renaissance version
 ex traditione Maurolyci , which marks an important change in the graphic repre-
 sentation of the spherical elements; and (4) Cristoph Clavius' version of 1586,
 which adopted Maurolico's iconographie conception, and by somewhat rework-
 ing Maurolico's diagrams, started the modern tradition of the diagrams of the
 Spherics.

 For each of them, in the following sections, we will faithfully reproduce, by means

 of the electronic program DRaFT,18 the more representative diagrams to show their

 peculiar features and their distinctive traits. In order to make a comparison between
 the examined versions more evident and immediate, in the Appendix, we present a

 table of all the diagrams considered in the article.

 Rather than undertaking a minute analysis of every particular element or single

 variant, we will try to uncover the more general message each author attempted to

 convey through his particular graphical choices. From this analysis, it emerges that

 the different kinds of representation are not the result of merely formal requirements

 but mirror substantial geometrical requirements expressing different ways of inter-

 preting the sphere and testify to different ways of reasoning about the elements that
 interact on it.

 From a detailed study of individual diagram-proposition couples, we will attempt

 to grasp the relation between each proposition's content and the related diagram con-

 adiuntur nomina? ... Et horum si quid circumfertur, tot tantisque scatet mendis, ut vix etiam ab authore

 Footnote 15 continued

 ipso emendari possit" Maurolico (2002, III).

 16 Maurolico (2002, III): "Ego . . . nisus sum collatis priscis exemplaribus et dictorum authorum et aliorum
 opera complura emaculare et in suum restituere nitorem For a survey about Maurolico's researches
 and contributions see Moscheo (1988). See also http://www.dm.unipl.it/pages/maurolic/.

 17 F. Maurolico in a letter to Juan de Vega, sent from Messina in August 1556, says: "... si quid in his a
 tralatoribus bene traditum aut additum fuisset, id non omitterem. Demum, si quid ego quod ad correctionem

 aut faciliorem demonstrandi viam faceret excogitassem, id cum venia eruditorum traderem" Maurolico
 (2002, XII, paragraphs 7-8).

 18 This program enables the redrawing of diagrams while faithfully reproducing the original figure. For
 more details see http://www.hs.osakafu-u.ac.jp/~ken.saito/diagram/index.html.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 80 M. Malpangotto

 firming, with increasing evidence, the strong connection of text and drawing as two

 elements mutually complementing one another in an inseparable unity: Neither alone

 is sufficient to understand the work's contents. The diagrams visualise the text, and
 the text explains the role and properties of the drawn elements according to a com-

 plementarity in which the conventions of both the written text and the drawn diagram
 play a fundamental role.

 While the study of each geometrical diagram cannot ignore the content of the related

 proposition, it is also necessary to situate this particular analysis within the broader

 context of the whole work: its aims and the scientific domain to which it pertains. Pro-

 ceeding in this way, it becomes possible to suggest an interpretation of the Spherics '

 diagrams that, while not an exhaustive answer to the issues involved, is presented as a

 working hypothesis for future research. In fact, the extension of the domain of enquiry

 and the interaction with current studies19 will progressively lead to a more complete

 understanding and to a more conscious comprehension of the role of diagrams in the
 mathematical works.

 3 The diagrams of the Spherics in the ancient tradition

 In Greek manuscripts of the Spherics 20 one can recognise two, clearly distinct, homo-

 geneous kinds of representation, which lead us to consider Theodosius' work as being
 divided, at least as regards to the graphic aspect, into two parts: The first part covers

 propositions 1.1 to II. 16;21 and the second part covers all the other propositions, from
 11.17 to III. 17.

 The common feature of the text of all the propositions of the first part is a constant,

 explicit reference to the sphere, "in the sphere", as the context where the proper-
 ties under consideration occur and the demonstrations are developed. Surprisingly,
 in the diagrams accompanying these same propositions, however, the sphere is not
 depicted.22 In a number of cases, the circles produced on the sphere by the intersec-

 tion of variously inclined planes, are all represented as lying side by side in the plane of

 the diagram. Both the arcs and linear segments lying on different planes are flattened,

 and objects lying on the far side of the sphere are turned out, into the plane of the
 figure, to make them visible on the plane of the diagram.

 19 For a survey of recent results see De Young (2005), Eastwood and Grasshof (2003), Keller (2005), Netz
 (1999), Saito (2006).

 The critical editions in Heiberg (1927) and Czinczenheim (2000) are taken as representatives of the
 Greek text; while for the study of the diagrams the ancient manuscripts Vat.Gr.204 and Marc.Gr.301 have
 been directly examined.

 21 Diagrams of III. 1 and III.2 can be added to this group: they are two lemmas of solid geometry in which
 the considered circles do not lie on a sphere.

 22 It should be noted that in Vat.Gr.204, three diagrams - those for propositions 1.13, 1.14, and 1.15 - do
 not agree with this general condition; while in the Hebrew-Arabic manuscript of Florence Biblioteca Lau-

 renziana and in both the Arabo-Latin versions - that of Gerard of Cremona and that commonly attributed
 to Plato of Tivoli (in manuscripts as well as in the printed editions of 15 18, 1529)- their shape is consistent
 with all the other diagrams of the first part of Theodosius' work, leading one to believe that the latter was
 their authentic form.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 8 1

 In contrast with this approach, the diagrams of the second part of Spherics
 offer a clear image in perspective view of the sphere as the actual context in which
 the geometric elements interact. These images invalidate the common hypothesis
 according to which Greek geometers did not have access to the techniques of three-
 dimensional representation. They rather compel us to suppose the existence of a pre-
 cise and consistent iconographie approach according to which the author has clearly

 distinguished between the two parts of his work through the graphic aspect. This opens

 the problem of decoding, understanding and bringing out the implicit reasons for this
 distinction.

 Let us consider some general examples, grouping them according to the principal

 subjects examined in the related propositions.23

 3.1 The first part of the Spherics

 3.1.1 General properties of circles of the sphere

 Proposition 1.6
 Enunciation: "On a sphere, circles which pass through the sphere's center are the

 greatest ones; of the others, those which are equally far from the center, are equal,
 while those, which are farther from the center, are smaller."

 Construction: "Let the circles AB, ГА, EZ be on the sphere, of which Г A passes

 through the sphere's center, while AB, EZ are, in the first case equally far from the

 sphere's center. I say that Г A is the greatest and AB, EZ are equal. (...) If, in the
 second case, AB is farther from the sphere's center than EZ; I say that the circle
 AB is less than EZ."

 A z

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Commentary: In the diagram, the three circles, AB, Г A, and EZ are seen side by side

 with no attempt at depicting the sphere in which they lie, obscuring any visual
 evidence that their circumferences are indeed in the same spherical surface. More-

 over, the three points A, M, and N also lie in the same spherical surface and the

 line segments joining them to the sphere's centre H are actually radii of the sphere.

 23 In the following, the manuscript Vat.Gr.204 is taken as the representative of the Greek graphical tradi-
 tion. Its diagrams are faithfully reproduced by means of the electronic program DRaFT (see n. 18), only
 the labelling has been modified by systematically adopting Greek capital letters. The English text of enun-
 ciations and constructions is our translation based on Heiberg's critical edition. The only translations in a

 modern language of the Spherics existing today are the French ones in Ver Eecke (1959) who translates
 Heiberg Greek text; and Czinczenheim (2000) giving a new critical edition of the Greek text followed by a
 translation.

 82 M. Malpangotto

 This kind of representation, however, clearly shows the plane triangles Л0Н
 and NKH: The two planes on which they lie, even if different and differently

 inclined, are identified with the single plane of the diagram. This makes it easier to

 visualise their elements on which the proof depends by applying one of Euclid's

 criteria for congruence to Л0Н, and NKH24 to prove that the line segments A©,

 and NK are equal. Since these are radii of the circles AB, and EZ, the proposition
 is demonstrated.

 Proposition II. 1
 Enunciation: "On a sphere, parallel circles have the same poles."
 Construction: "For, on a sphere, let circles АВГ, AEZ be parallel. I say circles АВГ,

 AEZ have the same poles."

 ■Ф Z

 e

 Commentary: The representation clearly shows the parallelism of the two circles АВГ,

 and AEZ depicted as concentric.

 The two points H, and 0, which are the poles of the parallel circles, are not rep-
 resented on the spherical surface, but as two general points in the plane of the
 diagram; and the straight line connecting them is simply superimposed on the two
 circles without any graphical evidence of the perpendicularity of this line to the

 planes of the parallel circles, despite the fact that this perpendicularity is a necessary
 condition for the proof of the proposition.

 3.1,2 Properties of the axis of a circle lying on a sphere

 Proposition 1.7

 Enunciation: "If, on a sphere, there is a circle and a straight line is traced, both passing

 through the sphere's centre and the circle's centre, then this line is perpendicular
 on the circle."

 24 In the plane triangles Л0Н, and NKH, the angles Л0Н, and NKH are equal by construction, the sides
 H0, and HK are equal by hypothesis, while the sides AH, and HN are equal because they are radii of the
 sphere.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 83

 Construction: "Let AB Г A be a circle on a sphere, E the sphere's centre, and Z that of

 the circle; and let the straight line EZ be traced. I say that EZ is perpendicular to
 the circle AB Г A."

 Commentary: The diagram represents the circle AB Г A as lying in the plane of the

 figure, and its diameters АГ, and В A passing through the circle's centre Z.

 It is impossible to recognise E as the centre of the sphere by looking at the diagram
 alone.

 Proposition 1.8
 Enunciation: "If on a sphere there is a circle, the straight line passing through the

 sphere's centre that is perpendicular to the circle will pass also through the circle's
 poles."

 Construction: "On a sphere let there be the circle АВГ, and let point A be the sphere's

 centre. Through A let there be drawn the straight line perpendicular to ABFs plane,

 intersecting it in the point E; so that E is the centre of the circle АВГ. Extending

 the straight line E A, it intersects the sphere's surface in points Z and H. I say that
 Z, H are the poles of the circle АВГ."

 Z

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 84 M. Malpangotto

 Commentary: As in the previous example, here there is no graphical evidence of the

 specific function of points Z, A, H in the sphere: A represents the centre of the

 sphere, Z and H represent the poles of circle AB which lie on the sphere's surface,

 which is not represented.

 3.1.3 Relations between tangent , parallel , and intersecting circles of the sphere

 Proposition II.6
 Enunciation: "If on a sphere a great circle is tangent to one of the circles which lies

 on the sphere, then it is tangent also to another, equal and parallel to it."

 Construction: "For, on a sphere, let the great circle AB Г be tangent to one of the

 circles, lying on the sphere, Г A in point Г. I say that the circle AB Г is also tangent
 to another circle which is equal and parallel to Г A."

 Г

 Г1 I 1

 25 Theodosius 1.20.

 26 Theodosius II. 1 .

 27 Theodosius II.3.

 Springer

 Commentary: In this diagram, through point E, the pole of circle Г A, and the point of
 tangency Г, the great circle TEABZH is drawn,25 on whose circumference the arc

 BZ is taken equal to arc ГЕ to determine the second pole Z of circle Г A. Thus, Z

 is also the pole of all the circles parallel to it,26 of which the one passing through
 В is tangent to AB Г at В27 and is equal to Г A.28

 The figure depicts all the circles as lying in the plane of the figure so as to show
 more clearly the property of tangency.

 This graphic representation concentrates attention on an auxiliary object, the arc

 of the circumference ГЕН, and makes it clear that both the points of tangency and

 the poles of the tangent circles lay on this arc, which is fundamental to the proof
 of the proposition.

 28 By construction the distance ZB of the pole Z to the circumference BH is equal to the distance ЕГ of
 the pole E to the circumference Г A.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 85

 Proposition II.7

 Enunciation: "If, on a sphere, there are two equal and parallel circles, then a great

 circle which is tangent to one of them, is also tangent to the other."

 Construction: "Let two equal and parallels circles, AB, Г A, be on a sphere. I say that

 a great circle which is tangent to AB, is also tangent to Г A."

 Commentary: The proof uses a reductio ad absurdum argument that relies on the

 impossibility of two equal circles Г AE, and EZ both tangent to the great circle AE

 at the same point E lying on the same sphere.

 Proposition II.9
 Enunciation: "If, on a sphere, two circles intersect one another, and through their poles

 is drawn a great circle, then it will cut their arcs in equal parts."

 Construction: "For, on a sphere, the circles ZAEB, ZrEA intersect one another in

 points Z, E, and the circle АГВА is drawn through their poles. I say that АГВ A
 cuts the arcs of ZAEB, ZrEA in equal parts, namely, that the arc ZA is equal to

 AE, ZB is equal to BE, Z Г to ГЕ, and ZA to AE."

 Commentary: The diagram shows clearly the common section of the two circles, EZ,
 and their circumferences' arcs whose equality must be shown. The proof points out

 the relations of perpendicularity and bisection of the linear segments ZE, AB, and

 Г A determined by the intersection of the planes of the three circles.

 Visually, it is not easy to grasp the spatial arrangement of the circles on the sphere.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 86 M. Malpangotto

 3.2 A suggested interpretation

 The diagrams that we have examined are not anomalous cases. They express general
 trends to which all the diagrams of the first part of the Spherics systematically conform.

 This kind of drawing makes it difficult to recognise the spherical reality. The correct

 interpretation of these diagrams is disclosed only by reading the text. In fact, it is the

 construction given in the text which enables the reader to rebuild every drawn element

 in its spherical reality, and thus make clear the spatial relationships among them. All

 of this leads us to interpret this "plane" representation, characterising the first part of

 the Spherics , as a particular choice adopted by the author to graphically concentrate
 the attention, case by case, on specific elements which have a fundamental role in

 each proposition, to the detriment of the spherical reality in which these properties
 take place.

 If one considers comprehensively the complete contents of each of these proposi-

 tions, one notices that they examine general properties pertaining to the domain of pure

 geometry. One then naturally infers that in this homogeneous technique of represen-
 tation, Theodosius considered the first part of his Spherical elements as an extension

 of Euclid's Elements of geometry?9 whose graphic tradition - especially that of the

 stereometric books - is followed by him in the first part of his Spherics.

 In contrast, starting with the seventeenth proposition of the second book, the dia-

 grams are more consistent with the domain of spherical geometry, which is represented

 in a realistic way. The sphere becomes fundamental as the context containing all the
 elements involved in the proposition, which are now drawn in perspective view. The

 propositions they pertain to analyse specific properties and relations whose chief func-

 tion is to be an instrument particularly useful in astronomy. It becomes necessary to
 adopt a more complete graphical representation of the spherical context in its whole

 by means of diagrams whose content can be easily shifted to the celestial reality. In
 fact, if one identifies the sphere now actually represented with the celestial sphere,
 it is easy to recognise the ecliptic, the equator, the solstitial and equinoctial colures,
 the right and oblique horizon, and parallel and meridian circles, from which one

 can then compare the relations between particular arcs corresponding to the celes-
 tial coordinates, such as declination, right and oblique ascension, and latitude and
 longitude.

 Let us consider some examples of diagrams pertaining to the second part of

 Spherics.

 29 This continuity is confirmed by the version traditionally attributed to Plato of Tivoli, where the three
 books of Theodosius' Elements of Spherical Geometry are numbered the 16th, 17th, and 18th, follow-

 ing the fifteen books of Euclid's Elements of Geometry. This occurs not only in manuscripts, but also in
 both the printed editions of 1518 and 1529, although these volumes do not contain Euclid's Elements. In

 these editions of the Spherics , the references to propositions legitimizing Theodosius' demonstrations never

 specify the title of the reference work - Euclid's Elements or Theodosius' Spherics. Distinguishing them
 is clear since books I, VI, and XI are Euclid's, while Theodosius' are numbered XVI, XVII, and XVIII.
 These citations and the link they seem to reveal between Theodosius' three books and Euclid's traditional

 fifteen support Lorch ( 1996)'s attribution of this Latin version of the Spherics to Campanus of Novara, who
 reworked Euclid's Elements and may also have joined these two works.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 87

 3.3 The second part of the Spherics

 3.3.1 Relations between arcs employed in astronomy

 Proposition III.6

 Enunciation: "If the pole of parallel circles lies on the circumference of a great circle, to

 which two other great circles are perpendicular, one of which is one of the parallels

 and the other of which is inclined to the parallels, and two equal and consecutive

 arcs are cut off on the inclined circle on the same side with respect to the greatest of

 the parallel circles, and the great circles passing both through the parallels' poles

 and the arcs' extremities, are drawn, then they mark, on the greatest of the parallels,

 two unequal arcs, of which the one nearer to the original great circle is greater than
 the farther."

 Construction: "For, on the circumference of the great circle АВГ let A be the pole of

 the parallel circles, and the great circle AB Г be perpendicular to two great circles
 BZr, AZE, of which BZr is one of the parallels, while AZE is inclined to the
 parallels. On AZE let two equal and consecutive arcs, K0, ©H, be cut off on the
 same side with respect to the greatest of the parallels BZr ; and describe the great
 circles passing through A and through H, 0, К respectively, AHA, А0М, AKN. I
 say that the arc AM is greater than the arc MN."

 Commentary: Since this proof uses propositions already demonstrated in the Spherics ,

 its diagram can be visualised entirely on the surface of the sphere, with no reference
 to internal objects.
 On the celestial sphere, where BZr is considered as the equator and AE as the

 ecliptic, the proposition shows that the right ascension of equal arcs on the ecliptic
 increases continuously with the distance from the solsticial point Z. For example,

 Gemini's right ascension is greater than Taurus' right ascension, which is in turn

 greater than that of Aries.

 Proposition III.7
 Enunciation: "If, on a sphere, a great circle is tangent to one of the circles lying on the

 sphere, and another great circle, inclined to parallels, is tangent to another circle

 that is parallel to the first and greater than it, being the tangent point on the first

 great circle considered; and on the inclined great circle two equal and consecutive

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 88 M. Malpangotto

 arcs are cut off, on the same side with respect to the greatest of parallels; the parallel

 circles, passing through the extremities of these arcs, then cut off on the first great

 circle considered two unequal arcs, of which the one nearer to the greatest parallel

 is greater than the farer one."

 Construction: "For, on a sphere, let the great circle AB Г be tangent to one of the circles

 lying on the sphere A A at point A; let another great circle EZH, inclined to parallel

 circles, be tangent to a circle which is greater than AA, having the tangent points
 E, H on АВГ; and let BZr be the greatest of parallels. Then, on the inclined circle
 EZH, let two equal and consecutive arcs AK, K© be cut off on the same side with

 respect to the greatest parallel BZr; and through the points A, K, 0 let the parallel
 circles ПАР, SKO, M©N be described. I say that the arc ПЕ is greater than the
 arc SM."

 Commentary: Since this proof uses propositions already demonstrated in the Spherics ,

 its diagram can be visualised entirely on the surface of the sphere, with no reference
 to internal objects.

 On the celestial sphere, where AB Г is the oblique horizon, Y the visible pole,

 and EZH the ecliptic, then the ortive amplitude of equal arcs taken on the ecliptic
 diminishes with the distance from the solstitial point Z. For example, the ortive
 amplitude of Gemini is smaller than that of Taurus, which is in its turn smaller than
 that of Aries.

 Proposition III. 1 1

 Enunciation: "If the pole of parallel circles lies on the circumference of a great circle to

 which two other great circles are perpendicular, one of which is one of the parallels

 and the other of which is inclined to the parallels, and another great circle described

 through the poles of the parallels intersects the inclined one between the greatest
 of the parallels and the parallel circle which is tangent to the inclined one; then
 the ratio between the diameter of the sphere and the diameter of the circle which

 is tangent to the inclined one is greater than the ratio between the arcs determined

 respectively on the greatest parallel and the great inclined circle by the first great
 circle and the one described through the poles."

 Construction: "For, on the circumference of the great circle AB Г is placed the pole
 A of parallel circles, and the circle AB Г is perpendicular to two great circles ВЕГ

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 89

 and AEZ, of which ВЕГ is the greatest of parallels and AEZ is inclined on them;

 another great circle AHK described through the parallels' poles intersects AEZ
 between ВЕГ and the circle which is tangent to AEZ, and let AAM be the circle
 which is tangent to AEZ. I say that the ratio between the diameter of the sphere

 and the diameter of the circle AAM is greater than the ratio between the arc B©
 and the arc AH."

 Commentary: The diagram shows both the elements on the sphere's surface, whose

 interactions produce the arcs considered in the thesis, as well as the plane sections

 inside the sphere producing secondary auxiliary lines marking the plane triangles,

 which allow one to prove the thesis using Euclid's plane theorems.
 On the celestial sphere, ВЕГ being the equator, AEZ the ecliptic and AM a tropic
 circle, this theorem concludes that the ratio between the right ascension and the

 corresponding arc of the ecliptic is smaller than the ratio between the sphere's
 diameter and the tropic circle's diameter.

 This drawing reveals that Greek geometers could just as well have adopted this

 same graphic technique in the diagrams of the first part of the Spherics , and offers a

 further argument that the graphic choices are motivated by reasons linked to the dis-
 tinction between the ambits of interest. It is worthy of note that the text of the Spherics

 always expresses itself in purely geometrical terms without any explicit reference
 to astronomy.30 It is only the diagrams which translate and reveal different concep-
 tual exigencies such as that the work's content pertains to two different domains of
 mathematical knowledge, geometry and astronomy.

 30 Some remarks containing the transposition of Theodosius' geometric properties on the circles of the
 celestial sphere appear for the first time in Voegelin (1529). Voegelin himself says in his note to 1.17:
 "Accommoda schema hoc sphaerae armillari et nihil te remorabitur". These contributions are placed at the
 end of the demonstrations and introduced by his name "Voegelin", see also n. 9. Only in the 1 7th century, did

 Pierre Herigone, in his edition of the Spherics , introduce as "Corollaries" the astronomical transpositions
 of Theodosius' theorems, being the first author to follow Voegelin's suggestion. See Herigone (1644).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 90 M. Malpangotto

 4 The early printed diffusion of Spherics: Plato of Tivoli 's version

 In the course of our analysis, particular attention must be paid to the Arabo-Latin medi-

 eval version usually ascribed to Plato of Tivoli,3 1 for it was the basis of the early printed

 diffusion of the Spherics with the three editions in the sixteenth century. These editions
 transmitted Theodosius' work with additions that enriched and widened its contents

 in a substantial manner: The definitions were doubled; the number of propositions

 increased from 59 to 79; and the work's structure was modified, with some propositions

 originally in the third book being transferred to the second. These textual changes do

 not correspond to any similar attitude towards the graphical content, which was main-

 tained unchanged, preserving the previous tradition to which the new diagrams, relat-

 ing to the new propositions, also conformed, as the following examples will show.32

 4.1 The first part of the Spherics

 4.1.1 General properties of circles of the sphere

 Proposition 1.33

 Enunciation: "The circles described on a sphere which have straight lines joining their

 poles to their circumferences equal are equal."

 Construction: "Let two circles ab , cd , whose poles are e and /, be described on a

 sphere whose center is g , and extend the straight lines from their poles to their

 circumferences ea.fc, which are equal. I say that circles ab , cd are equal."

 e f

 Commentary: This style of representation is clearly similar to those found in the dia-

 grams of the Greek tradition that are adopted to illustrate the general properties of

 circles on the sphere. As in 1.6, here the two circles ab , cd are seen side by side with

 no attempt at depicting the sphere in which they lie, obscuring any visual evidence
 that a single spherical surface holds both the poles e , / and the circumferences of

 32 For the study of this Latin version the manuscripts Q.112.sup and C.241.inf in Milan, Biblioteca

 Ambrosiana, and the printed editions of Lucantonio Giunta and Ottaviano Scoto's heirs have been directly
 examined. The diagrams of the printed edition published in Venice by Lucatonio Giunta in 15 18 are faith-

 fully reproduced here by means of the electronic program DRaFT (see n. 18). This edition uses both capital
 and lower case Latin letters on the diagrams (sometimes also in the same diagram); we always use lower
 case letters.

 31 Seen. 6.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 9 1

 the circles, in particular the points a and c. Moreover, the four lines ag , eg,fg and

 eg joining these points to the sphere's centre, g - whose role is also unrecognizable

 in such a drawing - are radii of the sphere.

 The plane triangles aeg , gfc , however, are clearly shown, and the two planes on

 which they lie, even if different and differently inclined, are identified with the

 plane of the diagram: the same plane where we also see the two circles ab , cd , even

 if they are orthogonal to them.

 Proposition II. 3
 Enunciation: "On a sphere there are exactly two equal and parallel circles."
 Construction: "Otherwise, let three equal and parallel circles ab, cd, ef be described

 on a sphere: by II. 1 they will have the same poles g , h, and by 1.12 the line join-
 ing g and h will be perpendicular to their planes and pass through their centres,

 which are points k , I, m, and through the sphere's centre which is point n. Since

 the straight lines nk, nl and nm, by definition, determine the distance of each circle

 from the sphere's centre, it will follow, by 1.6, that these three lines are equal, but

 it is impossible. So, on a sphere there are exactly two equal and parallel circles."

 âÇ^)h Ti

 cQd

 g

 1

 Commentary: The diagram places side by side in the plane of the drawing all three

 circles supposed equal and parallel on the same sphere, and the straight line joining

 the two common poles g, h. This line is drawn through them without any graphical
 evidence that it is orthogonal to the circles' planes. In this representation one can

 easily recognise the same graphic choice adopted by the ancient tradition for II.l.
 The sphere is not depicted, and it is impossible to graphically recognise the point
 n's role as the centre of the sphere.

 4.1.2 Properties of the axis of a circle lying on the sphere

 Proposition 1.13
 Enunciation: "Every straight line joining one of the poles of a circle to the sphere's
 centre, if prolonged, will necessarily also pass through the second pole of the
 circle."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 92 M. Malpangotto

 Construction: "For, let the circle ab , whose pole is с, be described on a sphere, whose

 centre is dy and draw the line cd which, being prolonged, intersects the sphere's

 surface in point е. I say that point e is the second pole of the circle аЪГ

 С

 e

 Commentary: As in the ancient tradition, here there is no graphical evidence of the

 specific functions of points c, e , d on the sphere: The point d represents the sphere's

 centre; and с and e represent the poles of circle ab lying on the sphere's surface,
 which is not depicted at all.

 4.1.3 Relations between tangent , parallel , and intersecting circles of the sphere

 Proposition II.9

 Enunciation: "Every pair of parallel circles on the sphere to both of which a <single>

 great circle is tangent are equal."

 Construction: "On a sphere, let ab , cd be two parallel circles to both of which the great

 circle ef is tangent in points a , с. I say that circles ab , cd are equal."

 d

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 93

 Commentary: In this representation, one can easily recognise the same graphic choice

 adopted in the ancient tradition.

 5 Francesco Maurolico's graphic innovation

 Throughout the course of the transmission of the Spherics , in Greek, Arabic and Latin,
 Theodosius' diagrams remained essentially the same33 until 1558, when Francesco

 Maurolico published his Theodosii sphaericorum elementorum libri tres ex îradiîione
 Maurolyci, 34 which inaugurated a more advanced phase of the Renaissance recovery
 of ancient mathematics. The Sicilian mathematician took as his source Plato of Tivoli's

 Arabo-Latin medieval version, of which he retained all the propositions, adopting the
 enunciations verbatim. Nevertheless, he introduced substantial changes to the work,

 adding further propositions, whose number increased from 79 to 84, reworking the
 demonstrations according to the requirements of modernity and renewal, which also

 involved the iconographie apparatus.

 Maurolico's graphic choice is not a mere formality, nor is it simply motivated by
 Renaissance texts on perspective. Instead, it mirrors his own attitude toward objects

 in the sphere, which leads him to prefer to work directly on the sphere's surface. This
 inclination is attested by Maurolico's original proofs in which arguments concerning

 arcs are preferred to the arguments concerning plane and rectilinear sections inside

 the sphere that had prevailed throughout the earlier tradition.

 One case may be taken to illustrate the difference between the traditional approach

 to spherical geometry and Maurolico's. It is problem II. 1 5 in the Greek version, which
 becomes 11.19 ex traditione Maurolyci. The two diagrams are very different and mir-

 ror the different procedures, whose principal steps can be outlined as follows using

 faithful reproductions of the figures.

 Enunciation: "To construct on a sphere a great circle passing through a given point on

 the sphere's surface and tangent to a given circle."

 Commentary: In order to make the comparison easier, Greek and Latin labels have
 been changed so as to mark the same points on the different diagrams by means of

 the same Latin capital letters.35

 On the sphere's surface, let AB be the given circumference on the sphere, and С

 the given point. The pole of AB is taken as D.36

 The problem is solved by locating the pole of the required tangent circle. The
 required pole is a point of the sphere's surface satisfying two conditions: (1) its

 33 We refer to the general stability of the graphic aspects in the overall transmission of the Spherics , ignoring
 minor, individual variants, such as a rotation of 90 degrees.

 34 Maurolico's contribution to spherical geometry is known only through this edition of 1558. No manu-

 script autograph sources have been found. For further information concerning the editorial vicissitudes of
 this volume, see Moscheo (1998, pp. 100-132, 309-316); for a bibliographical description of the whole
 volume's contents, see Moscheo (1998, pp. 283-308).

 3^ The diagram of Vat.Gr.204 is reproduced and employed here to illustrate the solution of the traditional

 version. Both the diagram and the solution remain the same for the entire tradition in all the versions which
 we have examined; the first meaningful change was made by Maurolico in 1558.

 36 Theodosius 1.21, corresponding to Maurolico 1.32.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 94 M. Malpangotto

 D

 К E C i T P

 II. 15 in Vat. Gr. 204 (left), and 11.19 in Maurolico's edition (right). The labelling has
 been modified in order to indicate the same points of the two diagrams with the same
 letters.

 distance from the given point С is a quadrant of a great circumference - or, as the

 Greek text says, is an arc of a great circle subtended by the side of a square inscribed

 in it - ; and (2) its distance from the given circle AB is a quadrant of a great circum-

 ference - or, as the Greek text says, is an arc of a great circle subtended by the side of
 a square inscribed in it.

 The traditional - both Greek and Arabo-Latin - version draws the circle FCG with

 D as a pole and line DC as a distance.

 Then, both the traditional version and Maurolico construct the great circle DCE

 through points D and C.37 On this great circle, the traditional version cuts off the arc
 BE subtended by the side of a square inscribed in it, while Maurolico cuts off the arc

 BE equal to a quadrant of the circumference ABC: then he draws the circle EL parallel
 to AB passing through E; while the traditional version draws the circle FBG with E
 as a pole and line EB as a distance.

 FBG is a great circle38 tangent to circle AB at B39 and cutting the circumference

 FCG at F and G. Through points F and G the traditional version considers, respectively,
 the great circles DFK and DGL also passing through D. On their circumferences arcs
 FK, GL are cut off equal to CE.

 Maurolico, on the other hand, cuts off the arc CP, on the great circumference ABC,

 equal to a quadrant and then draws the circle PL with the given point С as a pole and

 arc CEP as a distance. Great circle PL intersects the circumference of EL in two points,
 one of which is L, whose distance from С is a quadrant of a great circumference by
 construction. In this way, Maurolico has found a point satisfying the first condition for

 the pole of the tangent great circle40: The great circle with L as a pole passes through C.

 37 Theodosius 1.20, corresponding to Maurolico 1.3 1 .

 38 Theodosius 1.17: by construction, the segment EB, from the pole of circle FBG to its circumference, is
 equal to the side of a square inscribed in a great circle.

 39 Theodosius II.3: circles AB and FBG intersect the great circle DB passing through their poles at the
 same point on its circumference, B.
 40 Maurolico '2'.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 95

 The traditional version is more complex and has more steps than Maurolico's. It

 demonstrates that: (1) arc FC is equal to CG41 ; (2) arcs FK, CE, GL are equal by con-
 struction; and (3) the three circles passing through the pole D of FCG are orthogonal
 to FCG.42 This means that all the conditions to apply 11.12 are verified,43 and it is

 possible to conclude that the rectilinear segment FE is equal to the rectilinear segment
 CL. However, since FE is equal to the side of a square inscribed in a great circle,44
 also CL is equal to the side of a square inscribed in a great circle: L satisfies the first
 condition, and the great circle having L as a pole passes through C.

 Let us now consider the second condition. Maurolico does this more simply
 by considering the great circle through L and D.45 On the circumference LD,
 the parallel circles AB and LE cut off an arc NL equal to arc BE,46 which is a
 quadrant by construction. This means that L satisfies the second condition, and
 the great circle CN having L as a pole will be tangent to AB at N. The tradi-
 tional version draws the rectilinear segment NL, proving that it is the side of a
 square inscribed in a great circle as follows. Arcs DF, DC, and DG are equal,
 since D is a pole of circle FCG,47 while arcs DM, DB, and DN are equal, since
 D is a pole of circle AB,48 and hence their differences, MF, ВС, and NG are
 equal. By construction, arcs FK, CE, and GL are equal; hence, the sums MK,
 BE, and NL are equal. By construction, arc BE is subtended by the side of a
 square inscribed in a great circle; then, arc NL is subtended by the side of a
 square inscribed in a great circle, too. That means that the rectilinear segment NL
 is also the side of a square inscribed in a great circle. Therefore, L satisfies the
 second condition, and it will be the pole of the great circle CN tangent to AB
 in N.

 The traditional version proves in the same manner that the point К also satisfies
 the conditions, and hence, on the same sphere there are exactly two great circles both

 passing through the same given point С and tangent to the given circle AB. Maurolico
 states this in a corollary to the proposition.

 6 Maurolico's graphic realism

 Maurolico substantially modified those figures which in the previous tradition were

 given a plane schematic representation. He reinterpreted them according to the new

 perspective. The sphere itself was given priority, it became the actual context in which

 41 Theodosius II.9: circle FBG intersects FCG in points F and G, and DBC is the great circle through their

 poles, so DBC divides arcs FBG, FCG in halves.

 42 Theodosius 1. 15.

 43 Theodosius 11.12: CE is orthogonal to FC, and LG is orthogonal to CG, arc FC is equal to arc CG and
 arc CE is equal to arc GL.

 44 Theodosius 1. 16.

 4^ Maurolico 1.3 1 .

 46 Maurolico 11.15.

 47 Theodosius definition 5 of the first book.

 48 Theodosius definition 5 of the first book.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 96 M. Malpangotto

 the geometric elements interact. The diagrams are drawn three-dimensionally and
 express the content of the propositions by showing the objects involved in correct

 proportions and as a whole. His aim is to represent the relations and properties, geo-
 metrically proved, in a realistic way.

 The following examples reproduce some diagrams ex traditione Maurolyci to show

 how Maurolico transformed the traditional ones.49 We have chosen diagrams which
 correspond to the propositions already examined above. For this reason the enuncia-
 tions are not repeated in the following table.

 6. 1 The first part of the Spherics

 1. Generai properties of circles of the sphere

 Proposition 1.6 Proposition 1.34 Proposition II. 1

 2. Properties of the axis of a circle lying on the sphere

 Proposition 1.8 Proposition 1.9 Proposition 1. 1 5

 49 The diagrams from the printed edition of Theodosii Sphaericorum elementorum libri tres ex traditione

 Maurolyci published in Messina in 1558 are faithfully reproduced by means of the electronic program
 DRaFT (see n.18).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 97

 3. Relations between tangent, parallel, and intersecting circles of the sphere

 Proposition II.7 Proposition II. 1 2

 t f

 6.2 Reductio ad absurdum

 Even diagrams belonging to propositions whose demonstrations use reductio ad absur-

 dum arguments maintain a coherence with the realism of the representation generally
 adopted by Maurolico. These proofs assume situations which cannot actually occur
 on the sphere, so that they are depicted by means of diagrams where the circles, sup-

 posed in particular unlikely conditions, remain indefinitely suspended in the plane of

 the figure without any reference to a sphere. The following is a selection of the more

 Enunciation: "On a sphere there are exactly two equal and parallel circles."
 Construction: "Otherwise, if possible, three equal and parallel circles ab , cd , ef are

 meaningful examples.

 Proposition II.3

 described on a sphere ..."

 g

 a ^ к Ь

 <Г~ I' ~3d

 Commentary: This proposition corresponds to II. 3 in Plato of Tivoli's version, and it

 is not found in the Greek tradition.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 98 M. Malpangotto

 Maurolico maintains the same lettering as his mediaeval source, but he modifies the

 diagram's shape, using perspective techniques to represent the three circles lying

 on three different parallel planes and showing the perpendicular position of their

 axis by means of a realistic representation that depicts only its visible parts and

 interrupts it in the parts covered by the circles' surfaces.

 The demonstration, using a reductio ad absurdum argument, proves, as in the medi-
 aeval source, the impossibility of three equal and parallel circles existing on the

 same sphere. The diagram represents them as suspended in space without locating
 them on a sphere.

 Proposition II.5

 Enunciation: "On a sphere, every great circle passing through the poles of a pair of

 circles that intersect one another will pass also through their point of tangency."

 Construction: "On a sphere, let circles ab , be be tangent in point b' and a great

 circle pass through their poles d9 e. I say that the great circle de passes through the
 point ЬГ

 Commentary: This proposition corresponds to II.5 in Plato of Tivoli's version and to

 II.4 in Vat.Gr.204.

 Maurolico repeats the same figure and the same demonstration, which used a
 reductio ad absurdum assumption already in the ancient tradition.

 Proposition II.6

 Enunciation: "On a sphere two tangent circles are given, the great circle passing

 through the poles of one of them and through the tangent point will also pass
 through the poles of the second circle."

 Construction: "On a sphere, let circles ab , be , be tangent at point b' and let a great
 circle pass through the pole d <of ab> and the tangent point b. I say that the great
 circle db will also pass through the pole e <of k>."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 99

 Commentary: This proposition corresponds to II.6 in Plato of Tivoli's version and to

 II.5 in Vat.Gr.204.

 Maurolico uses the same demonstration, which, already in the ancient tradition,
 used reductio ad absurdum assumptions.

 Proposition II.8
 Enunciation: "If on a sphere there are two equal and parallel circles, every great circle

 which is tangent to one of them is also tangent to the other."

 Construction: "On a sphere, let there be two equal and parallel circles ade , chk, and

 let a great circle abc be tangent to ade in point a. I say that the same circle abc is

 tangent to chk , too."

 Commentary: This proposition corresponds to II.8 in Plato of Tivoli's version and to

 II.7 in Vat.Gr.204.

 Maurolico definitively modified the traditional figure. The contrast between this
 diagram and the realistic approach of II.7 in Maurolico, seen above, in which cir-

 cles are physically represented as partially covering the axis fg, reveals the author's
 desire to make graphically evident the impossibility of the "absurd" hypotheses
 actually occurring on a sphere. In fact, the proof uses a reductio ad absurdum argu-

 ment that relies on the impossibility of three equal and parallel circles ade , chk> Im

 existing on the same sphere. Consequently, the sphere is not drawn.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 100 M. Malpangotto

 6.3 Consequentia mirabilis

 Propositions 1.1, 1.16, 1.17, and 1.33 seem to contradict Maurolico's graphie approach

 as presented thus far. The style of the diagrams is the same as those in the demonstra-

 tions that use reductio ad absurdum assumptions, in which the explicit negation of the

 thesis leads immediately and evidently to the absurdity of the assumed condition. As

 a matter of fact, in 1.1, 1.16, 1.17, and 1.33 the negation of the thesis is also implicitly

 assumed, but, this time, the reasoning leads instead to a proof of the thesis in a direct

 way, without any contradiction occurring:

 It is the most surprising thing to be discovered since the origins of the world,

 namely to prove something from its negation by means of a demonstration which

 does not lead to an impossible condition, and so the demonstration could not be

 done without appealing exactly to the negation of the conclusion.50

 And, as Clavius will say in the Scholium to proposition 1. 1 2 in his version of The-

 odosius' Spherics:51

 Here, you indeed see a surprising kind of demonstration. In fact, from the fact

 that G is said not to be the sphere's centre, it is proved, by an affirmative dem-

 onstration, that G is the sphere's centre.52

 In Maurolico's Spherics , these diagrams represent the circles and the straight lines

 without placing them on the sphere; however, in their demonstrations no "absurd"

 hypothesis is explicitly evoked. Hence, the simple addition of a circle would be enough

 to bring these diagrams into line with the rest of Maurolico's figures.

 Actually, these cases show that Maurolico's iconographie approach is more refined

 and goes beyond the simple formal distinction between real and impossible conditions.

 They reveal that the Sicilian mathematician pays particular attention to demonstrations

 and, more precisely, to the distinction between different methods of proof.

 For these four propositions, in which the reasoning is carried out following on

 the consequentia mirabilis ,53 he adopts a technique of representation similar to the

 one adopted for the reductio ad absurdum. The negation of the thesis, which remains

 implicit at the textual level, becomes evident exclusively through the image joined to

 the proposition. Therefore, the fact that the sphere is not portrayed in the diagram is
 not simple carelessness. It represents an important clue, because it reveals Maurolico's

 50 Cardanus (1570, p. 231) Propositio 201, Scholium : "Et est res admirabilior quae inventa sit ab orbe
 condito, scilicet ostendere aliquid ex suo opposito, demonstratione non ducente ad impossibilem et ita, ut
 non possit demonstran ea demonstratione nisi per illud suppositum quod est contrarium conclusioni, velut
 si quis demonstrarei quod Socrates est albus quia est niger, et non posset demonstrare aliter, et ideo est
 longe maius Chrysippeo Syllogismo."

 51 It corresponds to Maurolico's 1.17, quoted below.

 52 Clavius (1586, p. 17): "Hic vides mirabilem sane argumentandi modum. Nam ex eo, quod G, dicitur
 non esse centrum sphaerae, demonstratum est demonstratione affirmativa, G esse centrum sphaerae."

 53 Both Cardanus and Clavius, in their praise of this kind of demonstration, define it as "surprising", in
 Latin "admirabilis" or "mirabilis". For this reason, today we refer to it as to the consequentia mirabilis.
 Maurolico never refers to it in an explicit way, but the diagrams reveal his awareness of the application of
 this specific method. For further details see Freguglia (1999).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 101

 mastery of logical-deductive discourse, understanding and consciously applying the
 consequentia mirabilis.

 This attention to logical-deductive discourse, which we see in these latest diagrams,

 testifies again to Maurolico's sensitivity to the problems discussed at this time and in

 particular to the debate de certitudine mathematicarum , which attempted to articulate
 the methods which must be followed to produce valid geometrical reasoning.

 Enunciation: "When a plane surface intersects a spherical surface, the intersection is

 Proposition 1. 1

 a circle."

 Construction: "A plane surface intersects a sphere, and let the line ab be their inter-

 section. I say that ab is the circumference of a circle."

 Proposition 1.33
 Enunciation: "If from a point on a sphere's surface, more than two equal straight lines

 are drawn to the circumference of a circle lying on the same sphere, then the point

 is a pole of the circumference."

 Construction: "From the point a on the sphere's surface to the circumference bed of a

 circle are drawn three straight lines ba , ac , ad which are equal. I say that the point

 a is a pole of the circle bed."

 A d C

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Proposition 1.16
 Enunciation: "All the great circles on a sphere divide themselves into equal parts."

 102 M. Malpangotto

 Construction: "Let two great circles abc , ade be described on a sphere whose centre

 is e. I say that each of them divides the other into equal parts."

 Enunciation: "All the circles on a sphere dividing themselves into equal parts are great

 Proposition 1.17

 circles."

 Construction: "On a sphere let the circles abc , ade divide themselves in semicircles.

 I say that they are two great circles."

 7 Concluding remarks

 In every mathematical work the diagrams and the text are the end result of some process
 of selection, made by the author of each redaction, of those elements that are essential

 to each proposition. However, this is the result of a previous elaboration during which

 the mathematician makes properties already proved and new elements converge in a
 complex interaction gradually leading to the determination of every new enunciation.
 This prior elaboration - at least in the specific case of spherical geometry - cannot
 be purely mental or verbal: it also requires the support of graphic elements on which
 to consolidate the spatial disposition of the geometric objects under consideration.

 During this prior elaboration each diagram can be considered as a working instru-
 ment reflecting the author's choice, so that it then assumes personal value in support
 of his geometrical thought. The study of images could surely find useful material in
 authors' working autograph drafts, by means of which one could follow the course of
 the geometrical reasoning.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 103

 The tradition of Theodosius' work, both manuscript and printed, consists only of

 versions that are in their definitive form. Nevertheless, even in this final form, not only

 each diagram but the entire iconographie apparatus exhibits the choices of the author,

 while reflecting the practices of an epoch: the ancient one represented by Theodosius;
 that of the Renaissance represented by Maurolico and then Clavius, whose version,
 followed in successive editions, began the modern tradition.

 In each version of the Spherics , the diagrams retain an inseparable and deep
 connection with the text, and they express the theoretical commitments of the
 mathematician who produced them. By means of the iconographie apparatus the

 author gives prominence to specific information, committing to the diagrams impor-

 tant conceptual messages that can not always be understood directly from the text
 alone.

 If the distinguishing feature of Greek mathematical texts has always been acknowl-
 edged to be rigour and concision - avoiding redundant hypothesis and arguments,
 or superfluous definitions, postulates and enunciations - it seems that now we must
 recognise that the same formal precision and attention was also extended to the
 graphical aspect, revealing an even closer connection between these two parts of the
 mathematical expression than had hitherto been recognised.

 It seems meaningful to note that the context "on the sphere" is expressed in the text,

 not only when the sphere is not depicted in diagrams, but also when just a generically

 spherical context is represented: "on the sphere" is missing from the text only when

 it is graphically drawn in a canonical configuration identified by a family of parallel

 circles and a great circle passing through their poles, perpendicular to them.54 In this

 case, the sphere was consistently drawn in a realistic manner that made it redundant

 to mention the sphere itself in the text.

 It is therefore evident that the ancient tradition paid particular attention to the

 iconographie apparatus, which also shows the different approach that Greek math-
 ematicians took with regard to the two different domains - the geometrical and the

 astronomical - by means of two different ways of representing the sphere. The anal-

 ysis of purely geometrical properties and relations is usually represented on the plane

 without any indication of spatiality, thereby making spherical geometry conform to

 Euclidean plane geometry by virtue of the individual elements' belonging to the plane

 sections which generate them and on which they lie. In contrast, the analysis of the
 relation between celestial magnitudes and coordinates is represented on the sphere,
 which thence becomes the actual context in which the astronomical phenomena under
 consideration occur.

 In the Renaissance, Francesco Maurolico, far from the classical sensibility, mod-

 ified the diagrams of Sphaericorum elementorum libri. He eliminates the previous
 distinction between geometrical and astronomical domains introduced by the Greeks,

 and prefers to give to the graphical aspect the role of bearing different messages that

 integrate and complete the text. The Sicilian mathematician reinterprets his medieval
 source, developing a version whose title ex traditione Maurolyci emphasises his depar-
 ture from the tradition. His new and individual manner of interpreting the spherical

 54 See, for example, supra III.6 of the Greek tradition.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 104 M. Malpangotto

 elements certainly concerns the text itself, but it is also reflected, in an evident and

 substantial way, in the representation of the diagrams supporting the text. In order to

 make as clear and evident as possible the interactions between the geometrical objects

 in true perspective, he sacrifices the representation of individual specific properties in

 favour of a holistic view in which he brings into the foreground the sphere, to which
 the entire work is devoted. Thus one can recognise in Maurolico the propensity to
 visualise all the elements involved in the proposition representing them in the way

 they actually interact.

 It is precisely because of this realism that, in the edition of the Sphaericorum

 elementorum libri ex traditione Maurolyci, we find two homogeneous groups of dia-
 grams whose distinguishing character remains the presence or the absence of the
 sphere. Nevertheless, this distinguishing element is adopted by Maurolico to express

 the possibility or impossibility that the conditions expressed in the hypotheses could
 realise themselves on the spherical context. So, while the Greeks, by means of the
 graphical aspect, rigourously distinguished the domains, geometry and astronomy, to

 which the examined properties pertain, in Maurolico's work this distinction changed

 into a differentiation between the different demonstrative methods implicit in the text.

 In 1586, the edition of the Spherics realised by Clavius was published in Rome.
 Working in an epoch where the recovery of ancient mathematics was complete,
 he could consider didactical problems, which he then addressed in textbooks. This
 project included the edition of the Spherics. Clavius' principal aim was to make
 the work's contents clear and comprehensible through both the text and diagrams.
 For this reason, he states that he preferred the diagrams introduced by Maurolic-
 o to those of the ancient tradition, because they "make understanding the spher-
 ical elements much more easy."55 He introduces some changes to his source's
 images: all the parts involved in the proposition are depicted by perspective on the
 sphere, even when they cannot really occur in the spherical context. In Clavius'
 version most of the diagrams pertaining to the technique of reductio ad absur-
 dum and all those pertaining to the consequentia mirabilis modify those of Mau-
 rolico, adding a circle which represents the sphere.56 In this way, Clavius made
 a conscious decision to leave awareness of the different demonstrative methods

 employed to the text and the reader's competence.57 In subsequent editions of the

 55 Clavius (1586, p. 3): "Figuras quoque, quae in graeco exempláři extant, plerunque negleximus, quod
 illae, quas Maurolicus pinxit, commodiores sint, et ad intelligendas res sphaericas multo faciliores." For

 informations about the personal acquaintance of Maurolico and Clavius see Moscheo (1998, pp. 2 14-22 1 ).

 56 See, for example, Clavius' propositions 1.1; 1.1 1; 1.12; Scholium I following 1.21 ; Scholium following
 II.2.

 57 For Clavius' attitude toward explicitly commenting on demonstrative methods, one should note his

 Scholium to 1. 1 of Euclid's Elements. This scholium presents all the syllogisms involved in a single demon-

 stration, giving an example of the so-called demonstratio explicita. He concludes the example by saying that
 the structure of every proposition, not only those of Euclid but of all other mathematicians, is the same, but

 this "resolutio" is not explicitly given by mathematicians who prove the assumption in a briefer and easier

 way: "Ut autem videas, plures demonstrationes in una propositione contineri, placuit primam hanc prop-

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ositionem resoluere in prima sua principia, initio facto ab ultimo syllogismo demonstrativo
 resolui poterunt omnes aliae propositions, non solum Euclidis, verum etiam caeterorum mathematicorum.

 Negligunt tamen Mathematici resolutionem istam in suis demonstrationibus, eo quod brevius, ac facilius

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 105

 Spherics , Clavius' diagrams were adopted, beginning the more modern graphical
 tradition.

 The complex transmission of the Spherics shows that, as a matter of fact, there was

 no evolution or progressive refinement and improvement of the graphical expression.

 Rather, one recognises a number of very different and distinct manners of conceiv-

 ing of the function of the diagram, which, while overlapping one another, each time
 removed earlier criteria and imposed new graphic choices.

 Appendix

 Table of diagrams examined

 Since a complete edition was not the aim of this study, the following table intends
 to give a comprehensive overview of the diagrams examined in this article. In order
 to show similarities and differences in the whole tradition, they are faithfully repro-

 duced58 from the three representative versions examined: ( 1 ) the manuscript Vaticanus

 Graecus 204 ; (2) the printed edition of the medieval Arabo-Latin version of Plato of
 Tivoli, published by Lucantonio Giunta in 1518; and (3) the Renaissance version of
 Francesco Maurolico printed in 1558.
 Comment on diagram 11.18 in Plato of Tivoli 's version. In this diagram, the arc abc of
 circle abc is not drawn; the circle edh lacks the arc dh which allows one to mark an

 important point for the construction, namely, h , which is the pole of the great circle

 fog; and the linear segments ak , dk , с/, and gh are not drawn.
 Comment on diagram III A in Plato of Tivoli1 s version. This diagram contains some

 inaccuracies. The three great circles which must pass through h, m, and q, respectively,

 do not pass through them. On the circumference of the circle ebd, the point z should

 instead be /, being the intersection of the circumference ebd with the circumference

 of the great circle through z (the pole of parallels) and m. The arc pti should be pqt ,

 where q is the extremity of one of the two equal and consecutive arcs marked on abc ,

 and t (not i) is the extremity of the parallel circle through q. There are two points v

 on the parallel circle which should pass through a point x which is not indicated.
 Comment on diagram 111.12 in Plato ofTivolťs version. This diagram too contains
 some inaccuracies. The point p should be d. The linear segment ch is the intersec-

 tion of the planes of circles nhs , phz , and so in the diagram the point с should be
 placed exactly on the section of the two linear segments ns, pz , while it is marked
 as a point of the diameter pz which does not lie on ns. Similarly, the point h is the
 intersection of three circumferences, nhs , phz, and ahtk , while the diagram represents

 three different points: the intersection of the circumferences ns and pz , atk and pz , atk
 and ns.

 Footnote 57 continued

 sine ea demonstrent id quod proponitur, ut perspicuum esse potest ex superiori demonstratione" (Clavius
 1612, T. I, p. 28). As regards the consequentia mirabilis , Clavius describes this method in a Scholium to
 IX. 1 2 of Euclid's Elements and to 1. 1 2 of Theodosius' Spherics.

 58 The same editorial criteria, already described in the course of the article (see notes 18, 23, 32, 49) have

 also been applied in the following appendix.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 106 M- Malpangotto

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lacking proposition

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 107

 Vat.Gr. 204 Plato of Tivoli Maurolico

 LÏ3 LÎ5

 с a

 Ш LÏ5 Пб

 Y c

 ^

 ■GE><3E> сЕз ^

 LÎ2 LÏ6 Ü7

 <ж> <ж> M

 L32 L33

 а

 i а

 Lacking proposition / / ''

 id M-

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 108 M. Malpangotto

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 109

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 110 M. Malpangotto

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Graphical Choices and Geometrical Thought 1 1 1

 References

 Sources

 Greek text in:

 Manuscripts of Theodosius' Spherics

 Città del Vaticano, Biblioteca Vaticana, Graecus 204 (10th century).
 Venezia, Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana, Graecus 301 (15th century)

 Arabie translation made by Qustã b. Luqã. in Hebrew script in:

 Firenze, Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, Or. 124 (9th century).

 Latin translation of Gerard of Cremona in:

 Milano, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, Q 69 sup. (14th century)

 Latin translation traditionally attributed to Plato of Tivoli in:

 Milano, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, Q 1 12 sup.
 Milano, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, С 241 inf. (year 1401)

 Printed editions of Theodosius' Spherics

 Valla, G. 1501. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus opus Venetiis, in aedibus Aldi Romani impensa, ас studio

 Ioannis Petri Vallae filii pietiss. mense Decembri 1501.

 Plato of Tivoli. 1 5 1 8a. Sphera mundi noviter recognita cum commentariis . . . Theodosii de Spheris cum textu;
 Michaelis Scoti questiones; Petri de Aliaco cardinalis questiones ; Roberti Linconiensis compendium;
 Theodosii iterum de Spheris cum textu . . . Venetiis impensis nobilis viri domini Luceantonii de Giunta.
 Die ultimo ¡unii 1518.

 Plato of Tivoli. 1518b. Sphaera cum commentis in hoc volumine contentis, videlicet: Cichi Esculani cum
 textu. Expositio Joannis Baptiste Capuani in eandem . ..Theodosii de Spheris. . . . Venetiis. Impensa here-
 dum quondam Domini Octaviani Scoti Modoetiensis ac sociorum. 19 Januarii 1518.

 Voegelin, J. 1529. Theodosii de Sphaericis libri tres, a Joanne Voegelin Hailpronnensi , . ..restituti et Scholiis

 non improbandis illustrati. Viennae, in officina Joannis Singrenii. Anno 1529. 18 Martii.

 Maurolico, F. 1558. Theodosii sphaericorum elementorum libri III, ex traditione Maurvlyci Messanensis

 mathematici ... Messanae, in freto Siculo, impr. Petrus Spira mense Augusto 1558.

 Pena, J. 1558. Theodosii Tripolitae Sphaericorum libri tres, nunquam antehac graece excusi. lidem latine

 redditi per Joannem Penam ...Parisiis, apud Andreám Wechelum, sub Pegaso, in vico Bellovaco. Armo
 salutis 1558.

 Clavius, C. 1586. Theodosii Tripolitae Sphaericorum Libri III, a Christophoro Clavio Bambergensi
 Societatis Jesu perspicuis demonstrationibus ac scholiis illustrati . . . Romae, ex typographia Dominici
 Basae, 1586.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Herigone, P. 1644. Cursus Mathematicus, nova , brevi et clara Methodo demonstratus ...Cours de Math-

 ématique démontré d'une nouvelle, briefve et claire méthode ... Parisiis, Sumptibus Aegidii Morelli,
 Architypographi Regij. 1644. Theodos i us' Spherics is in Tome V, pp. 218-329. (First edition: Paris, H.
 Le Gras, 1634-1637).

 Heiberg, J. L. 1927. Theodosius Tripolites Sphaerica. Berlin: Weidmännische Buchandlung.

 Ver Eecke, P. 1 959. Les Sphériques de Théodose de Tripoli; oeuvres traduites pour la première fois du grec

 en français, avec une introduction et des notes par Paul Ver Eecke. Paris: Albert Blanchard.

 Czinczenheim, C. 2000. Edition, traduction et commentaire de Théodose (Thèse de Docteur, Université

 112 M. Malpangotto

 Paris IV-Sorbonne).

 Cardanus, G. 1 570. Opus novum de p ropo rt ion ibus. Basileae.
 Clavius, C. 1612. Opera mathematica. Moguntiae.

 Maurolico, F. 2002. Epistulae , ed. R. Moscheo. http://www.dm.unipl.it/pages/maurolic/edizioni/epistola/

 Other sources

 intro.htm.

 Literature

 Boncompagni, B. 1851a. Delle versioni fatte da Platone Tiburtino traduttore del secolo duodecimo. Atti

 dell'Accademia pontificia de' Nuovi Lincei. Sessione VI dell' 1 1 Maggio, 247-286.

 Boncompagni, B. 1 85 lb. Della vita e delle opere di Gherardo cremonese, traduttore del secolo duodecimo, e

 di Gherardo da Sabbionetta astronomo del secolo decimoterzo. Atti dell'Accademia pontificia de ' Nuovi
 Lincei. Sessione VII del 27 Giugno, 387-493.

 De Young, G. 2005. Diagrams in the Arabie Euclidean tradition: A preliminary assessment. Historia Math

 ematica 32:1 29- 1 79.

 Eastwood, В., and G. Grasshof. 2003. Planetary diagrams. Descriptions, models, theories: From carolingian
 deployments to copernican debate. In The power of images in early modern science , ed. W. Lefèvre,
 J. Renn et U. Schoepflin, Bale, 197-226. Birkhauser Verlag.

 Evans, J. 1998. The history and practice of ancient astronomy. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Freguglia, P. 1999. La geometria fra tradizione e innovazione. Torino: Bollati Boringhieri.

 Keller, A. 2005. Making diagrams speak, in Bhãskara Fs commentary on the ÃryabhajTya. Historia Math-

 ematica 32: 275-302.

 Lorch, R. 1 996. The transmission of Theodosius' Sphaerica. In Mathematische Probleme im Mittelalter: der
 lateinische und arabische Sprachbereich hrsg. von Menso Folkerts , 159-183. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz.
 Moscheo, R. 1 988. Francesco Maurolico tra Rinascimento e scienza galileiana. Messina: Società messinese

 di storia patria.

 Moscheo, R. 1998. I gesuiti e le matematiche nel secolo sedicesimo. Maurolico, Clavio e l'esperienza

 siciliana. Messina: Società messinese di storia patria.

 Netz, R. 1999. The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Saito, К. 2006. A preliminary study in the critical assessment of diagrams in Greek mathematical works.

 Sciamvs 7: 81-144.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:42:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

