 

 

 

 

Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory
Author(s): A. J. Kox
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 2 (March 2013), pp. 149-170
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479264
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:02 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:149-170
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0107-8

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum
 theory

 A. J. Kox

 Received: 15 June 2012 / Published online: 24 July 2012
 © The Authors) 2012.1
 © The Authors) 2012. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

 Abstract A historical overview is given of the contributions of Hendrik Antoon

 Lorentz in quantum theory. Although especially his early work is valuable, the main
 importance of Lorentz's work lies in the conceptual clarifications he provided and in

 his critique of the foundations of quantum theory.

 1 Introduction

 The Dutch physicist Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1853-1928) is generally viewed as an
 icon of classical, nineteenth-century physics—indeed, as one of the last masters of
 that era. Thus, it may come as a bit of a surprise that he also made important contribu

 tions to quantum theory, the quintessential non-classical twentieth-century develop
 ment in physics. The importance of Lorentz's work lies not so much in his concrete
 contributions to the actual physics—although some of his early work was ground
 breaking—but rather in the conceptual clarifications he provided and his critique of
 the foundations and interpretations of the new ideas. Especially in his correspondence

 with colleagues, such as Max Planck, Wilhelm Wien and Albert Einstein, he time and
 again tried to clarify the quantum principles and explore their consequences.

 In this paper I will give an overview of Lorentz's work in quantum theory, includ
 ing his informal contributions in discussions and correspondence. I will first discuss

 Lorentz's early work on radiation theory, in which he gives a derivation of a radiation
 law from classical electron theory. Then I will discuss Lorentz's 1908 Rome lecture

 Communicated by : Jed Buchwald.

 A. J. Kox (El)
 Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Amsterdam,
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands
 e-mail: a.j.kox@uva.nl

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 150

 A. J. Kox

 in some technical detail, because the theory Lorentz develops in the lecture is a daring
 new application of Gibbs's statistical mechanics and because its outcome is that the
 most general classical theory one can think of leads inescapably to the Rayleigh-Jeans

 radiation law. A key element in this derivation is the theorem of equipartition of energy.

 The Rome lecture was widely discussed, both in correspondence and in papers. As

 we will see, in the discussions with Lorentz and also in his later work three questions

 will keep coming back. The first one is the validity of the law of equipartition of energy

 and its possible modifications. A second theme, how to deal with the quantum discon

 tinuity (also discussed in the lecture, although less explicit), would soon evolve in the

 specific question of where to localize the discontinuity: in the ether, in the interaction

 between matter and ether, in the resonators or elsewhere. A third theme, not explicitly

 present in the Rome lecture, but gaining much prominence in later work, is the matter

 of the light quantum. Do independent light quanta exist, and if so, how to reconcile

 their existence with typical wave phenomena such as interference? This last theme is

 in particular discussed in correspondence with Einstein.

 The paper concludes with a discussion of the way Lorentz dealt with the parallel
 developments of matrix mechanics and wave mechanics. He carefully studied both

 theories but engaged with them in totally different ways: he extensively discussed
 and criticized wave mechanics, especially in correspondence with Erwin Schrodinger,

 whereas in the case of matrix mechanics he limited himself to trying to master the for
 malism and grasping its consequences. Although he had much respect and admiration

 for the work of the younger generation, he remained critical and to the end couched
 his quantum work in classical terms.

 2 Early work on radiation theory

 Lorentz's work on radiation theory is characterized by the same methodological con

 sistency that we find throughout his work and that culminated in his mature theory of

 electrons in the first decade of the twentieth century. He bases himself on an ontology
 of particles and fields, or, to use his own terminology, on a strict separation of mat
 ter—consisting of charged and neutral particles—and ether. The latter acts as carrier

 of the electromagnetic action, caused by the presence of charged particles. Ether and

 matter are separate entities, that act on each other, but must be treated differently. The
 particles obey the laws of classical mechanics; the ether is governed by Maxwell's
 equations.1

 The first paper I want to discuss dates from 1903, and has the title: "On the emis

 sion and absorption by metals of rays of heat of great wave-lengths" (Lorentz 1903).
 Lorentz bases himself on the theories of Paul Drude and Eduard Riecke for the electri

 cal conductivity of metals, in which it is assumed that metals contain large quantities

 of freely moving electrons, that regularly collide with the metal atoms. Applying his

 electron theory to this model, Lorentz calculates the energy density of radiation emit

 ted by the electrons by assuming that they only radiate when colliding with atoms,

 1 In Lorentz's early work the ether is still treated as a mechanical system, but gradually it loses all of its
 mechanical properties save one: its immobility. See Kox (1980) for further details.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's straggle with quantum theory 151

 limiting himself to the case of long wavelengths. In a dazzling show of mathematical
 prowess he finds that the radiation is distributed according to the Rayleigh-Jeans law

 (which, of course, was not yet known by that name in 1903) and also that it conforms
 to the long wavelength limit of Planck's brand-new radiation law:

 8 nkT

 f(X,T) = —. (1)

 In this paper Lorentz makes his first comments on Planck's quantum hypothesis.

 He writes:

 [...] the hypothesis regarding the finite "units of energy", which has led to the

 introduction of the constant h, is an essential part of the theory; also that the

 question as to the mechanism by which the heat of a body produces electromag

 netic vibrations in the aether is still left open. Nevertheless, the results of Planck
 are most remarkable.

 And later on, when comparing his result with Planck's work, he comments:

 There appears therefore to be a full agreement between the two theories in
 the case of long waves, certainly a remarkable conclusion, as the fundamental

 assumptions are widely different.

 It is interesting to note that in his paper Lorentz characterizes Planck's theory in the
 following way:

 It will suffice to mention an assumption that is made about the quantities of

 energy that may be gained or lost by the resonators. These quantities are sup
 posed to be made up of a certain number of finite portions, whose amount is
 fixed for every resonator; according to Planck, the energy that is stored up in
 a resonator cannot increase or diminish by gradual changes, but only by whole

 "units of energy", as we may call the portions we have just spoken of.

 According to Thomas Kuhn, this is an "anomalous" reading of Planck's work, that
 Lorentz corrected later.2 Closer study of Lorentz's published and unpublished utter
 ances shows, however, that Lorentz never strayed very far from this interpretation.
 For instance, in his 1908 Rome lecture (see Sect. 3), he uses almost identical words,

 whereas Kuhn uses a quotation from a letter from Lorentz to Wilhelm Wien (to the

 effect that processes in the ether take place in a continuous way), which was written

 a bit after the lecture, to argue that Lorentz had dropped his earlier interpretation.3
 What Lorentz was uncertain about, as will be shown in Sect. 6 below, was where the

 discontinuity lay: in the interaction between ether and matter (i.e., the resonators) or
 in the interaction between the resonators and the other matter.

 2 See Kuhn (1978, p. 138).

 3 See Kuhn (1978, p. 194). The letter in question is dated 6 June 1908; it is reproduced in Kox (2008) as
 Letter 171. See also Sect. 4.1 below for a further discussion of the Lorentz-Wien correspondence.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 152

 A. J. Kox

 3 The Rome lecture

 From Lorentz's later work on radiation theory, it becomes clear that the paper discussed

 in the previous section sets the methodological stage for later developments along sim

 ilar lines and that its critical tone about the mystery of the underlying mechanism in

 Planck's theory of energy elements remains an important theme.

 The first important one of the later papers is the 1908 Rome lecture. It was delivered

 at a somewhat strange venue, namely, the 4th International Congress of Mathemati
 cians in April 1908. Its impact has been considerable, if only because it made indis

 putably clear that Planck's energy elements were fundamentally foreign to classical
 mechanics and electrodynamics.

 The lecture, entitled "The distribution of energy between ponderable matter and

 ether",4 starts with a lengthy and very general discussion of the foundations of mechan
 ics, kinetic gas theory, and electrodynamics, clearly meant for an audience of non

 physicists. It is useful to follow Lorentz's reasoning in some detail, because it brings

 out the systematic way he has set up this paper.

 Lorentz first reviews the basics of radiation theory. From Kirchhoff's work it follows

 that a universal radiation law exists: the energy density of radiation in the wavelength

 interval X, X + dX at temperature T is given by:

 F(X,T) dX,

 (2)

 with F a function that is independent of the specific properties of the body that has
 produced the radiation.

 Next Lorentz discusses the law of equipartition of energy, Boltzmann's work in

 kinetic gas theory, and the at that time not widely known statistical mechanics of Gibbs,
 as an alternative to Boltzmann's approach. He stresses that the phase space approach
 taken by Gibbs only works if the system under consideration can be described using
 Hamilton's equations, so that the ensemble behaves like an incompressible fluid (in
 other words, if Liouville's theorem holds for the ensemble density). He then introduces
 the ensemble density of the canonical ensemble in the form:

 and explains how one can determine macroscopic quantities from ensemble averages.

 Lorentz now turns to electromagnetism. He argues that one needs to base this theory

 on a variational principle of the form:

 <p = Ce~E'&

 '/ 8 (L-U)dt = 0

 (3)

 (4)

 4 The lecture was published in different versions and in various places; see Lorentz (1908a) in the bibliog
 raphy for more details.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 153

 with L the magnetic energy and U the electric energy. This becomes the standard
 Lagrangian for the electromagnetic field if one takes:

 L = \J H2dV (5)

 V = ^ f D2dV

 (6)

 where D is the dielectric displacement and H the magnetic force. Note that, although

 the integrand in (3) has the form of a "standard" lagrangian, in this case the terms L

 and U do not have their usual meanings of kinetic and potential energy, respectively.

 It will become clear in the following why Lorentz is using this suggestive notation.

 Having set the stage, Lorentz proceeds to consider the most general physical sys
 tem he can think of. It consists of charged particles ('electrons'), neutral particles
 ('atoms'), and ether (i.e., electric and magnetic fields), enclosed in a rectangular box.
 The particles are all in motion; the electrons may be free or bound inside of atoms.

 This system can be described by four sets of generalized coordinates:

 - {q\} for the neutral particles,
 - {^2} for the charged particles,

 - {<731 #3} for the electric field.

 While {q\} and {^2} have a straightforward meaning, the 'coordinates' {<73, q'^} have a
 more complicated interpretation. For each instant of time one can split the electric field

 into two parts: the first is the field that would exist if all charged particles were at rest

 at their positions <72. while the second part obeys the source-free Maxwell equation

 V • D = 0. This latter part can be expanded in a Fourier series of the modes that fit in

 the box; {<73, q^} are the coefficients appearing in this expansion. Thus, the the three
 components of D can be written as:

 D

 Z. . UTt . VTZ W7T

 (qia + q^a ) cos — x sin —y sin —— z

 f
 T «s n
 u,v,w J

 V-i ... UTT V7T W7T

 Dy - > (qifi + q3p ) sin — x cos—ysin— z (7)

 U,V,W J

 f 8 h

 Z, .. UTT VTT WTT
 J 8 h

 (q3Y +q-iY) sm — x sin —y cos — z.

 u,v,w °

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Here /, g, h are the lengths of the sides of the box and u, u, w are integers running from

 1 to oo.5 For each component and for each set {u, v, w] three directions are defined,

 perpendicular to each other. One is determined by the vector (j, j, f), and the other
 two, corresponding to the two polarization states of the field, have the direction cosines

 5 The particular choice of sines and cosines is dictated by the boundary conditions in the box: the sides of

 the box are supposed to be perfectly conducting, which means that D is always perpendicular to the sides.

 154

 A. J. Kox

 a and a', fi and fi\ and y and y', respectively. The coefficients {<73, q'^} (which, fol
 lowing Lorentz's usage, will be abbreviated to {^3} in the following) obviously depend
 on {u, v, w) and on t.

 The next step is to write the Lagrangian L — U as a function of the generalized

 coordinates. Because Lorentz now considers a more general system than just electro

 magnetic fields, he includes kinetic energy terms in L and potential energy terms in
 U, in addition to the field terms. For U he finds

 u = u0 + ^f8hY,q3

 (8)

 with Uo a function of the coordinates q\ and qi, accounting for the potential energy

 between the particles; the second term is \ f D2dV.

 The term L consists in the first place of a part representing the kinetic energy of

 the electrons and of the neutral particles, denoted by Lo and quadratic in q\ and c/2

 Further, to find the field part \ J H2dV it has to be taken into account that magnetic
 fields are generated by moving charges as well as by changing electric fields. This

 gives rise to terms in H proportional to <72 and to qj,, respectively, which leads to terms

 in L proportional to q^,q3, and t/2<73• The terms proportional to q\ are absorbed in

 Lo; the explicit form of the part proportional to q3 is found by first calculating D from
 (7) and then using V A H = (l/c)D to find H. The final result is:

 J T 4- fhg V
 L-i0 + l6?^  7T2(w2//2 + v2/g2 + w2/h2)

 + (9)

 Whenever there is a valid Lagrangian formalism, one can also write down Hamilto

 nian equations. That does not mean that Gibbsian statistical mechanics can be applied
 to the system under consideration yet. A major obstacle remains: because there are

 infinitely many terms in the sum (7) there are also infinitely many coordinates <73, so
 that phase space would become infinitely dimensional, precluding the existence of a
 meaningful ensemble density. Lorentz's workround solution is to introduce what he

 calls "fictitious connections" ("liaisons fictives") in the ether by which standing waves
 with smaller wavelengths than some value Xq are excluded. As can be seen from (10)
 this means that an upper limit is imposed on the values taken by u, v, w. Lorentz
 justifies his condition by pointing out that one can make Xq as small as one wishes. To

 this "fictitious" system Gibbsian statistical mechanics is then applied.

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the last term the index i refers to the individual electrons; the index j abbrevi
 ates the dependence of the quantities <73 on w, u, uj and the direction cosines a, fi,y.

 Accordingly, the coefficients Uj depend on u, v, w, a, ft, y and on the coordinates qu ■

 From this Lagrangian the Lagrange equations follow easily. Lorentz explicitly

 writes down the equations for <73 and shows that they give rise to standing waves,
 with wavelength

 A.= ==

 (10)

 y/u2/f2 + v2/g2 + W21 h2

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 155

 Lorentz now returns to expression (3) for the ensemble density. He first notes that in

 L the term Lq contains terms of the form (1 /2)mq\2. Because E — L + U, the expo

 nential in (3) contains these terms as well. Taking the ensemble average of (\/2)mq\2
 using (3) (i.e., calculating the mean kinetic energy of a neutral particle), now gives
 (1/2)©; for the three-dimensional motion of the particles this becomes (3/2)0. Ear

 lier in the paper, Lorentz has explained that one of the most important results of kinetic

 gas theory is that the mean kinetic energy of a moving molecule or atom is equal to a T,

 with T the temperature and a a universal constant (not to be confused with the direc
 tion cosine introduced earlier). Thus (3/2)0 = aT (or, in modern notation, 0 = kT).

 In this way, Lorentz extends the standard interpretation of 0 for mechanical systems
 to his much more complicated system of particles and fields.

 Now Lorentz turns to the second term in (8). Since the terms in this sum are qua

 dratic in <73, a calculation similar to the one above shows that in an ensemble average

 each term will contribute (1/2)0 = (1 /3)aT to the mean electric energy. Taking into

 account the two polarization states represented by the coordinates qs and q^, we get a
 total contribution by the q3's of 2a T/3. This can also be interpreted as the contribution

 of one mode (u, v, w) to the mean electric energy.

 Returning to the rectangular box, it is easy to see that the number of modes with

 wavelengths between A. and X + dX that fit in the box (which is supposed to be suffi

 ciently large) is equal to

 Taking into account the earlier result for the mean electric energy per mode, Lorentz
 finds

 -jjfghdX.

 3X4

 for the energy density. Because the mean magnetic energy is equal to the mean electric

 energy, the total mean electromagnetic energy density is given by twice this expression,
 so that the radiation function (2) is now given by:

 16 rcaT

 F(k, T) = (13)

 (ID

 (12)

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This is the Rayleigh-Jeans law.

 In this way, Lorentz has generalized his earlier paper on long-wave radiation in

 metals, in which he first specified a mechanism by which radiation is generated and

 then explicitly calculated the energy-density of this radiation.

 Lorentz of course realizes the consequences of his result. It is clearly in contradic
 tion with the observed radiation curve, which shows a maximum when plotted as a

 function of X. Moreover, it implies that in the case of a material body in equilibrium

 with the ether the latter will contain an infinite amount of energy and the energy will

 156

 A. J. Kox

 become concentrated in ever shorter wavelengths.6 This had already been concluded

 by Jeans. As Lorentz remarks:

 [...] when Jeans published his theory, I had hoped that on closer inspection one

 could show that the theorem of equipartition of energy on which he based him

 self cannot be applied to the ether and that in this way one could find a true
 maximum of the function The preceding considerations seem to prove
 that this is not the case and that Jeans's conclusions will be inescapable unless

 the fundamental hypotheses of the theory are profoundly modified.7

 This is a crucial conclusion. To summarize: Lorentz has shown that the valid

 ity of the equipartition theorem for material particles inescapably implies its valid
 ity for his more complicated mechanical-electromagnetical system (or, using his
 own words, for the ether). This then immediately leads to the Rayleigh-Jeans
 law.8

 Is there a way to reconcile the experimental results with what he has found, Lorentz

 wonders. One thing is certain: for long wavelengths the law is satisfactory; the prob

 lem lies in the short-wavelength regime. A possible solution is that the maximum in

 the observed curve is an artefact of the experiment, perhaps due to the fact that the

 radiating bodies used in the experiments are not black for small wavelengths and thus
 radiate much less energy for these wavelengths than is assumed. In this way equilib

 rium between radiation and matter will take a very long time to set in—it is in fact
 never observed.

 In the final paragraphs Lorentz emphasizes that he does not pretend to have provided

 the definitive solution to the radiation problem. The way one proceeds in theoretical
 physics, he argues, is to examine the relative likelihood of various hypotheses and
 theories for a given phenomenon and study the consequences that follow from those
 hypotheses. In the case of the Planck radiation law versus the Rayleigh-Jeans law,
 one has to conclude that the latter is very hard to bring in agreement with experi
 ments, whereas Planck's law is in good agreement with them but requires a funda
 mental change in our thinking about electromagnetic phenomena. This is already
 clear if one looks at a freely moving electron emitting radiation with a continu
 ous frequency spectrum. The question remains how to apply Planck's hypothesis of

 energy elements in this case. Lorentz concludes by expressing the hope that future
 experiments will provide firm evidence for one or the other of the two radiation
 laws.

 6 This is what Paul Ehrenfest dubbed the 'ultraviolet catastrophe'.

 7 "[■■•] lorsque Jeans publia sa theorie, j'ai espere qu'en y regardant de plus pies, on pourrait demontrer que

 le theoreme de l'"equipartition of energy", sur lequel il s'etait fonde est inapplicable a l'ether, et qu'ainsi
 on pourrait trouver un vrai maximum de la fonction F(X,T). Les considerations precedentes me semblent
 prouver qu'il n'en est rien et qu'on ne pourra echapper aux conclusions de Jeans a moins qu'on ne modifie
 profondement les hypotheses fondamentales de la theorie."

 As Einstein had already shown, given the validity of the equipartition law, the Rayleigh-Jeans law follows

 even without invoking the apparatus of statistical mechanics. See Sect. 4.2 below for details.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 157

 4 Reactions to the Rome lecture

 4.1 Wilhelm Wien

 Once the Rome lecture's contents became known among the physicists, it stirred up
 quite some emotion. Wilhelm Wien wrote to Arnold Sommerfeld on 18 May 1908:

 The lecture Lorentz delivered in Rome has disappointed me greatly. That he did

 not do more than present the old theory of Jeans without presenting a new point
 of view is in my opinion a bit shabby. [...] This time Lorentz has not shown
 himself as a leader of science.9

 Wien points out in rather strong terms that the question of the validity of Jeans's
 law—or rather its non-validity—is a purely experimental matter. He emphasizes that
 Lorentz's theoretical views on this point are irrelevant, because experiments show
 enormous deviations from Jeans's law in a region where one can easily establish how

 much the radiating body deviates from a black body.

 Wien also communicated his objections to Lorentz himself, though in a rather more

 cautious way, in a letter dated 17 May 1908:10

 With much interest I have read the lecture you gave in Rome. I think that it is

 very useful to continue to keep all theoretical possibilities in mind. But I do not

 think that anyone who has ever done experiments in the field of radiation will

 admit that there is even the remotest possibility for the theory of Jeans to reach

 agreement with experience.11

 He then points out that one can easily determine, by measuring their absorptive

 power, that the radiating bodies used in experiments depart at most a few percent from
 ideal black bodies and that the discrepancies of Jeans's law with experiment are so

 large that there is no way theory and experiment can be reconciled. The letter finishes
 with an admonition of sorts:

 I fear that further resistance and clinging to views that are too simple will be an

 impediment to the progress of science.12

 9 "Der Vortrag, den Lorentz in Rom gehalten hat, hat mich schwer enttauscht. DaB er weiter nichts vor
 brachte als die alte Theorie von Jeans ohne irgend einen neuen Gesichtspunkt hineinzubringen finde ich
 etwas diirftig. [...] Lorentz hat sich diesmal nicht als ein Fiihrer der Wissenschaft erwiesen." See Eckart
 and Marker (2000, nr. 132).

 10 See Kox (2008, Letter 170).

 11 "Ich habe mit grossem Interesse den Vortrag gelesen den Sie in Rom gehalten haben. Ich glaube dass
 es durchaus zweckmassig ist alle theoretischen Moglichkeiten dauemd im Auge zu behalten. Aber ich
 glaube nicht, dass irgend jemand, der jemals experimentell auf dem Gebiete der Strahlung gearbeitet hat,
 Ihnen zugeben wird, dass fur die Theorie von Jeans auch nur die entfernteste Moglichkeit besteht mit der

 Erfahrung in Ubereinstimmung zu kommen."

 12 "Ich fiirchte daher, dass ein langeres Strauben und Festhalten an zu einfachen Vorstellungen hemmend
 auf den Fortschritt der Wissenschaft wirken kann."

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 158

 A. J. Kox

 Revisions of fundamental ideas, Wien continues, have always led to great progress
 in science, provided that they forced themselves upon us, and this is one of those
 occasions.

 Lorentz was quick to realize that he had been in error. In his reply to Wien of 6 June

 190813 he admits his mistake, thanking Wien for pointing it out to him.14 In his letter

 to Wien Lorentz emphasizes that he had not meant to claim that he had proven the
 correctness of Jeans's law. At the same time, Wien's letter has convinced him that the

 experimental bodies are indeed close enough to an ideal black body to unambiguously

 disprove Jeans's law. He adds a very simple reasoning that makes the invalidity of this

 law even more striking: a simple calculation shows that, were Jeans's law the right

 13 Kox (2008, Letter 171).

 14 That Lorentz was quite embarrassed about his error becomes clear from a letter to Pieter Zeeman of 20

 August 1908. (The letter is in the Zeeman Archive in the Noord-Hollands Archief, Haarlem, The Nether
 lands.) He wrote: 'To finish, I have to tell you that I have been very unfortunate in a certain respect with my
 Rome lecture. You know the theory of Jeans. For years I had broken my head about it, and about radiation
 theory in general, and I had always some hope that, if one stayed with the usual foundations of electron

 theory, one could escape from the theorem of "equipartition of energy" and could show that there had to be

 a real maximum (inversely proportional to T) in the radiation function. The question whether one can apply
 the theorem in question to a system consisting of ether, electrons, and atoms comes down to whether one

 is allowed to use the methods of Gibbs's statistical mechanics and this in turn depends on whether one can
 put the equations that describe the phenomena in the form of Hamilton's equations of motion. When I had

 found that this is indeed the case, it did not seem an unsuitable subject for a mathematical congress, and so
 I explained there how one arrives at Jeans's formula, starting from the generally accepted principles. I then
 also spoke of the well-known way in which Jeans wants to explain the contradiction between his theory
 and the observations, but unfortunately I overlooked (I don't quite understand how) that one cannot enter
 that road without getting into conflict with phenomena that are very well known and simple. Thus, instead
 of concluding "only Planck's theory is feasible", I expressed myself at the end as if a decision between this
 theory and Jeans's should still be sought. W. Wien [...] has written to me about this right away, and I have

 conceded the case immediately. [... ] I am, of course, extremely sorry that I was wrong, but I could do nothing
 else but admit it, because spoken words, too, cannot be undone." ("Ik moet U eindelijk schrijven dat ik met
 mijne voordracht te Rome in zeker opzicht ongelukkig ben geweest. Gij kent de theorie van Jeans. Daarover

 en over de stralingstheorie in het algemeen had ik mij jaren lang het hoofd gebroken en ik had altijd eenige
 hoop dat men, als men zich aan de gewone grondslagen der electronentheorie hield, aan het theorema der

 "equipartition of energy" zou kunnen ontkomen, en zou kunnen aantoonen dat er een werkelijk maximum
 der stralingsfunctie (omgekeerd evenredig met T) moest zijn. De vraag of men het bedoelde theorema op
 een stelsel bestaande uit aether, electronen en atomen mag toepassen, komt hierop neer of men van de

 methoden der statistische mechanica van Gibbs gebruik mag maken, en dit hangt er weer van af of men de

 vergelijkingen die de verschijnselen beschrijven, in den vorm der bewegingsvergelijkingen van Hamilton
 kan brengen. Toen mij nu gebleken was dat dit inderdaad mogelijk is, leek mij dat geen ongeschikt onder
 werp voor een mathematisch congres, en zoo heb ik daar uiteengezet hoe men inderdaad, van de algemeen
 aangenomen grondbeginselen uitgaande, tot de formule van Jeans komt. Ik heb toen ook gesproken van
 de bekende wijze waarop Jeans de tegenspraak tusschen zijn theorie en de waarnemingen wil verklaren,

 maar ongelukkigerwijze heb ik over het hoofd gezien (ik begrijp zelf niet hoe) dat men dien uitweg niet kan
 inslaan zonder met zeer bekende en eenvoudige verschijnselen in strijd te komen. Dientengevolge heb ik,

 in plaats van te concludeeren: "alleen de theorie van Planck is houdbaar", mij aan het slot van de voordracht

 uitgelaten alsof er nog een beslissing tusschen deze en die van Jeans zou gezocht moeten worden. W. Wien
 [...] heeft mij er dadelijk over geschreven en ik heb hem de zaak dadelijk toegegeven. [...] Het spijt mij
 natuurlijk zeer dat ik mij vergist heb, maar ik kon niet anders doen dan het erkennen, want ook gezegde
 woorden nemen geen keer.")

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 159

 one, a bar of silver should emit enough radiation in the visible spectrum to be visible

 in the dark at room temperature.15

 Thus, Lorentz concludes, only Planck's theory—which he claims to admire very

 much—remains and the considerations in his Rome lecture show that the standard

 electron theory needs to be supplemented in one way or another to solve the radiation
 problem. Defending himself against Wien's veiled accusation of standing in the way

 of the progress of science, Lorentz stresses that he too believes that bold new hypoth

 eses lead to progress in physics and he praises the quantum hypothesis as one of those
 new ideas. But, he adds, if we adopt Planck's theory, we immediately encounter a
 serious problem. Elaborating on his final remarks in the Rome lecture, Lorentz argues

 as follows. If we assume that equilibrium between ether and matter is brought about

 by Planck's resonators, which can only absorb or emit energy in discrete quantities,
 we introduce a mechanism for which equipartition is no longer valid. But if our sys
 tem also contains free electrons, for the equilibrium between these and the ether the

 equipartition law should be valid. This means that two different equilibria exist within

 one system, which is in conflict with the second law of thermodynamics.16

 4.2 Einstein

 Another reaction to the Rome lecture was more positive. On 13 April 1909 Albert
 Einstein wrote:

 I have to tell you how much I admire the beauty of your derivation of Jeans's law.

 I cannot think of any serious objection to this derivation. Reading your paper
 has been a real event for me.17

 At first sight it seems puzzling that Einstein praised Lorentz for his derivation of
 a radiation law he was convinced to be wrong, but if we look a little more closely at
 Einstein's work we can understand his reaction. In the paper from 1907 in which he
 developed his quantum theory of specific heats (Einstein 1907), Einstein had made a
 very strong case for a total revision, not just of radiation theory, but also of what he
 called 'molecular mechanics'. A key role in his argument was played by the equiparti
 tion law. His reasoning went as follows. Planck has shown, on purely classical grounds,

 that the interaction between his oscillators and a radiation field leads to the expression

 uv =

 Pv

 8 7tV2

 (14)

 15 Lorentz would use the same example in an addendum to some of the printed versions of his Rome
 lecture.

 16 Not long after the exchange with Wien, Lorentz submitted (Lorentz 1908b), a response to (Lummer
 and Pringsheim 1908), a critical paper by the experimentalists Ernst Lummer and Otto Pringsheim. In it he

 retracts his remarks on the validity of the Rayleigh-Jeans law in the Rome lecture without any reservation.

 He also reiterates the argument about two different equilibrium states first formulated in the letter to Wien.

 17 "Ich muss Ihnen meine Bewunderung ausdriicken iiber die Schonheit Ihrer Ableitung des Jeans'schen
 Gesetzes. Gegen diese Ableitung wiisste ich keinen ernst zu nehmenden Einwand. Die Lektiire Ihrer Ab
 handlung ist fur mich ein Ereignis." See Kox (2008, Letter 185).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 160

 A. J. Kox

 with Uv the mean energy of an oscillator with frequency v and pv the energy density of

 radiation of the same frequency. Assuming that equipartition holds for the oscillators,
 we have U = kT. Substituted in (14) this gives the Jeans radiation law, which, as

 Einstein points out, is only valid for large values of T/v. Einstein's conclusion is that

 even for a system of oscillators we have to modify the equipartition law because it
 leads to serious contradictions.18 So, what Lorentz had done was to provide in effect

 a much stronger basis for the argument that equipartition was the problem, and this

 must have pleased Einstein.19

 In Lorentz's reply, a lengthy letter dated 6 May 1909,20 as well as in a letter to Wien

 from 12 April 190921 it becomes clear that his thinking about the quantum problem

 has evolved and that he now accepts the need for energy elements:

 I no longer have doubts that only with the help of the hypothesis of energy
 elements one can arrive at the correct radiation-law.22

 In his reply to Einstein Lorentz also admits that one cannot do without energy
 elements. He reiterates some of the points already discussed in his earlier correspon
 dence with Wien and Planck: the problem of the existence of two equilibrium states
 in a system containing free electrons as well as oscillators and the question of where

 to localize the discontinuity.

 Lorentz uses the occasion of his letter to Einstein to discuss another important
 quantum issue that had only been touched upon briefly in his earlier correspondence:

 how to deal with the light quanta, postulated by Einstein in 1905:

 I find it hard to subscribe to the view that light quanta retain a certain individuality

 even during their propagation, as if one were dealing with point-like quantities
 of energy or at least energy quantities concentrated in very small spaces.23

 He now works out his objections in detail, emphasizing in particular the problems a
 localized light quantum poses in explaining interference and the resolving power of
 telescopes. He concludes that a light quantum must have a length of at least dozens of

 centimeters in order to account for the observed possibility of interference with phase

 differences of millions of wavelengths. From the fact that the resolving power of a
 telescope gets better with increasing aperture, he then infers that light quanta should

 have a larger lateral extension than the aperture of any telescope. For an aperture of,
 say, 50 cm this leads to an estimate for the lateral extension of at least 5,000 cm2

 18 He then proceeds to show how one can modify the structure of phase space, namely by quantizing it, to
 obtain Planck's law from a statistical mechanical calculation.

 19 One might wonder why Lorentz did not refer to Einstein's 1907 paper in his Rome lecture.

 20 Kox (2008, Letter 189).

 21 Kox (2008, Letter 184).

 22 "Ich zweifle jetzt gar nicht mehr daran, dass man nur mit Planck's Hypothese der Energieelemente (die

 man iibrigens noch in verschiedener Weise auffassen kann) zu der richtigen Strahlungsformel gelangt."
 Lorentz to Wien, 12 April 1909.

 23 "Ich kann mich aber schwerlich der Meinung anschliessen, dass die Lichtquanten auch wahrend der
 Fortpflanzung eine gewisse Individualitat behalten, als ob man es mit 'punktformigen' oder jedenfalls in
 sehr kleinen Raumen konzentrierten Energiemengen zu tun hatte."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 161

 (because light quanta that do not hit the telescope right in the middle of the objective
 should still cover the full opening). Lorentz would raise these objections time and
 again in later papers as well as in correspondence with colleagues.

 Einstein was pleased with Lorentz's letter. To his former collaborator Jakob Laub

 he wrote on 19 May 1909:

 I am presently carrying on an extremely interesting correspondence with H. A.

 Lorentz on the radiation problem. I admire this man like no other: I might even
 say, I love him.24

 Einstein takes the objections raised by Lorentz very seriously, emphasizing not so
 much their points of disagreement but rather where they agree. He suggests that the

 discrepancy between the behavior of free electrons and resonators should be resolved

 by a suitable generalization of Planck's hypothesis, which is simply too narrow if only
 applied to monochromatic resonators. He also denies that he subscribes to the idea of

 discrete, independent point-like light quanta, but instead suggests a picture in which

 these quanta are singularities that are surrounded by a vector field whose strength
 decreases with increasing distance. The field energy is then related somehow to the
 number of these singularities.

 4.3 An objection by Van der Waals Jr.

 A more technical problem with Lorentz's approach in the Rome lecture was pointed

 out by Johannes Diderik van der Waals Jr. (at the time professor at the University of

 Groningen but soon to be his famous father's successor in Amsterdam). He objected

 that Lorentz's formalism only works when one assumes that the electrons have material
 mass, in addition to their electromagnetic mass.25 This was a very serious assump
 tion, because a consensus had more or less been reached that electrons only possess
 an electromagnetic mass. Especially Walther Kaufmann's experiments on the ratio of
 charge to mass of electrons seemed to indicate that they have no material mass.26

 Van der Waals's reasoning went as follows: if the electrons lack mechanical mass,
 accelerations no longer occur in the equations of motion. This circumstance leads to
 relations between the coordinates <72 and q2, so that these are no longer independent.
 Because of this a canonical ensemble cannot be formed, so that the whole edifice

 24 "Mit H.A. Lorentz habe ich gegenwartig eine uberaus interessante Korrespondenz iiber das Strahlungs
 problem. Ich bewundere diesen Mann wie keinen andem, ich mochte sagen, ich liebe ihn." (Klein et al.
 1993, Doc. 161).

 25 See Van der Waals (1909).

 26 See, e.g., Miller (1981, chapter 1.11), for a discussion of these experiments. See also the following
 statement by Lorentz in section 32 of Lorentz (1909b), his 1906 lectures at Columbia University: "[...]
 with a view to simplicity, it will be best to admit Kaufmann's conclusion that the negative electrons have
 no material mass at all." And in section 34 he generalizes his view in the following way: "I for one should

 be quite willing to adopt an electromagnetic theory of matter and of the forces between material particles.
 [...] Therefore, [...] all forces may be regarded as connected more or less intimately with those which we

 study in electromagnetism." These forces, Lorentz argues, include molecular forces and gravitation. See
 McCormmach (1970) for more on this 'electromagnetic world picture.'

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 162

 A. J. Kox

 of Lorentz's reasoning collapses.27 That Lorentz took this objection very seriously
 becomes clear from his correspondence. He mentions the objection in letters to Ein

 stein28 and to Arnold Sommerfeld,29 adding in both cases that he has been unable to

 find a solution—except the obvious one of postulating that there is a material mass, but

 that it is vanishingly small. The most detailed discussion is found in correspondence
 with Van der Waals himself, in particular in a letter of 7 April 1909. Here Lorentz
 introduces the assumption that in the system under consideration the speeds of the
 electrons are small as compared to the speed of light. For vibrating electrons, this

 means that their amplitudes are small compared to the wavelength of the radiation and

 for non-vibrating ones that their state of motion changes noticeably over distances that

 are small with respect to the wavelength of the radiation. Thus, Lorentz's assumption

 once again amounts to a condition on the wavelengths allowed in the system under con
 sideration. On his assumption, Lorentz shows, the coordinates become independent
 again. Still, he must have felt uncertain about his supplementary condition, because

 he did not follow up on his plans to publish his ideas, in spite of an announcement in

 the letter to Van der Waals that he would do so. Only in 1911, in his lecture at the first

 Solvay Conference did Lorentz openly speak out on this point (see Sect. 5).

 It is interesting that in the correspondence with Van der Waals, nor in his Solvay

 lecture does Lorentz counter Van der Waals's objection by simply introducing a small
 material mass for the electrons and working out the consequences. In a letter to Van

 der Waals of 19 November 1908 Lorentz does raise this possibility, but he then rejects

 it. His argument is that unforeseen problems might arise in the limiting case of zero

 material mass, which one would have to consider if only electromagnetic mass should

 exist—and, as we saw, Lorentz believed this to be the case. As he puts it: "In any case,
 it is much safer to directly consider electrons without material mass."30

 5 The first Solvay Conference

 The first Solvay Conference, which was held in Brussels from 30 October to 3 Novem

 ber 1911, offered Lorentz the opportunity to express himself on the crisis in physics

 that the emerging quantum theory had caused. In his opening address as chairman of

 the meeting he showed himself far from optimistic:

 At the moment we have the feeling that we are at a dead end, with the old the

 ories showing themselves more and more powerless to pierce the darkness that
 surrounds us from all sides. [...] What will be the result of these meetings? I
 dare not predict it, not knowing what surprises may be in store for us. But, as

 27 If in phase space the coordinates and their time derivatives are no longer independent, the incompress
 ibility condition fT ds)/dsi, with s; the coordinates of the phase space, is no longer satisfied, so that the
 ensemble is not stationary.

 28 Lorentz to Einstein, 6 May 1909 (Kox 2008, Letter 189).

 29 Lorentz to Sommerfeld, 23 November 1908 (Kox 2008, Appendix, Letter 178a).

 30 "In elk geval is het veel veiliger, rechtstreeks electronen zonder materieele massa te behandelen."

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 163

 it is wise not to count on surprises, I admit that it is very likely that we will

 contribute only little to the immediate progress.31

 Lorentz's lecture at the Solvay meeting (Lorentz 1912b), dealt with the same sub

 ject as his Rome lecture, but its main point, the problem of the validity of the theorem

 of equipartition of energy in the theory of radiation, now appears already in its title.

 Lorentz accepts the failure of classical theory to account for the radiation experiments
 from the outset and points out how Planck's hypothesis of energy elements has been

 more successful and has even found "unexpected verifications" ("verifications inatten

 dues"). But he finds it still useful to reiterate his Rome derivation of the Rayleigh-Jeans

 law to bring out clearly what the problems are with the classical approach. As he puts it:

 Before starting the discussion of Planck's hypothesis, it is perhaps useful to
 become aware of the shortcomings of the old theories.

 Lorentz's approach is now more systematic: he first reproduces the simple deriva
 tion of the Rayleigh-Jeans law on the basis of the equipartition law that was earlier
 given by Einstein (see Sect. 4.2), and then immediately poses his central question:

 Is there a way to escape from the equipartition theorem, either in general, or in

 in its application to the problem that we are occupied with?32

 Lorentz then essentially repeats the calculation of the Rome lecture, although with

 one important difference: whereas in the Rome lecture Lorentz glosses over his intro

 duction of the "Active connections" that put a lower limit on the allowed wavelengths,

 and in fact proceeds as if this limit does not exist, he now emphasizes this cutoff as

 essential to avoid the problem of zero material mass of the electrons. He does add, how

 ever, that the restriction on the possible wavelengths does not resolve the discrepancy

 between his outcome (the Rayleigh-Jeans law) and experiments, as the experimental

 differences show themselves also at larger wavelengths than the extremely small ones
 excluded here. In the end, however, the conclusion of the Solvay lecture is the same
 as the one drawn in the Rome lecture: the equipartition theorem is incompatible with

 the observed form of the radiation curve. Obviously, after the critical reactions to the

 Rome lecture, Lorentz no longer tries to find a way out by doubting the validity of the
 radiation measurements.

 6 The discontinuity

 In addition to the problem of equipartition of energy and the validity of the
 Rayleigh-Jeans law, another important point of often confused discussion emerged in

 the correspondence with Wien, Planck and Einstein following the Rome lecture. It is

 31 "Nous avons maintenant le sentiment de nous trouver dans une impasse, les anciennes theories s'etant

 montres de plus en plus impuissantes a percer les tenebres qui nous entourent de tous cotes. [...] Quel sera
 le resultat de ces reunions? J n'ose le predire, ne sachant pas quelles surprises peuvent nous etre reservees.

 Mais, comme il est prudent de ne pas compter sur les surprises, j'admettrai comme tres probable que nous
 contribuerons pour peu de chose au progres immediat." (Lorentz 1912a, pp. 7-8).

 32 "Y a-t-il moyen d'echapper, soit au theoreme de l'equipartition en general, soit a son application au
 probleme qui nous occupe?"

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 164

 A. J. Kox

 the question where one should localize the discontinuity—if there is one. In a letter
 to Planck, for instance, Lorentz maintains that processes that take place in the ether

 are continuous in character, agreeing with Planck on this point.33 Two months later,

 he admits that one cannot do without light quanta, but immediately adds his standard

 objections against the individuality of these quanta. He now claims that h might be

 a constant of the ether: the Maxwell equations are valid, but links between groups of

 vibrations limit the number of degrees of freedom of the ether, a limitation that finds its

 expression in the occurrence of Planck's constant.34 Two months later Lorentz spec
 ulates again that h has something to do with the particles that produce radiation.35

 His final view, expressed in 1912, seems to be that the interaction between ether and

 resonators is continuous, whereas the energy exchange between ordinary matter, such
 as atoms, and resonators is somehow quantized.36

 7 The light quantum

 After his initial discussion with Einstein (see Sect. 4.2) Lorentz kept arguing against
 the independent existence of light quanta in his correspondence and in later publi
 cations. He was of course not alone in his objections: in fact, the large majority of
 physicists rejected the existence of light quanta on grounds similar to the ones put

 forward by Lorentz.37

 Let me briefly mention two later publications in which Lorentz expresses himself

 strongly on this point. The first is a paper from 1909, with the title "The hypothe

 sis of light quanta" (Lorentz 1909a). Here Lorentz first gives an elegant derivation of

 Planck's law, using the now well-known combinatorial expression to count the number
 of ways to distribute p identical elements over n indistinguishable resonators. He then

 discusses the light quantum hypothesis and its successful application to phenomena
 such as Stokes's law for phosphorescence38 and the photoelectric effect.39 He also
 discusses experiments by Stark on canal rays that seem to support the light quantum
 hypothesis. The discussion is, as always, fair and thorough, but he concludes:

 33 Lorentz's letter is lost, but its contents may be partially reconstructed from Planck's reply of 24 March
 1909 (Kox 2008, Letter 187).

 34 See Planck's summary in Planck to Lorentz, 16 June 1909 (Kox 2008, Letter 192).

 35 See Kox (2008, Letters 194 and 195) (drafts for a letter dated 30 July 1909, now lost).

 36 See Lorentz (1912c). In this paper Lorentz tries to explore in a purely classical way the consequences of

 the hypothesis that somehow during collisions between resonators in a solid and the atoms of a surrounding

 gas energy is only exchanged in discrete quanta. He is motivated by Einstein's successful theory of specific
 heats, in which quantized monochromatic oscillators are the building blocks of solids.

 37 Typical is the assessment given by Planck, Nemst, Rubens and Warburg in their proposal to award Ein

 stein a salaried membership of the Prussian Academy of Sciences: "That he might sometimes have overshot

 his target in his speculations, as for example in his light quantum hypothesis, should not be counted against

 him too much." ("Dafi er in seinen Spekulationen gelegentlich auch einmal iiber das Ziel hinausgeschossen
 haben mag, wie z.B. in seiner Hypothese der Lichtquanten, wird man ihm nicht allzuschwer anrechnen
 diirfen.") (Klein et al. 1993, Doc. 445).

 38 The light emitted in a phosphorescence process is always lower in frequency than the light absorbed.

 3® These two processes were also discussed by Einstein as evidence for his light quantum hypothesis in
 Einstein (1905).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 165

 This is all without doubt very striking, but nevertheless it seems to me that on
 closer inspection grave objections to the light quantum hypothesis arise.40

 Lorentz then reiterates his reasoning about the size of the quanta and the paper ends

 with the conclusion:

 What has been said may be sufficient to show that there can be no question of light
 quanta that remain concentrated in small spaces and remain always undivided

 during their propagation.41

 A few years later, during a discussion at the September 1913 meeting of the Brit

 ish Association for the Advancement of Science, Lorentz repeats his rejection of the
 existence of light quanta:

 Now it must, I think, be taken for granted, that the quanta can have no individual

 and permanent existence in the ether, that they cannot be regarded as accumu

 lations of energy in certain minute spaces flying about with the speed of light
 (Lorentz 1913, p. 381).

 Eventually, though, Lorentz had to modify his views, especially once Einstein's
 explanation of the photoelectric effect had been confirmed by Robert Millikan's exper
 iments. But he remained concerned because the problem of how to reconcile the exis

 tence of light quanta with phenomena like interference remained unsolved.

 In 1921 Lorentz finally saw a way out through an idea first formulated by Einstein
 in a discussion they had in Leiden. Einstein never published his idea, but he refers to

 it obliquely in a paper from 1921.42

 The first elaboration of Einstein's idea came in a letter from Lorentz to Einstein

 of 13 November 1921, written by Lorentz to make sure he had understood Einstein
 correctly.43 The mechanism he outlines is clearly inspired by De Broglie's postulated

 pilot waves: whenever radiation is emitted, this radiation consists of two parts, which

 Lorentz calls energy radiation and interference radiation. The latter carries no energy,
 but has a wavelike character (one might think of ordinary electromagnetic waves with

 infinitesimally small amplitude). It paves the way, so to speak, for the quantized energy

 radiation that follows it. The idea is that the light quanta are no longer completely free

 in their motion; where they can go, and how many can go to a certain spot is dictated

 by the 'intensity' of the interference radiation. Let us take the double-split experiment

 as an example. The interference radiation creates the well-known interference pattern
 on the screen behind the slits, but because the radiation carries no energy we cannot

 see it. The number of light quanta that land on the screen is determined by this inter

 ference pattern: the higher the 'intensity' in a spot on the screen, the more light quanta

 40 "Dies alles ist ohne Zweifel sehr auffallend, aber trotzdem will mich dtinken, dass bei naherer Betrach

 tung ernste Bedenken gegen die Hypothese der Lichtquanten aufsteigen."

 41 "Das Gesagte diirfte geniigen, um zu zeigen, dass von Lichtquanten, die bei der Fortbewegung in kleinen

 Raumen konzentriert und stets ungeteilt bleiben, keine Rede sein kann."

 42 See Einstein (1921). In this paper Einstein proposes an experiment to determine whether canal rays have

 a wave-like or a particle-like structure. The reasoning behind the experiment turned out to be flawed: see
 Janssen et al. (2002, Doc. 68, note 5).

 43 Kox (2008, Letter 371).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 166

 A. J. Kox

 reach that spot. Where the 'intensity' is zero, no light quanta arrive. Thus the familiar
 interference pattern is made visible by a succession of individual quanta.

 The Einstein-Lorentz idea had little resonance with other physicists. But Lorentz
 remained charmed by it: he included a more elaborate form, including the interac
 tion of two beams, in lectures given in 1922 at the California Institute of Technology

 (Caltech),44 as well as in lectures at Cornell University in the fall of 1926.45

 8 Wave mechanics and matrix mechanics

 While in the years after 1911 quantum physics made huge progress, with the break
 through achieved by Bohr in 1913 and the subsequent development of what is now
 known as the 'old quantum theory' by Sommerfeld and others, Lorentz remained skep

 tical. As late as 1925 in a lecture at the Societe Franchise de Physique he summarized
 his misgivings in the following way:

 All this [i.e. quantum theory] is of great beauty and importance, but unfortu

 nately we do not understand it. We do not understand Planck's hypothesis on the

 oscillators, nor do we understand the exclusion of non-stationary orbits and we

 do not see how in Bohr's theory the light is eventually produced. For, admittedly,

 the mechanics of quanta, the mechanics of discontinuities, still has to be made.46

 It would take another 2 years before the first steps were taken towards a true quan

 tum mechanics. At the end of 1925 Werner Heisenberg published the ground-breaking

 paper in which he developed the formalism of matrix mechanics and in the first months

 of 1926 Erwin Schrodinger published his wave mechanics.47 It is interesting to com
 pare Lorentz's reactions to the two new approaches. From his correspondence, in
 particular with Paul Ehrenfest, it becomes clear that he studied Heisenberg's original

 paper and the further development of matrix mechanics by Heisenberg, Born, Jordan,
 and Dirac. He even lectured in Leiden on matrix mechanics, as early as the fall of
 1926.48 But he never engaged with matrix mechanics in the way he did with wave
 mechanics. There is no correspondence on technical points with the authors men
 tioned earlier, and in his correspondence with Ehrenfest, for example, Lorentz seeks

 out Ehrenfest's help and opinion rather than trying to extend the theoiy.

 44 See Lorentz (1927, sees. 50-53).

 45 A set of mimeographed lecture notes of the Cornell lectures is preserved in the Caltech Archives.

 46 "Tout cela est d'une grande beaute et d'une extreme importance, mais malheureusement nous ne le
 comprenons pas. Nous ne comprenons ni l'hypothese de Planck sur les vibrateurs, ni l'exclusion des orbites

 non stationnaires et nous ne voyons pas, dans la theorie de Bohr, comment, en fin de compte, la lumiere est
 produite. Car, il faut bien l'avouer, la mecanique des quanta, la mechanique des discontinuites, doit encore
 etre faite." (Lorentz 1925).

 47 See Heisenberg (1925) and Schrodinger (1926a,b); see also, for instance, Jammer (1966) or Mehra and

 Rechenberg (1982-2001, vols. 2 and 5), for historical overviews of the development of matrix mechanics
 and wave mechanics.

 48 See his lecture notes in nrs. 289, 574, and 576 in the Lorentz Archive in the Noord-Hollands Archief,
 Haarlem, The Netherlands.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory

 167

 With wave mechanics the situation was different. On 30 March 1926 Schrodinger

 sent Lorentz the proofs of his first two papers on wave mechanics (Schrodinger
 1926a,b), asking Lorentz for his comments.49 On 27 May the 72-year-old Lorentz
 replies with a letter of nine densely written pages,50 from which it becomes clear that
 he has thoroughly analyzed Schrodinger's papers. Not surprisingly, Schrodinger's
 approach appealed to him, as being more 'anschaulich' than the much more abstract

 matrix mechanics. Lorentz writes that he had very much enjoyed studying the papers,

 but that he has also found some problems that, in his view, might be unsurmountable:

 - It will be very difficult to give a physical interpretation of Schrodinger's wave func

 tions iff, because they are complex quantities in a high-dimensional configuration

 space;

 - A calculation has shown that wave packets formed from such wave functions can

 not represent stable particles, because of their rapid spreading.

 These problems cast doubt in particular on one of the basic ideas behind wave
 mechanics: the extension of Hamilton's old analogy between mechanics and geomet
 rical optics.51 As Lorentz put it:

 Your idea that the change which our dynamics must undergo will be similar to

 the transition from geometrical optics to wave optics sounds very enticing, but
 I have doubts about it.52

 In his reply53 Schrodinger tries to counter Lorentz's objections. He suggests that

 one needs to look at i/r* ^ (with x[r* the complex conjugate) to find a physical interpre

 tation of the wave function and suggests that this quantity is related to the electrical

 charge density.54 He also refers to a note that he has included and in which he shows
 that that for a harmonic oscillator stable wave packets can be constructed, indicat
 ing that perhaps there is still hope for free or bound electrons to be represented by
 packets.55

 49 See Kox (2008, Letter 405). Schrodinger later also sent the proofs of his third paper, in which he shows
 the formal equivalence of wave mechanics and matrix mechanics; see ibid. Letter 412.

 50 Kox (2008, Letter 412).

 51 In short: Hamilton had shown that there is a formal analogy between mechanics and geometrical optics,
 in the sense that the Hamilton-Jacobi formalization of mechanics can be translated into the eikonal for

 malism of geometrical optics. Since geometrical optics is the short-wavelength limit of wave optics, one
 might wonder whether classical mechanics is the limiting case of some wave theory which is analogous
 to wave optics. In Hamilton's days there was no reason to suppose that mechanics might have any kind of

 wave-like character, but when Schrodinger was looking for a quantum theoretical generalization of classical

 mechanics, trying to find a wave-like theory was a plausible way to proceed. In fact, his derivation of the
 Schrodinger equation in Schrodinger (1926b) takes this approach. See also Goldstein (1950) for more on
 the optical-mechanical analogy and Joas and Lehner (2009) for Schrodinger's inspiration by the analogy.

 52 "Ihre Vermutung, dass die Umwandlung, welche unsere Dynamik wird erfahren miissen, dem Ubergange

 von Strahlenoptik zu Wellenoptik ahnlich sein wird, klingt sehr verlockend, aber ich habe doch Bedenken
 dagegen."

 53 Kox (2008, Letter 413).

 54 Not long afterwards Schrodinger had to abandon this interpretation.

 55 The included note is a copy of the manuscript of Schrodinger (1926b).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 168

 A. J. Kox

 Lorentz replied as quickly as 19 June with a letter of 19 large pages full of calcula
 tions.56 He essentially crushes Schrodinger's hopes with a new and detailed analysis of

 the behavior of wave packets in wave mechanics. In his usual gentle way he concludes

 that there is little hope left for Schrodinger's theory:

 If we have to give up the wave packets and with it one of the fundamental ideas

 of your theory, the transformation from classical mechanics to a wave mechan

 ics, something would be lost that would have been very beautiful. I would be
 extremely pleased if you could find a way out.57

 Lorentz believed to have shown Schrodinger's theory to be untenable—at least from

 a purely classical point of view. As we know, Schrodinger did not give up. Complete
 new interpretations of the wave equation and the wave function were needed to give

 physical meaning to the theory. But Lorentz had gone as far as he could go: reaching

 further beyond the boundaries of classical physics was too much for him.58

 9 Conclusion

 From the discussions in the preceding sections a few key points have emerged, both
 concerning Lorentz's concrete contributions and his approach to quantum theory:

 - Lorentz's way of thinking about the radiation problem was strongly influenced by

 his views on the constitution of matter and on the interaction between matter and

 ether, views that had led to his eminently successful electron theory.

 - The conclusion of his Rome lecture that classical theory necessarily leads to the
 Rayleigh-Jeans law and that the discrepancy between the experimental radiation
 curve and classical theory can only be removed by a radical new element has served

 as an important clarification of the radiation problem, in particular about the role

 of the equipartition theorem.

 - It is fair to say that, after the clarification provided by the Rome lecture, Lorentz did

 not come up with any new ideas but kept repeating his objections. He proceeded as

 he always did in physics: with great caution, and with impressive technical mastery.

 In this particular case he was perhaps more critical and cautious than in his earlier,

 purely classical work, because of his desire to keep as much of classical theory

 intact as possible. In specific cases, such as the discussion with Schrodinger, this

 led to useful clarifications, but real progress in quantum theory had to come from

 representatives of a younger generation, who embraced the quantum hypothesis as

 something new and unavoidable and made daring applications of it.

 56 Kox (2008, Letter 416).

 57 "Indes, wenn wir die Wellenpakete aufgeben miissen und damit einen der Grundgedanken Ihrer Theorie,
 die Umwandlung der klassischen Mechanik in eine undulatorische, so wiirde damit etwas verloren gehen,

 das sehr schon gewesen ware. Es wiirde mich sehr freuen, wenn Sie hier einen Ausweg finden konnten."

 In spite of his misgivings, Lorentz lectured on wave mechanics (as well as on matrix mechanics) while

 visiting Cornell University in the fall of 1926 and the California Institute of Technology in the first months
 of 1927. See Footnote 45; see also Lorentz to Schrodinger, 21 January 1927 (Kox 2008, Letter 420), for
 evidence that Lorentz covered the same material at both institutions.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hendrik Antoon Lorentz's struggle with quantum theory 169

 - To the very end, and true to his status as classical physicist par excellence, Lorentz

 kept thinking in purely classical terms and tried to adhere as closely as possible to
 classical theory in his work on quantum theory.59

 As will have become clear from the preceding discussion, Lorentz also remained
 true to himself in another more general way: in his capacity to objectively evaluate and

 appreciate points of view of others, without giving up his own, strong convictions.60

 Although he made no secret of his personal preferences for specific approaches, he
 never rejected alternatives out of hand and was willing and able to accept new con
 cepts, such as the light quantum, when the evidence was overwhelming. Still, in the
 end, he was and remained a classical physicist.

 Acknowledgments I am much indebted to Jed Buchwald for his critical comments on an earlier version
 of this paper and to Henriette Schatz for valuable suggestions.

 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License

 which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
 the source are credited.

 References

 Eckart, Michael, and Karl Marker, ed. 2000. Arnold Sommerfeld, Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel. Band 1:
 1892-1918. Berlin; Diepholz; Miinchen: Deutsches Museum; Verlag fur Geschichte der Naturwissen
 schaften und der Technik.

 Einstein, Albert. 1905. Uber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen

 Gesichtspunkt. Annalen der Physik 17: 132-148.

 Einstein, Albert. 1907. Die Plancksche Theorie der Strahlung und die Theorie der spezifischen Warme.

 Annalen der Physik 22; 180-190.

 Einstein, Albert. 1921. Uber ein den Elementarprozess der Lichtemission betreffendes Experiment. Sit

 zungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (1921); 882-883.

 Goldstein, Herbert. 1950. Classical Mechanics. Cambridge; Addison-Wesley.
 Heisenberg, Werner. 1925. Uber die quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer

 Beziehungen. Physikalische Zeitschrift 33: 879-893.

 Jammer, Max. 1966. The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Janssen, Michel, Robert Schulmann, Joszef Illy, Christoph Lehner, and Diana Kormos Buchwald, ed. 2002.
 The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 7, Writings 1918-1921. Princeton: Princeton University
 Press.

 Joas, Christian and Christoph Lehner 2009. The Classical Roots of Wave Mechanics: Schrodinger's Trans
 formations of the Optical-Mechanical Analogy. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
 40(2009): 338-351.

 Klein, Martin J., A.J. Kox, and Robert Schulmann, ed. 1993. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol.

 5, Corespondence 1902-1914. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Kox, A.J. 1980. Hendrik Antoon Lorentz, the Ether, and the General Theory of Relativity. Archive for His

 tory of Exact Sciences 38: 67-78. Also in Einstein and the History of General Relativity, ed. D. Howard
 and J. Stachel, pp. 201-212. Boston: Birkhauser, 1989.

 59 Examples, not mentioned in the text or only mentioned in passing are Lorentz (1912c) (see Footnote 36),

 and Lorentz (1928), a paper delivered at the 1927 Como conference, with the revealing title: "On the rotation
 of an electron that circles around a nucleus."

 We owe this insight to Russell McCormmach, who first formulated it in his article on Lorentz in the
 Dictionary of Scientific Biography. The best-known known instance of this attitude is found in his view of

 the theory of relativity: Lorentz was a great admirer of Einstein's work, lectured extensively on the theory,

 but never gave up on the existence of the electromagnetic ether and thus of a privileged reference frame
 (see Kox 2008 for a discussion).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 170

 A. J. Kox

 Kox, A.J., ed. 2008. The Scientific Correspondence ofH.A. Lorentz, vol. 1. New York: Springer.
 Kuhn, Thomas S. 1978. Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894—1912. Oxford: Clarendon

 Press; New York: Oxford University Press.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1903. Het emissie- en absorptievermogen der metalen in het geval van groote golf

 lengten. Verslagen van de Gewone Vergaderingen der Wis- en Natuurkundige Afdeeling, Koninklijke
 Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 11(1902-03): 787-807. Reprinted in translation as "On
 the Emission and Absorption by Metals of Rays of Heat of Great Wave-lengths." Proceedings of the
 Section of Sciences, Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 5(1902-03): 666-685.
 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1908a. Lepartage de I'energie entre la matiere ponderable et I'ether. Roma: R. Acca
 demia dei Lincei, 1908. Slightly revised reprints: Nuovo Cimento (5) 16(1908): 5-34; Revue Generate
 des Sciences 20 (1909): 14-26. Reprinted with an additional note in Atti del IV Congresso Internazi
 onale dei Matematici (Roma, 6-11 Aprile 1908), ed. G. Castelnuovo. Vol. 1, pp. 145-165. Roma: R.
 Accademia dei Lincei, 1909.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1908b. Zur Strahlungstheorie. Physikalische Zeitschrift 9: 562-563.
 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1909a. De hypothese der lichtquanta. Handelingen van het Nederlandsch Natuur- en

 Geneeskundig Congres 12: 129-139. Reprinted as "Die Hypothese der Lichtquanten." Physikalische
 Zeitschrift 11(1910): 349-354.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1909b. The Theory of Electrons and Its Applications to the Phenomena of Light and
 Radiant Heat. A Course of Lectures Delivered in Columbia University, New York, in March and April
 1906. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1912a. Discours d'ouverture de M. Lorentz. In La theorie du rayonnement et les

 quanta. Rapports et discussions de la reunion tenue a Bruxelles du 30 octobre au 3 novembre 1911, sous
 les auspices de M. E. Solvay, pp. 6-9. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1912b. Sur l'application au rayonnement du theoreme de l'equipartition de I'energie.
 In La theorie du rayonnement et les quanta. Rapports et discussions de la reunion tenue a Bruxelles du
 30 octobre au 3 novembre 1911, sous les auspices de M. E. Solvay, pp. 12^18. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1912c. Over de theorie der energie-elementen. Verslagen van de Gewone Vergader
 ingen der Wis- en Natuurkundige Afdeeling, Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam
 20(1911-12): 1103-1117. Reprinted in translation as "Sur la theorie des elements d'energie." Archives
 Neerlandaises 2 (1912): 176-191.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1913. Discussion remark. Reports of the British Association for the Advancement of

 Science 83: 381.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1925. L'Ancienne et la nouvelle mecanique. In Le livre du cinquantenaire de la Societe
 franfaise de Physique, pp. 99-114. Paris: Editions de la Revue d'Optique Theorique et Instrumentale.
 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1927. Problems of Modern Physics. A Course of Lectures Delivered in the California

 Institute of Technology. H. Bateman, ed. Boston: Ginn.

 Lorentz, Hendrik A. 1928. Sur la rotation d'un electron qui circule autour d'un noyau. In Atti del Congresso

 Internazionale dei Fisici, 11-20 Settembre 1927-V, Como-Pavia-Roma. Onoranze ad Alessandro Volta

 nel primo centenario della morte. Vol. 2, pp. 3-32. Bologna: Zanichelli, 1929.

 Lummer, Otto and Ernst Pringsheim 1908. Uber die Jeans-Lorentzsche Strahlungsformel. Physikalische

 Zeitschrift 9: 449^150.

 McCormmach, Russell. 1970. H.A. Lorentz and the Electromagnetic View of Nature. Isis 61: 459^-97.
 Mehra, Jagdish, and Helmut Rechenberg. 1982-2001. The Historical Development of Quantum Theory,

 6 vols, in 9 parts. New York, Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer.

 Miller, Arthur I. 1981. Albert Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity: Emergence (1905) and Early Inter

 pretation (1905-1911). Reading: Addison-Wesley.

 Schrodinger, Erwin. 1926a. Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem I. Annalen der Physik 79: 361-376.
 Schrodinger, Erwin. 1926b. Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem II. Annalen der Physik 80: 489-527.
 Schrodinger, Erwin. 1926c. Der stetige Ubergang von der Mikro- zur Makromechanik. Die Naturwissens

 chaften 14: 664-666.

 Van der Waals Jr., Johannes D. 1909. Over de verdeelingswet der energie bij electrische stelsels. Versla
 gen van de Gewone Vergaderingen der Wis- en Natuurkundige Afdeeling, Koninklijke Akademie van
 Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 17(1908-09): 659-670. Reprinted in translation as "On the Law of the
 Partition of Energy in Electrical Systems." Proceedings of the Section of Sciences, Koninklijke Akademie
 van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 11(1908-09): 580-590.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

