 

 

 

 

Historical development of Teichmüller theory
Author(s): Lizhen Ji and  Athanase Papadopoulos
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 2 (March 2013), pp. 119-147
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479263
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:02 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:119-147
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0104-y

 Historical development of Teichmuller theory

 Lizhen Ji • Athanase Papadopoulos

 Received: 26 May 2012 / Published online: 28 June 2012
 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract Originally, the expression "Teichmiiller theory" referred to the theory that
 Oswald Teichmiiller developed on deformations and on moduli spaces of marked
 Riemann surfaces. This theory is not an isolated field in mathematics. At differ

 ent stages of its development, it received strong impetuses from analysis, geometry,
 and algebraic topology, and it had a major impact on other fields, including low
 dimensional topology, algebraic topology, hyperbolic geometry, geometric group the

 ory, representations of discrete groups in Lie groups, symplectic geometry, topological

 quantum field theory, theoretical physics, and there are certainly others. Of course, the

 impacts on these various fields are not equally important, but in some cases (namely,

 low-dimensional topology, algebraic geometry, and physics) the impact was crucial.
 At the same time, Teichmiiller theory established important connections between the

 fields mentioned. This, in part, is a consequence of the diversity and the richness of the
 structure that Teichmiiller space itself carries. From a more subjective point of view,

 the result of pondering on these connections and applications demonstrates the unity
 of mathematics. The aim of this paper is to survey the origin of Teichmiiller theory

 and the development of its early major ideas.

 Communicated by Jeremy Gray.

 L. Ji (El)

 Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
 e-mail: lji@umich.edu

 A. Papadopoulos
 Institut de Recherche Mathematique Avancee, Universite de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France
 e-mail: papadop@math.unistra.fr

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 120 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 1 Introduction

 Many people made substantial contributions to Teichmiiller theory by discovering
 new ideas, or formulating important problems, or proving major results. In fact, to

 understand the origin of this theory, one has to ponder on the origins of both Riemann

 surface theory and of the theory of complex functions. In this respect, we shall mention
 a certain number of names, but two names appear to the forefront, Riemann and
 Teichmiiller.

 There are very few mathematicians whose works had as much influence on math
 ematics as Riemann. Ahlfors (1953, p. 53) wrote: "The spirit of Riemann will move

 future generations as it has moved us." Since our purpose in this paper is not to describe

 the work of Riemann, but only the part of it related to Teichmiiller theory, his name

 will be mainly attached to two fundamental objects: Riemann surfaces and the Rie
 mann moduli space. The concept of Riemann surface arose in Riemann's attempt to
 associate a surface to a multivalued algebraic function defined by a polynomial equa

 tion so that the function becomes univalent, or "uniform" (this is probably the origin
 of the word "uniformization"). Depending on the way one can represent a Riemann
 surface, one can regard Riemann's moduli space from different points of view: as a

 space of equivalence classes of branched coverings of surfaces, as a space of birational
 equivalence classes of algebraic curves, as a space of equivalence classes of function
 fields, etc. At Riemann's time, it was not easy to make precise relations between these

 various points of view. Riemann wanted to understand the family of Riemann sur
 faces, and his moduli space arose as an attempt to study the family of equivalence
 classes of function fields on algebraic curves. One important step in the study of the
 moduli space of surfaces was to count the number of parameters needed for the space
 of equivalence classes of surfaces of a given topological type. Riemann made such a
 parameter count although he did not have a topology or a complex structure on that
 space, and therefore it is hard to give a precise meaning to this parameter count. In
 this sense, Riemann's ideas are to be considered as a program rather than as results.
 This was the opinion of Ahlfors (1982, vol. II, p. 207), of Klein (1882, pp. X and XI
 of the Preface), and of several other people. Let us quote Ahlfors (1963a, p. 4):

 Riemann's classical problem of moduli is not a problem with a single aim, but

 a program to obtain maximum information about a whole complex of questions

 which can be viewed from several different angles.

 Let us also quote Bers, from a survey he wrote on the uniformization problem that
 was started by Riemann (Bers 1976, p. 559):

 A significant mathematical problem, like the uniformization problem which

 appears as No. 22 on Hilbert's list, is never solved only once. Each generation of
 mathematicians, as if obeying Goethe's dictum Was du ererbt von deinen Vatern
 hast, erwirb es, um es zu besitzen} rethinks and reworks solutions discovered

 by their predecessors, and fits these solutions into the current conceptual and
 notational framework. Because of this, proofs of important theorems become,

 1 That which you have inherited from your fathers, earn it in order to possess it.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 121

 and if by themselves, simpler and easier as time goes by—as Ahlfors observed
 in his 1938 lecture on uniformization. Also, and this is more important, one
 discovers that solved problems present further questions.

 Monastyrsky wrote about Riemann (Monastyrsky 1987, p. 52): "It is difficult to

 recall another example in the history of nineteenth-century mathematics when a strug

 gle for a rigorous proof led to such productive results." A twentieth-century example
 is certainly that of Teichmiiller. We can quote Ahlfors again, from his 1953 survey

 Development of the theory ofconformal mapping and Riemann surfaces through a cen

 tury (Ahlfors 1953, pp. 93 and ff.) written for a conference celebrating the hundredth

 anniversary of Riemann's inaugural dissertation:

 [...] Riemann's writings are full of almost cryptic messages for the future. For

 instance, Riemann's mapping theorem is ultimately formulated in terms that

 would defy any attempt of proof, even with modern methods. [...] In the pre

 mature death of Teichmiiller geometric function theory, like other branches of

 mathematics, suffered a grievous loss [...] Nothing could be more false than to
 say that classical function theory has solved its problems and has therefore out

 lived itself. Even without the introduction of completely new ideas the classical

 problem of modules, vague as it is, and—to mention a more recent example—the

 investigation of the true role played by Teichmiiller's extremal quasiconformal

 mappings, are questions that can keep generations busy. [... ] Geometric function
 theory of one variable is already a highly developed branch of mathematics, and

 it is not one in which an easily formulated classical problem awaits its solution.

 On the contrary it is a field in which the formulation of essential problems is
 almost as important as their solution.

 Today, 59 years after Ahlfors' statement, Teichmiiller theory is still growing, faster
 than ever before. New ideas and new connections between this theory and several
 domains in mathematics are still emerging.

 The name of Teichmuller is attached to Teichmiiller space, i.e, the deformation space
 of marked Riemann surfaces. Teichmuller space is an orbifold covering of Riemann's
 moduli space. Riemann's problem of moduli was formulated precisely in terms of
 complex geometry by Teichmuller, who emphasized the problem of understanding the

 intrinsic properties of the moduli space as a variety. In particular, he realized the need

 of using markings to unfold the singular points. Teichmuller (1939) after introducing

 the deformation space that carries now his name, provided this space with a topology
 that is induced from a metric (the so-called "Teichmiiller metric"). Teichmuller (1944)

 equipped this space with the structure of a complex manifold, and this gave a meaning

 to Riemann's parameter count. We also owe to Teichmuller the use of the theory of

 quasiconformal mappings and that of quadratic differentials as two major ingredients

 in the deformation theory of Riemann surfaces.

 One special moduli space was well understood right from the beginning, and it
 was certainly used as a motivation; this is the moduli space of the closed surface of
 genus one (equivalently, the space of elliptic functions). From the point of view of
 uniformization, this case was completely treated by Riemann (1857) (cf. Riemann's
 remark, on Jacobi's Inversion Problem, p. 93 in the English Collected Works: "Until

 4?} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 122

 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 now the only parts of that investigation which have been worked out fully are those
 mentioned in Sects. 1 and 2 and the first half of Sect. 3 related to elliptic functions").

 We shall recall below that likewise, Teichmiiller space of the closed surface of genus

 one was understood and completely analyzed by Teichmiiller.

 Both Riemann and Teichmiiller had interior visions of theories on moduli that they
 did not develop completely because both of them had short lives.2 Thus, they left
 for other mathematicians—and not minor ones—the task of filling out the details

 of their theories and transforming the sketches they left into complete and rigorous
 results. Riemann's ideas were commented and complemented by Klein, and they
 were the most influential on the works of Fricke, Koebe, Weierstrass, Poincare, Weyl,

 and on the whole Italian school of algebraic geometry that grew up during the early

 years of the twentieth century (one can mention the names of Castelnuovo, Enriques,
 Torelli, Severi, and others). Teichmiiller's ideas were influential on all subsequent

 developments of complex analysis, and they were at the basis of the works of Ahlfors,
 Bers, Rauch, Kodaira, Spencer, and other complex analysts and geometers. It was
 only after the work of generations of mathematicians that it became clear that the
 intuitions that Riemann and Teichmiiller had were completely sound. Teichmiiller
 theory had also an important impact on modern algebraic geometers, namely, Weil,
 Grothendieck, Mumford, and many others. In some sense, ideas in the last paper of
 Teichmiiller (1944) contributed to the birth of the modern theory of moduli spaces

 in algebraic geometry and influenced the modern formulation of algebraic geometry
 by Grothendieck (1960-1961). The fact that a large number of people contributed
 to the foundations and the development of a single mathematical theory, each person

 introducing an idea, or a technical tool, and sometimes a new problem, is an illustration

 of how mathematics generally grows.

 Andre Weil wrote, in a commentary to a 1958 paper in his Collected Works (1979,

 vol. II, p. 545)

 One should almost write a book, or at least a beautiful article, on the history of
 moduli and moduli varieties; this has to be traced back to the beginning of the

 theory of elliptic functions.

 The present article is a small contribution to that project. The period we concentrate
 on is roughly 1939-1959.

 In what follows, we shall refer to foundational articles and surveys written by the

 founders themselves and others written by other authors in the field.

 We are grateful to the following colleagues with whom we corresponded regard
 ing Teichmiiller's contribution: Oliver Baues, Peter Buser, Bill Fulton, Bill Gold

 man, Bill Harvey, Linda Keen, Chris Leininger, Enrico Leuzinger, John Ratcliffe, and

 Sumio Yamada. We are indebted to Bill Abikoff, to Scott Wolpert, and especially to

 Jeremy Gray for several corrections and for valuable suggestions on a preliminary ver

 sion of this paper. Remarks and corrections by Clifford Earle were essential. We are
 most grateful to Norbert A'Campo for many valuable discussions and for his shared
 enthusiasm.

 2 Riemann, born in 1826, died at the age of 39, and Teichmiiller, bom in 1913, died at the age of 30.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 123

 2 The quasiconformal theory

 The classical proofs of several major results in Teichmiiller theory use the theory
 of quasiconformal mappings even though the term "quasiconformal mapping" does
 not always appear in the statements of these results. The results include the fact that

 Teichmiiller space is homeomorphic to a cell, and the fact that it admits a canonical
 holomorphic embedding in some CN.

 We present in this section some aspects of the development of the theory of qua

 siconformal mappings because of its importance. We start with Grotzsch's definition

 and we shall review the use of this theory in Teichmiiller theory. We shall also describe

 some major later developments and generalizations of quasiconformal mapping theory.
 Before Teichmiiller, work on quasiconformal mappings was done in Grotzsch
 (1932), Ahlfors (1935), and Lavrentieff (1935). Ahlfors gave a brief summary of the
 early use of quasiconformal maps (Ahlfors 1964, p. 153). According to this account,

 the first mention of quasiconformal mappings (by a different name) occurred in a 1928

 paper by Grotzsch. Ahlfors adds, however, that the problem that Grotzsch solved there,

 of finding the best mapping between a rectangle and a square, was first considered as

 a mere curiosity, and that the full strength of quasiconformal mappings and their use

 in the deformation theory of Riemann surfaces was first realized by Teichmiiller.3 Let
 us quote Ahlfors (1964, p. 156):

 The very genesis of quasiconformal mappings was connected with the elemen
 tary extremal problem formulated by Grotzsch. Teichmiiller was the first to
 extract a general principle: In a class of mappings it is required to find one
 whose maximal dilatation is a minimum. It is to be expected that the solution is

 unique, and that the extremal mapping is characterized by simple properties.

 Likewise, Bers (1970, p. 180) writes:

 [The approach of] applying quasiconformal mappings to the "problem of mod
 uli" was pioneered by Teichmiiller 25 years ago.

 In the rest of this section, after a quick review of the work of Grotzsch and of other
 pioneers, we shall survey the work of Teichmiiller on quasiconformal mappings and

 their subsequent use in Teichmiiller theory.

 In (Grotzsch 1932), the author introduced the notion of quasiconformality of a map
 between surfaces as a deviation from conformality. The quasiconformal deviation (or

 "dilatation") of a differentiable map is defined as the supremum over all points on the

 surface of the ratio of the major to the minor axes of the infinitesimal ellipses that are

 images of infinitesimal circles. The following formula for the dilatation of a differen

 tiable map / between two domains in the plane, at a point z, was given by Grotzsch:

 . \fz(z)\ + \Mz)\
 Z \fz(z)\-\Mz)\'

 3 Teichmuller, in his main paper (Teichmiiller 1939), quotes the papers of Grotzsch and of Ahlfors for the
 notion of quasiconformal maps.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 124

 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 The dilatation of / is then

 K(f) = sup Kf{z).

 z

 The dilatation of a map is invariant under composition by conformal mappings.

 Ahlfors (1964, p. 153) writes that Grotzsch's paper was "buried in a small journal,"

 that it first remained unnoticed, and that he himself learned of it by word of mouth in

 1931 and used it only in 1936.

 In 1935, in the Soviet Union, Lavrentieff (1935) published a paper on partial differ

 ential equations in which he introduced a notion of almost-analytic function ("fonction

 presque-analytique") which is equivalent to the notion of quasiconformal mapping
 considered by Grotzsch. Lavrentiev used these mappings in a study of the partial
 differential equation that controls the flow of an incompressible fluid. He proved in

 (Lavrentieff 1935) that if / is a sense-preserving homeomorphism between two sim
 ply connected domains D and D' of the complex plane, then for almost all jc in D,
 one can define the eccentricity of the infinitesimal ellipses that are images by / of
 infinitesimal circles in D.

 Ahlfors (1964, p. 153) says in his paper that it was not clear to him how the name

 "quasiconformal mapping" originated. In a commentary on that paper (Ahlfors 1982,
 vol. 1, p. 213), Ahlfors writes:

 Quasiconformal mappings had been introduced already in 1928 by Grotzch, who
 called them "nichtconforme Abbildungen" and almost simultaneously with my

 paper by A. M. Lavrentiev, who used the term "fonctions presque analytiques". I

 have been credited with being the first to have used the name "quasiconformal,"
 which has become standard. The truth is that I cannot recollect having invented
 the name, but I have also not been able to locate it elsewhere. Little did I know at

 the time what an important role quasiconformal mappings would come to play
 in my own work.

 In any case, the expression appears in print in the fundamental paper on covering
 surfaces (Ahlfors 1935).4 Again, according to Ahlfors (1964, p. 153):

 In a few years it became increasingly clear that quasiconformal mappings merited

 a theory of their own, a view that gained its strongest support from the more

 prophetic than rigorous writings of Teichmiiller in 1938-1940.

 In (Ahlfors 1978, pp. 72-73), he makes the following remarks on the status of

 Teichmiiller's use of quasiconformal mappings

 Quasiconformal mappings might have remained a rather obscure and peripheral

 object of study if it had not been for Oswald Teichmiiller, an exceptionally gifted

 and intense young mathematician and political fanatic, who suddenly made a fas

 cinating and unexpected discovery. At that time, many special extremal problems
 in quasiconformal mappings had already been solved, but these were isolated

 without a connecting idea. In 1939, he presented to the Prussian Academy a

 * This is the paper for which Ahlfors earned the Fields medal.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 125

 now famous paper which marks the rebirth of quasiconformal mappings as a
 new discipline which completely overshadows the rather modest beginnings of
 the theory. With remarkable intuition he made a synthesis of what was known
 and proceeded to announce a bold outline of a new program which he presents,
 rather dramatically, as the result of a sudden revelation that occurred to him
 at night. His main discovery was that the extremal problem of quasiconformal
 mapping, when applied to Riemann surfaces, leads automatically to an intimate
 connection with the holomorphic quadratic differentials on the surface. With

 this connection the whole theory takes on a completely different complexion: A

 problem concerned with non-conformal mappings turns out to have a solution

 which is expressed in terms of holomorphic differentials, so that in reality the

 problem belongs to classical function theory.

 To say it briefly, Grotzsch solved the question of extremal quasiconformal mappings

 between quadrilaterals, and after that, Teichmiiller addressed the problem of extremal
 quasiconformal mappings between arbitrary Riemann surfaces. Teichmiiller (1939)
 asserted that these mappings exist, that they are affine with respect to some singular

 Euclidean structure on the surface, and that they are unique in their homotopy classes.

 He introduced the notion of quadratic differential as an ingredient in this theory,
 which provided an analytic setting to describe a quasiconformal mapping and the
 underlying Euclidean structure for the extremal map and he gave a formula relating

 the Beltrami coefficient of this extremal map to the quadratic differential. In that paper,

 Teichmiiller used the notion of quasiconformality to define a metric on Teichmiiller

 space. Starting from this work, quasiconformal mappings, used in measuring distances
 between conformal structures, instead of being only "non-conformal" (as Grotzsch
 had called them), became a basic ingredient of the theory of conformal mappings.
 We shall further comment on this below. According to Ahlfors (1964, p. 156), after

 he learned about the work by Grotzsch on extremal mappings between quadrilaterals,

 Teichmiiller worked out the same problem for pentagons, and proved a result which
 according to Ahlfors, is "already a sophisticated result. [...] The problem is more
 complicated for hexagons, but can still be solved by the same method." Ahlfors then
 adds:

 Efforts to solve the [more general] problems had failed, but in a flash of genius
 Teichmiiller came forth with a daring conjecture which he himself admitted
 was based on almost nothing. In the few cases that could be solved explicitly he

 observed that the solution was always given by a conformal mapping, followed by

 an affine mapping, and by another conformal mapping. Teichmiiller conjectured

 that the same would be true in all problems. For topological reasons, however, the

 conformal mappings cannot be single-valued mappings, except in the simplest

 cases, and by heuristic reasoning (we could say by sleight of hand), he concluded

 that they must be determined, locally, by quadratic differentials with certain

 special properties. [...] After hard work Teichmiiller finally managed to prove

 his conjecture, but it took several years to produce a reasonably neat proof. Even
 now, the available proofs leave much to be desired in way of directness and

 simplicity.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 126 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 The most remarkable feature of this result is the direct connection it establishes

 between quasiconformal mappings and quadratic differentials. This connection

 is entirely unexpected and is a sure sign that the role of quasiconformal mappings

 in function theory is far from superficial. Furthermore, any classically trained

 analyst cannot dismiss as pure coincidence that the number of linearly indepen

 dent quadratic differentials is precisely equal to the number of parameters, or
 moduli, which according to Riemann characterize a closed Riemann surface of

 given genus. TeichmUller does not fail to make the most of this observation.

 The theory of quasiconformal maps has since been developed, extended and applied
 to many different situations. The standard introduction and reference to quasiconfor

 mal maps is the book (Ahlfors 1966), the first edition of which had educated gen
 erations of mathematician. A book that emphasizes the low regularity character of
 quasiconformal maps is Lehto and Virtanen (1965).

 3 Teichmiiller space

 Teichmiiller space appeared for the first time in the literature in the paper by Teich
 miiller (1939) entitled Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Dif
 ferentiate. Before that, a space of Riemann surfaces was only implicit in Klein (1883)
 and in Klein and Robert (1897). A space of polygons in the hyperbolic plane that
 parametrize Riemann surfaces is contained in the work of Poincare (1884), who used

 it in an approach to the uniformization problem known as the "continuity method";
 cf. the discussion in Gray (1986), also quoted in Ratcliffe (2006). A good refer
 ence for this method and more generally for the uniformization theorem is the book
 (Saint-Gervais 2010).

 The name "Teichmiiller space" appears in a 1953-1954 survey article by Ahlfors,
 but it seems that the expression was introduced by Weil; see the comments by Weil
 in Weil's Collected Works (vol. II, p. 546), on his paper (Weil 1958a), where Weil
 writes: "[...] this led me to the decision of writing up my observations on the moduli
 of curves and on what I called 'Teichmiiller space' [...]"

 Teichmiiller's (1939) paper is probably his most influential one, and it contains

 the foundations of the theory. The paper contains ideas and few technical details. As

 a matter of fact, this is the case with all of Teichmiiller's papers on the subject. In
 the introduction, Teichmiiller declares that for some of his results, he gives only an
 idea of the proof, and that his hope is to give sufficient heuristic justification that

 will lead to complete proofs, and that this publication will encourage others to study
 these problems. The setting is very general: an orientable or nonorientable surfaces

 of finite topological type, with or without boundary, of genus g, with y cross-caps, n

 boundary curves, h interior distinguished points, and k boundary distinguished points.

 Teichmiiller calls this surface a Hauptbereich, i.e., a "principal region." The surface is

 equipped with an atlas the charts of which take their values in the complex plane with
 coordinate changes that are conformal or anti-conformal.5 Teichmiiller introduces the

 5 We note that Teichmiiller includes anti-conformal maps in his setting because the surface he is considering

 might be nonorientable. We recall that the definition of an abstract Riemann surface is due to Weyl (1913).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory 127

 notion of marked surface (where the marking is a quasiconformal map) and the notion
 of equivalence relation between marked surfaces. The mappings he considers preserve

 the set of distinguished points.

 Teichmiiller states that the set of equivalence classes of such Riemann surfaces (the

 space which is called today "Teichmiiller space") is a topological manifold homeo
 morphic to RCT, with er — p — 6g — 6 + 3y + 3n + 2h + k, where p is the number of

 parameters of the group of holomorphic transformations of the surface. For the annu

 lus, p — 1; for the torus, p = 2 and for a surface of higher genus, p — 0. Teichmiiller's
 formula is valid in all cases.6

 In this paper, Teichmiiller starts by reviewing Grotzsch s work on contormal maps

 between rectangles. Grotzsch showed that between any two rectangles with marked

 vertices, a diffeomorphism which preserves the marking of the vertices and that has

 least dilatation is the affine map among those that preserve these marked vertices.
 Teichmiiller gives to such a map the name extremal quasiconformal map. He then
 solves the problem of extremal quasiconformal maps for annuli, and he considers tori,

 showing that their deformation space is parameterized by the upper half-plane. After

 that, he considers general surfaces ("principal regions"). He notes that since, in general,

 Riemann surfaces are not conformally equivalent, one has to look at notions involving

 quasiconformality. He considers the problem of finding maps between two principal

 regions that have the least quasiconformal dilatation. He states that for such a map, the

 quasiconformal dilatation must be constant, i.e., it must be the same at each point. He

 then formulates the problem of characterizing infinitesimally extremal quasiconformal

 mappings. He says that for the description of the best quasiconformal maps between

 two surfaces, one can find vector fields on the surfaces that give the infinitesimal change

 of direction in the major ellipses. He makes this more precise by introducing the notion

 of meromorphic quadratic differentials.7 He then defines natural local holomorphic
 parameters on the surface associated to quadratic differentials. These differentials
 establish a link between quasiconformal maps and complex structures. Indeed, Teich
 miiller gives a very simple local description of extremal homeomorphisms between
 two Riemann surfaces by means of two holomorphic quadratic differentials on these

 Footnote 5 continued

 Ahlfors writes in (Ahlfors 1953) about (Wey 11913) "H. Weyl's book Die Idee der Riemannschen Fliiche was

 the real eye-opener. Pursuing the ideas of Klein it brings, for the first time, a rigorous and general definition
 of a Riemann surface, and it marks the death of the glue-and-scissors period." Unlike the definition used

 by Riemann (using branched coverng of the sphere) or by Weierstrass (using power series expansions), the
 surfaces in Weyl's definition are not associated to specific analytic functions, and they are free from any
 embedding of the surface in some Euclidean space. It is a theorem that any compact Riemann surface is
 biholomorphically equivalent to a surface defined by an algebraic curve or to a curve defined locally by
 power series.

 ® In the case of oriented surfaces without boundary and with no distinguished points, the dimension is
 6g — 6 + p. In the modern literature on the subject, one usually distinguishes between the case of surfaces
 of genus > 2 (the dimension of the space is 6g — 6 in the closed case) and genus 1 (the dimension is 2,
 which is not what the formula 6g — 6 gives).

 7 Teichmiiller introduced the more general notion of a differential of order n, as an object which in the

 local parameters can be written as (pit) dtn, where ip(t) is a meromorphic function, satisfying an invariance

 transformation rule with respect to local parameter changes. For n = 1, these are the usual differential forms
 on Riemann surfaces and for n = 2 these are the quadratic differentials familiar to Teichmiiller theorists.

 4l) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 128 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 surfaces, written in local parameters as d£2 and df '2 with £ = § + ir/ and t;' = %+irj'.
 The extremal map is then given by f' = K%, rj' = r\. The local dilatation of this map is

 constant (independent of the point). Denoting the local dilatation of an extremal map /o

 by K (/o), Teichmiiller then uses the quantity log K (/o) to define a metric on the set of

 equivalence classes of marked Riemann surfaces. This is the metric which was called
 later on the Teichmiiller metric. In the case of genus one (elliptic curves), the space of

 equivalence classes of marked Riemann surfaces is parametrized by the upper half
 plane and the Teichmiiller metric coincides with the hyperbolic metric. Teichmiiller
 proves that quadratic differentials provide the description of extremal infinitesimal
 quasiconformal mappings, and he conjectures that the converse is also true. He states

 several forms of this conjecture, including a global (as opposed to infinitesimal) ver
 sion, stating the uniqueness of extremal mappings (i.e., that all extremal mappings
 are associated to quadratic differentials). He supports his conjecture by special cases
 which he works out in detail. He then makes a detailed discussion of quasiconformal

 maps on ring domains. He discusses the Grotzsch-Ahlfors method and the paper ends

 with a discussion on the role of quasiconformal mappings in the study of conformal
 mappings.

 TeichmUller proved his conjecture in a later paper (Teichmiiller 1943), in the form of

 an existence result (see the above comments by Ahlfors and the comments of Ahlfors
 and Bers which we reproduce below). Teichmiiller's existence proof is also based
 on quadratic differentials, and it makes use of the continuity method. By means of
 this existence and uniqueness result, Teichmuller states the existence and uniqueness
 of geodesies between any two points in Teichmuller space and he uses this to show
 that the space is homeomorphic to an open ball in the vector space of holomorphic
 quadratic differentials, equipped with a suitable norm. He shows that this metric is a
 Finsler metric, i.e., the distance between two points is the infimum of the lengths of

 piecewise smooth paths joining them, where length of paths is measured by integrating
 norms of tangent vectors. The dimension count for Teichmuller space follows from

 its parametrization by the vector space of quadratic differentials that provides the ray

 structure, the dimension of this vector space being known by the theorem of Riemann
 Roch.

 Other results of Teichmiiller that are contained in Teichmiiller (1939) include the

 fact that the mapping class group acts properly discontinuously on Teichmiiller space

 and that moduli space is the quotient of Teichmiiller space by this action. They also

 include the investigation of the singular flat metric on the surface induced by a quadratic

 differential and the representation of Riemann surfaces by Fuchsian groups.

 Teichmiiller's (1939, 1943) papers were first considered by the other mathemati
 cians as a program and not as finished papers. According to Abikoff, the fact that

 several ideas were sketched is only consistent with the tradition of the journal in
 which the article was published. Abikoff (1986) writes: "The tradition of Deutsche

 Mathematik is one of heuristic argument and contempt for formal proof. Busemann

 notes that Teichmiiller manifested those traits early in his career but when pressed

 could offer a formal proof." It was after several years of hard work by several math

 ematicians that all the arguments in these papers were considered as being sound. In
 any case, Teichmiiller's 1939 paper stimulated several authors to study the problems

 considered, and it is interesting to review some of the work done in this area.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory 129

 In his ICM 1958 paper (Bers 1960c), Bers sketched a proof of Teichmiiller's char

 acterization of extremal quasiconformal mappings, of the fact that Teichmiiller space
 is a cell, and of the fact that this space has a natural complex structure. Bers writes:

 Much of this work consists in clarifying and verifying assertions of Teichmiiller
 whose bold ideas, though sometimes stated awkwardly and without complete
 proofs, influenced all recent investigators [on the classical problem of moduli],
 as well as the work of Kodaira and Spencer on the higher dimensional case.

 Ahlfors' (1954) paper on quasiconformal mappings was motivated by Teichmiiller's

 work. In the commentary to that paper, Ahlfors writes (Collected papers, Ahlfors 1982,
 p. 1):

 It had become increasingly evident that Teichmiiller's ideas would profoundly
 influence analysis and especially the theory of functions of one complex vari
 able, although nobody at that time could foresee the extent to which this would

 be true. The foundations of the theory were not commensurate with the lofti
 ness of Teichmiiller's vision, and I thought it was time to reexamine the basic

 concepts. My paper has serious shortcomings, but it has nevertheless been very

 influential and has led to a resurgence of interest in quasiconformal mappings and

 Teichmuller theory. [...] In particular, a complete proof of the uniqueness part
 of Teichmiiller's theorem was included. Like all the other known proofs of the
 uniqueness it was modeled on Teichmiiller's own proof, which used uniformiza
 tion and the length-area method. Where Teichmuller was sketchy I tried to be

 more precise. In the original paper Teichmuller did not prove the existence part

 of his theorem, but in a following paper (Teichmuller 1943) he gave a proof based

 on a continuity method. I found his proof rather hard to read and although I did

 not doubt its validity I thought that a direct variational proof would be preferable.

 My attempted proof on these lines had a flaw, and even my subsequent correction

 does not convince me today. In any case my attempt was too complicated and did
 not deserve to succeed. Later, L. Bers (1960b) published a very clear version of
 Teichmiiller's proof. The final credit belongs to R. Hamilton (1969), who gave
 an amazingly short and direct proof of the existence theorem. The consensus
 today is that the existence part is easier to prove than the uniqueness.

 The proof of Teichmiiller's existence theorem by Bers (1960b) is close to Teich
 miiller's 1943 proof and it also uses the continuity method.8 Bers' proof uses the
 existence of solutions to the Beltrami equation. Hamilton's proof to which Ahlfors
 refers does not use the continuity method. In his paper, Ahlfors (1954, p. 4) writes:

 8 The proof is based on Teichmiiller's ideas: Given a Riemann surface S, let 7 be its Teichmiiller space
 and 2i(5) the unit ball in the vector space quadratic differentials of S (equipped with the L1 norm, i.e.,
 the integral of the modulus of the differential on the surface). There is a map jr : Q i (S) -» T(S) which to
 every quadratic 0 of essential norm satisfying 0 < ||0|| < 1 associates the element of Teichmiiller space

 defined by the Beltrami equation of coefficient ^ = kfy. The new element is obtained by stretching, in

 the natural coordinates of <p, by a factor K = The image 7r(0) is the structure S itself. The map n is
 injective and continuous. A dimension count, again by the Riemann-Roch theorem, shows that the map n
 is a homeomorphism.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 130 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 In a systematic way the problem of extremal quasiconformal mapping was taken
 up by Teichmiiller in a brilliant and unconventional paper (Teichmiiller 1939).
 He formulates the general problem and, although unable to give a binding proof,

 is led by heuristic arguments to a highly elegant conjectured solution. The paper

 contains numerous fundamental applications which clearly show the importance

 of the problem.
 In a later publication, Teichmiiller (1943) has offered a proof of his main con

 jecture. In many respects this proof is an anticlimax when compared with the
 original article. It is based on the method of continuity, which of all classical

 methods is the least satisfactory because of its nature of a posteriori verification.

 It is also unduly complicated.
 The main purpose of the present paper is to give a variational proof of Teich
 miiller's theorem. It is not our contention that the new proof is simpler than
 Teichmiiller's, especially if the latter would be rewritten with greater concise

 ness. We claim for it merely the merit of greater directness. It relies heavily on

 real variable techniques, and can therefore hardly be classified as elementary.

 One of the last papers that Bers wrote—in fact, his penultimate paper—is entitled

 On Teichmiiller's proof of Teichmiiller's theorem (Bers 1986). One could almost say
 that Bers struggled all his life to understand Teichmiiller's ideas and to find a proof

 of that theorem that would satisfy him. In the paper Bers (1986), Bers returned to the

 assertion he made in his paper (Bers 1960b) that the parameters determining a marked

 Fuchsian group depend continuously on the parameters determining the Teichmiiller

 Beltrami coefficient. At the same time, this gave another proof of the existence part
 of Teichmiiller's theorem, with an argument which is again close to Teichmiiller's
 argument. Bers (1986, p. 58) writes:

 This note is a postscript to a paper (Bers 1960b) which I published many years
 ago and is, like that paper, essentially expository. [...] In proving a basic conti
 nuity assertion (Lemma 1 in §14C of Bers (1960b)) I made use of a property of
 quasiconformal mappings which belongs to the theory of quasiconformal map
 pings with bounded measurable Beltrami coefficients (and seems not to have
 been known to Beltrami). Some readers concluded that the use of that theory
 was indispensable for the proof of TeichmUller's theorem. This is not so, and

 Teichmuller's own argument is correct. This argument can be further simpli
 fied and this simplified argument will be presented here. Then we will briefly
 describe Teichmuller's actual argument.

 We talked about Ahlfors and Bers, but there is another major figure on whom

 Teichmiiller's papers were influential; this is Andre Weil. In his 1958 report at the
 Bourbaki seminar (Weil 1958c, p. 413), Weil writes (translated from the French):

 Teichmiiller proved, first heuristically, then (it is said) rigorously, that we can

 define a topological space, homeomorphic to an open ball of dimension 6g — 6,
 whose points are "naturally" in one-to-one correspondence with the classes of
 Teichmiiller surfaces (classes with respect to the equivalence relation defined

 by isomorphism); Ahlfors gave another proof of the same fact. In what follows,

 we shall make a local study of this "Teichmiiller space," and mainly, define the

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmtiller theory 131

 structure of a complex manifold (of dimension 3g — 3), and even, of a Kahler

 manifold. After that, a remark by L. Bers (very simple, but based, it seems, on

 delicate results on partial differential equations with discontinuous coefficients)

 allows to recover very rapidly the principal result of Teichmiiller.

 In the same year, in a paper dedicated to Emil Artin, Weil (1958a, p. 413) writes:

 Perhaps the most remarkable of Teichmiiller's results is the following: when
 provided with a rather obvious "natural" topology, the set © of all classes of
 mutually isomorphic Teichmiiller surfaces is homeomorphic to an open cell of

 real dimension 6g — 6. This global result will neither be used nor discussed in the

 following pages, the chief purpose of which is to consider the local properties
 of 0 and to define on it a "natural" complex analytic structure, of complex
 dimension 3g — 3, and a "natural" Hermitian metric.

 In the same paper (Weil 1958a, p. 383), Weil describes a map from the Torelli

 space into the Siegel space. Combining this with the map from Teichmiiller space
 to the Torelli space, he gets a map from Teichmiiller space © to the Siegel space.9
 He declares that this map is holomorphic when © is provided with its natural com
 plex structure. The image is an analytic subvariety of the Siegel space the points of

 which are all smooth except those corresponding to a hyperelliptic Riemann surface.
 (We shall mention below Rauch's work on that case). Weil then says

 As for M (moduli space) there is virtually no doubt that it can be provided with a

 structure of algebraic variety (non-complete of course, and with multiple points),

 the "variety of moduli," so the natural mapping of © onto M is holomorphic.

 [...] In order to justify the statements that we have made so far, we shall make

 use of the Kodaira-Spencer technique of variation of complex structures. This
 can be introduced in an elementary manner in the case of complex dimension 1,

 which alone concerns us here; this, in fact, had already been done by Teichmiiller;
 but he had so mixed it up with his ideas concerning quasiconformal mappings

 that much of its intrinsic simplicity got lost. Perhaps the worst feature of his
 treatment, in the eyes of the differential geometer, is that his extremal mappings

 are destructive of the differentiable structure; this corresponds to the fact that

 his metric on © is almost certainly not to be defined by a ds2, even though it is

 presumably a Finsler metric.

 Weil (1958b, p. 91) writes:

 [...] Teichmuller's chief contribution was to define on T (Teichmiiller's space) a

 certain topology, the "natural" one in a sense described below, and then to prove

 that T, with this topology, is homeomorphic to an open cell of real dimension

 6g — 6. So far, I have mainly been concerned with the local properties of the

 Teichmiiller space and of its "natural" complex analytic structure. The definition

 of the latter depends upon ideas introduced by Teichmiiller himself, but which

 9 The definitions of the Torelli space, the Siegel space and the map between them are recalled later on in

 this paper.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 132

 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 do not appear to have been fully understood until Kodaira and Spencer attacked
 similar problems for higher dimensions.

 Weil then gives an outline of these ideas. On the same page (p. 391), he describes a
 homeomorphism between T and a subset of R6#-6 using generators for the funda
 mental group and their images as matrices representing group elements of hyperbolic
 transformations. He then writes:

 This gives a one-to-one mapping of T onto a subset of the coordinate space
 R6.S-6 it turns out that the latter subset is open, and that the mapping and its

 inverse are indefinitely differentiable (and even presumably, real-analytic) if T

 is provided with its "natural" differentiable structure; the proof of the latter fact
 is due to L. Bers.

 We finally quote the comments on the AF final report that Weil wrote as an adden

 dum to his Collected Works edition (Weil 1979, vol. II, p. 545) (translation from the
 French):

 The theory of moduli of curves, inaugurated by Riemann, has taken two decisive

 steps in our time, first in 1935, with the work of Siegel (Ges. Abh. No. 20, § 13, vol.

 I, pp. 394-405), and then with the remarkable works of Teichmiiller; it is true that

 some concerns were raised about the latter, but these were finally cleared up by

 Ahlfors in 1953 (J. d'An. Math. 3, pp. 1-58). On the other hand we realized at the

 end that Siegel's discovery of automorphic functions belonging to the symplectic

 group applied first to the moduli of Abelian varieties and then, only by extension,

 to those of curves, via their Jacobians and using Torelli's theorem. Thus, thanks

 to Siegel, we have at our disposal the first example of a theory of moduli for
 varieties of dimension >1. We owe it to Kodaira and Spencer (Ann. of Math. 67
 (1958), pp. 328-566) to have discovered that progress on cohomology allows us
 not only to address a new aspect of the same problem but also, at least from the

 local point of view, to tackle the general case of complex structures on varieties.

 4 On the complex structure of Teichmiiller space

 The existence of a natural complex structure on Teichmiiller space and on the quotient

 moduli space is one of the major results not only in Teichmiiller theory but also
 in the field of complex geometry. This complex structure is not easy to describe,
 except in the case where the Teichmiiller space has complex dimension one, i.e., if the

 surface is the closed torus or the once-punctured torus; in these cases, the Teichmiiller

 space is canonically biholomorphic to the upper half-plane equipped with its complex
 structure. It can be noted that this result is not surprising since, by the Riemann

 mapping theorem, there are only three distinct complex structures on simply-connected

 Riemann surfaces, namely, the sphere, the complex plane, and the upper half-plane,

 and that for the Teichmiiller space of the torus, one can easily exclude the first two.

 We now discuss higher-dimensional Teichmiiller spaces.

 Let us start with a general remark. We already recalled that any closed Riemann

 surface is conformally equivalent to a complex algebraic curve and, more precisely, to

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory 133

 the set of zeros of a collection of homogeneous polynomials with complex coefficients

 in the projective space P3. Thus, one way of describing a varying complex structure
 on a given topological surface would be to represent this surface as the set of zeros of
 a collection of complex homogeneous polynomials and then to vary in a holomorphic
 way the coefficients of these polynomials. In principle, this gives a way to get hold

 on the complex structure of moduli space. Since the number of polynomials and their

 degrees depend on the Riemann surfaces and might change, making this idea precise

 enough for studying the structure, and in particular studying the singular points of

 moduli space, the topology of that space, or even for simply computing the dimension

 turns out to be very difficult.

 There are other approaches to the complex structure of moduli space which are more

 efficient, in which one starts by proving that Teichmiiller space is a complex manifold
 (in particular a complex space without singularities). Indeed, Teichmiiller space is a

 branched cover of the moduli space, and it was already realized by Teichmiiller himself
 that it is much easier to start by defining a complex structure on Teichmiiller space
 than on moduli space. This was done in his 1944 paper "Veranderliche Riemannsche
 Flachen" (Variable Riemann surfaces) (Teichmiiller 1944), his last paper on the theory.

 It also turns out that whereas Teichmiiller space is a complex manifold, moduli space
 is a complex space which is not a complex manifold. By the way, it seems that the
 notion of complex manifold in dimension > 1 was completely new at that time, and

 it is safe to say that Teichmiiller space is historically the first interesting example of

 such a manifold.10 After Teichmiiller, the complex structure of Teichmiiller space was

 studied by Rauch, Weil, Ahlfors and Bers.

 In his 1944 paper, Teichmiiller (1944) defined the complex structure on Teichmiiller

 space by introducing the notion of a holomorphic family of Riemann surfaces ("ana
 lytische Schar Riemannscher Flachen"). He proved the existence of a universal object
 that was later called the "Teichmiiller universal curve." This is a fiber space over Teich

 miiller space where above each point there is a Riemann surface which represents the
 equivalence class of that point. The existence of the structure of a complex manifold on
 that space gives the complex structure on Teichmiiller space. We shall say more about

 that below. This is one way of defining this complex structure, and there are many oth
 ers. Teichmiiller's paper has been translated into English by Annette A'Campo-Neuen,
 see Teichmiiller (1944); see also the commentary in A'Campo-Neuen et al. (2013).

 10 Reinhold Remmert, one of the founders of the theory of several complex variables, says the following,

 regarding the beginning of the theory of complex manifolds of higher dimensions (Remmert 1998, p. 225):

 "It seems difficult to locate the first paper where complex manifolds explicitly occur. In 1944 they appear in
 Teichmiiller's work on "Veranderliche Riemannsche Flachen" (Teichmiiller 1944, Collected Papers, p. 714);

 here we find for the first time the German expression "komplex analytische Mannigfaltigkeit." The English
 "complex manifold" occurs in Chern's work (Chern 1946, p. 103); he recalls the definition (by an atlas)
 just in passing. And in 1947 we find "variete analytique complexe" in the title of Weil (1947). Overnight
 complex manifolds blossomed everywhere." One may add that complex domains of higher dimension, i.e.,
 domains of C, n > 2, had been studied earlier by several people, in particular, C. L. Siegel, in the context
 of modular forms, or automorphic functions of many variables, but Teichmiiller space was not known yet

 to be a complex domain. An embedding of that space in some C'v was found later on. See the Appendix of

 this paper.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 134 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 Before giving an overview of the various ways in which the complex structure on

 Teichmiiller space can be defined, let us quote some of the major mathematicians who

 worked on the subject.

 In his paper, Ahlfors (1961a, p. 156) writes that "in recent work of several persons

 it has been established that the Teichmiiller space of closed Riemann surfaces of genus
 g > 1 carries a natural complex analytic structure," and he refers to his own paper
 (Ahlfors 1960) and to (Kodaira and Spencer 1958). It is probable that since Teich
 muller's paper (Teichmiiller 1944) is written in the language of algebraic geometry, it

 did not attract Ahlfors' attention very much.

 In the introduction to another 1960 paper (Ahlfors 1960), concerning the com

 plex structure of Teichmiiller space, Ahlfors observed that Teichmuller set his sights
 extremely high, without claiming complete success, and as a result Ahlfors found
 himself unable to determine how much Teichmiiller had proved. He then presented his

 own construction of the complex structure, by means of techniques from (Teichmuller

 1939), but not (Teichmuller 1944). In a commentary on the same paper, written as
 a note in his Collected Papers edition (Ahlfors 1982, vol. II), Ahlfors mentions the
 work of Rauch, who had by then (Rauch 1955a,b) published two notes in which he

 settled the problem for nonhyperelliptic surfaces. Ahlfors commented that he had by

 then a proof in the nonhyperelliptic case, but was delaying publication until he was

 able to construct the complex structure for the whole space Tg. He then observed
 that "Today Rauch's and my methods would both be considered obsolete, but the

 variational formulae they led to are still of interest."

 In the same year (1960), Grothendieck established the existence of a complex man

 ifold structure on Teichmuller space that follows Teichmiiller's algebro-geometric
 ideas, probably without having read Teichmiiller's paper. See the commentary
 (A'Campo-Neuen et al. 2013) for more details.

 In his 1964 survey paper on quasiconformal maps and their applications (Ahlfors

 1964, p. 152), Ahlfors writes:

 Equally important, and in their ultimate consequences perhaps overwhelmingly
 so, were the observations that poured forth from the uncanny brain of Teich

 miiller. For better or for worse, his ghost has risen from an early grave to haunt

 a great deal of the thinking that has gone on in postwar function theory. An

 excellent way to acquaint the mathematical public with the trends in my special

 field is to relate some of the experiences of this author and fellow specialists in

 dealing with the heritage of Teichmiiller.

 [...] Actually, the classical problem calls for a complex structure, and Teich

 miiller was well aware that his method did not yet solve this problem. In fact, he

 refutes his own method and says explicitly that it is no good for the purpose of

 establishing a complex structure. This prediction turned out to be wrong.

 [...] In a final effort Teichmiiller produced a solution of the structure problem,
 by an entirely different method, but it was so cumbersome that it is doubtful

 whether anybody else has checked all the details. Many years later E. Rauch and

 this author found, independently of each other that the original method, used

 primarily as a convenient parametrization, does lead fairly easily to the existence

 of a natural complex structure on 7g. The most significant development, however,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmuller theory 135

 is due to Bers. He found, as has been indicated, that Teichmiiller's extremal

 problem can be dispensed with altogether, and that the most direct approach is

 via a closer study of the Beltrami equation. In other words, it is the full theory
 of quasiconformal mappings, rather than a special problem, which is the right
 clue to the moduli of Riemann surfaces.

 [...] It is only fair to mention, at this point, that the algebraists have also solved

 the problem of moduli, in some sense even more completely than the analysts.

 Because of the different language, it is at present difficult to compare the algebraic

 and analytic methods, but it would seem that both have their own advantages.

 This says in particular (a fact that we already pointed out) that there are several ways

 for defining the complex analytic structure of Teichmuller space. We also noted that in
 the paper, (Teichmuller 1944) observed that Riemann's moduli space is a quotient of

 Teichmiiller space by the action of the mapping class group. He proved that this action

 is holomorphic and properly discontinuous. It is known, from a result of Cartan that
 a holomorphic properly discontinuous action on a complex space induces a complex
 structure on the quotient space. There are natural holomorphic functions with respect

 to this structure, namely, the periods of Abelian differentials of the first kind, and
 in fact, one can use these functions to define the complex structure. This method is
 outlined at the end of (Teichmuller 1944) and it was later developed by Ahlfors and

 Rauch. One can recall again that the case of surfaces of genus one was known. Indeed,

 the fact that the shapes of complex tori represented by parallelograms in the complex

 plane can be specified by periods of Abelian integrals (more precisely, by the ratio

 co\ /a>2 of two periods) is a classical fact.

 The fact that hyperelliptic surfaces in Teichmuller spaces of higher dimension are
 a source of difficulties for the definition of the complex structure using the period
 map was already pointed out by (Teichmiiller 1944). In his papers, Rauch (1955a,b)

 gave prescriptions to find sets (each containing 3g — 3 elements) of periods of normal
 Abelian integrals of the first kind that serve as local moduli near a given nonhyperel
 liptic surface and analogous sets of 2g — 2 elements each serving as local coordinates
 near a hyperelliptic point. The work of Rauch gave the correct number locally. This

 difficulty was resolved by Ahlfors, who used Rauch's work and another ingredient for
 hyperelliptic surfaces to show the existence of a complex analytic manifold structure

 on 7g.

 There is also holomorphic embedding of Teichmuller space in a complex linear
 space CN, called the Bers embedding (see the Appendix to this paper), and we shall
 dwell on this below. Ahlfors (1963a,b) proved that the set of Schwarzian derivatives of

 univalent functions on the upper half-plane H2 is an open subset of the Banach space

 of holomorphic functions with the norm sup# \4>(z)\2y2. The Schwarzian derivative

 can be interpreted as a quadratic differential, and the embedding of Teichmuller space

 by means of the Schwarzian derivative made new connections between uniformization

 theory, quadratic differentials and Teichmiiller theory.

 In his paper, Ahlfors (1961a) defined a fiber space over Teichmuller space where the

 fiber above each point is a Riemann surface representing the point, and he described
 a complex analytic structure on that fiber space. This is the same fiber space that
 Teichmuller (1944) considered and which we already mentioned, but Ahlfors' methods

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 were completely different. Let us quote Ahlfors from his ICM talk (Ahlfors 1963a,
 P- 4):

 136 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 The present lecture reports on the results obtained by an analytic method which is

 based on the geometric idea of quasiconformal mapping. This analytic treatment
 has its roots in the work of O. Teichmtiller. [...] Teichmuller surmised, but did

 not establish, a link between moduli and quasiconformal mappings. The results
 on moduli that he achieved later were based on a different method which did not

 have the simplicity of his original approach.

 Teichmiiller's work was too sketchy to serve as a satisfactory theory. During the

 1950s, his results were confirmed and reorganized by H. Rauch, L. Bers, and the

 speaker. Through these efforts it was firmly established that the space of moduli

 has a natural complex analytic structure. As the work progressed, strong connec
 tions became apparent with Beltrami's classical theory of conformal mapping
 of surfaces with a Riemannian metric. Much more delicate existence theorems

 were needed, but it was found that they had already been proved by C. Mor
 rey for different purposes. Ideas of I. N. Vekua and Boyarskii led to important

 simplifications of these existence proofs.

 The proofs by Vekua and Boyarskii referred to by Ahlfors make use of the theory of

 Calderon and Zygmund on singular integrals. A sketch of the proof is given in (Ahlfors
 1964).

 Kodaira and Spencer, motivated by Riemann's and by Teichmuller's counts also

 tried to count the number of moduli, and we shall mention their work below.

 In what follows, we review in some detail several approaches to the definition of

 the complex structure of Teichmiiller space.

 4.1 Quasiconformal maps and the Beltrami equation

 In the approach to the complex structure using the Beltrami equation, Teichmiiller
 space is considered as a space of equivalence classes of Beltrami differentials on a
 fixed Riemann surface S. To make things more precise, we review some definitions.

 We recall that a Beltrami differential fi on S is an invariant object which is writ
 ten in any holomorphic coordinate chart U with holomorphic local coordinate z as

 I.i(z)dz/dz, where // is an essentially bounded measurable function on U. The invari

 ance of n means that in any other holomorphic local coordinate w = w(z),thc Beltrami

 differential ji is written as v(io)dw7/dw, where

 du; dw
 v(w(z)) - ^(z) —/—.
 d z d z

 For such a Beltrami differential fi, the real-valued function | /z | which a priori is defined

 only in local coordinates, is well defined on the surface S. The differential ji is said
 to be essentially bounded if the essential supremum of |>u.| on S is <1.

 Given an essentially bounded Beltrami differential /i on S, one associates to it the

 partial differential equation

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 137

 fz = M/z

 which is called the Beltrami equation with coefficient /x, in which fz = \(fx — ify)

 and fj = 5 (fx+ify)-The in variance property of/i insures that the equation fj — \ifz,
 which a priori is defined only in coordinate charts, is well defined on the surface S.

 One searches for quasiconformal mappings / : S —> S which are solutions of
 the Beltrami equation. The existence theory of such solutions is a difficult chapter in

 analysis. When a solution / exists, then the Beltrami differential /i is called the complex

 dilatation of /. If /l = 0, then a solution to the Beltrami equation is a conformal map
 since the equation fj = 0 is equivalent to the classical Cauchy-Riemann equation.

 There is a notion of equivalence between Beltrami differentials, defined in such a

 way that equivalent conformal structures on S are represented by equivalent Beltrami
 differentials.

 Given a quasiconformal mapping f : S -*■ S satisfying the Beltrami equation,
 a new conformal structure on S is obtained by composing the coordinate charts of
 the original structure with maps induced from the quasiconformal homeomorphism
 /. The basepoint of Teichmiiller space (i.e., the equivalence class of the surface S)
 corresponds to the (equivalence class of the) Beltrami differential [i = 0.

 The space of essentially bounded Beltrami differentials on S is the unit norm of

 the complex vector space of measurable functions equipped with its natural structure
 of a Banach complex space. The complex analytic structure of Teichmiiller space
 is defined using this complex Banach space structure. This is Ahlfors' approach,
 and it is still the most common way of defining the complex analytic structure of

 Teichmiiller space. Though in some sense it is awkward that a complex structure on a

 finite-dimensional space has to be defined through a complex structure on an infinite

 dimensional space, the spaces involved are essentially finite dimensional since, as we

 recalled, different Beltrami differentials can define the same complex structure, and

 their equivalence classes give the Teichmiiller space. Picking out and identifying the
 complex structure (or representatives) might not be obvious, and this infinite complex
 dimensional Banach space provides the convenience and flexibility to go around this
 difficulty. One must also add that this method also works for infinite-dimensional
 Teichmiiller spaces.

 For a concise survey on the development of the complex structure of Teichmuller

 space using the Beltrami equation, we refer the reader to Earle (2010).

 4.2 The Ahlfors-Bers approach using holomorphic families

 We already recalled that in his paper, Teichmiiller (1944) provided a description of the

 complex structure of Teichmiiller space using holomorphic families of marked Rie
 mann surfaces. Another approach using families was developed later on by Ahlfors
 (1961a) and by Bers (1958), using solutions of the Beltrami equation with the Bel

 trami coefficient depending on a parameter. In this approach, the complex structure on

 Teichmiiller space is characterized by the fact that if is a Beltrami coefficient defining

 a normalized complex structure obtained by solving the Beltrami equation fj = /ifz,
 and if the Beltrami coefficient ji = /iu(z) depends continuously (respectively,

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 138 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 differentiably and holomorphically) on a variable u, then the map u [/n„] is contin
 uous (respectively, differentiable and holomorphic). The Ahlfors-Bers theory gives a
 precise version of this result, in which a family of Riemann surfaces is obtained by
 means of Beltrami coefficients /x(z) = /iu (z) that depend on a complex parameter u.

 The complex structure on the fiber space is defined locally using the projection on the
 Riemann surface factor. The theory of the solution of the Beltrami equation is also
 used, i.e., the fact that when one starts with a measurable function [x : C -» C whose

 essential supremum ||/Lt|| is < 1, the Beltrami equation fj = [ifz has a unique solution

 f11 that is a homeomorphism fixing 0,1 and oo, and that for any point z in the complex

 plane, the map // /,x(z) is holomorphic from the unit ball of L°°(C) to C. This is
 the so-called "measurable Riemann mapping theorem" of Ahlfors and Bers.

 The development of the theory of holomorphic families of Riemann surfaces is

 surveyed in the recent paper (Earle and Marden 2012).

 4.3 The complex structure defined by periods of Abelian differentials

 As we already recalled, the complex structure of Teichmiiller space can also be defined

 using periods of Abelian differentials, and this is related to the fact that this com
 plex structure is expected to be natural in the sense that natural maps from Teich
 miiller space to some known complex manifolds should be holomorphic. We also
 noted that the idea of a construction of a complex structure on Teichmiiller space

 7g using periods is contained in (Teichmiiller 1944). Periods of Abelian differentials
 define maps from Teichmiiller space to the Siegel upper half-space, which is a Her

 mitian symmetric space Hg, and it was tempting to use this map to define a complex
 structure on the Teichmuller space 7g. Though this map is not injective, it factors
 through an injective map from the Torelli space Torg to Hg. This map was shown
 by Rauch to be a local embedding away from hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces and

 hence defines a complex structure on 7g outside the locus of hyperelliptic Riemann
 surfaces. The complex structure was extended to the whole Teichmuller space by
 Ahlfors.

 We recall now more precisely some of these notions and constructions.

 The Siegel upper half-space Hg of degree g (which is also called the Siegel gener

 alized upper half-plane) is defined by

 Hg = [X + iY | X, Y are real g x g symmetric matrices , Y > 0}.

 When g = 1, this is the usual upper half-plane.

 It is known that the symplectic group Sp(2g, E) acts holomorphically and transi

 tively on the Siegel upper half-space, and that the stabilizer of ilg is isomorphic to

 U (g). This implies that Hg can be written as

 Hg = Sp(2g, R)/U (g),

 and it is a Hermitian symmetric space of noncompact type, i.e., a symmetric space of

 noncompact type with an invariant complex structure.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmuller theory 139

 We now recall the definition of the period map of Riemann surfaces. Let S = Sg

 be a closed Riemann surface of genus g and a\, /3\,..., ag, /3g be a symplectic basis
 for the first homology group H\ (S, Z), where the word symplectic means here that

 the intersection numbers of the cycles satisfy a,- • aj = fy • Pj = 0 if i j and
 of,- • fij = 5ij. With such a choice, given an Abelian differential w of the first kind

 on S (i.e., a holomorphic 1-form on S), its periods are A j = fa w and Bj = fp. w.
 Consider now a basis w\,.. .wg of Abelian differentials of the first kind satisfying

 fa . Wj — Sij for all i and j. The matrix (Zi; ) = (L wi) is called the period of S with

 respect to the symplectic basis ai, /3\,..., ag, fig. The Riemann bilinear relations
 imply that (Zjy ) e Hg. Once a symplectic basis of the homology of a base Riemann

 surface So in 7g is fixed, it gives a choice of a symplectic basis for the homology of

 every marked Riemann surface in 7g. This defines a map

 Tg > Hg . S I—^ (Zf'y).

 The complex structure that we aim for on Teichmiiller space should satisfy the condi

 tion that each such function is continuous and holomorphic.

 Two choices of symplectic bases of H\ (S, Z) are related by elements in Sp(2g, Z),

 and their corresponding periods lie in an Sp(2g, Z)-orbit in Hg. Therefore, we obtain
 a well-defined map

 J : M8 = Mod(50)\Tg -> Sp(2g, Z)\Hg.

 The locally symmetric space Sp(2g, Z)\Hg is called the Siegel modular variety and

 it is the moduli space of principally polarized abelian varieties of dimension g. For
 each Riemann surface S, J(S) is the Jacobian variety of S. Because of this, the map

 J is also called the Jacobian map. Reference for the period map and abelian varieties
 include (Griffiths 1970; Griffiths and Harris 1994).

 In equipping Teichmiiller space 7g with a complex structure by pulling back

 the natural complex structure of the Siegel upper half-space, one needs to know
 that the period map is a local immersion, and this was proved by Rauch at points

 of Tg away from the locus of hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces. His method was to
 compute differentials of the period via the so-called Rauch's variational formula.
 Rauch (1955a, p. 43) says that Riemann's 3g — 3 count using Riemann-Roch and
 Euler's characteristic for the number of parameters that are involved in the construc

 tion of branched coverings of the sphere is "manifestly too vague a specification;
 one would like numerical moduli—a set of numbers associated with each surface

 whose equality would guarantee conformal equivalence between two surfaces." He

 then describes a set of periods of Abelian integrals 7r(;- and declares that his result
 solves "a reasonable and long-standing conjecture saying that a suitable subset of

 3g — 3 of the Ttij is a set of numerical moduli." He then says that the "key and
 unifying element" would be "the application of the concept of quadratic differen
 tial to conformal mappings by Teichmiiller." In a second paper, Rauch (1955b) pub
 lished an extension of his results to surfaces with boundary. It seems that some of
 Rauch's result had some gaps since Gerstenhaber produced Riemann surfaces that

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 have the same set of periods specified by Rauch and which are not conformally equiv
 alent.11

 140 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 In his paper, Ahlfors (1960) also worked out the complex structure of Teichmiiller

 space using holomorphic families and the period map, completing the work of Rauch.

 We already mentioned that the period map Tg —> Hg is not injective and factors
 through the Torelli space of a surface. It may be useful to recall that the Torelli space

 Tor^ of a closed surface of genus g is a space of equivalence classes of "marked"
 Riemann surfaces (/, S), where the marking here keeps track only of the action of the

 homeomorphism / on the first homology group of the surface. Alternatively, one can

 consider an element of the Torelli space as a Riemann surface equipped with a basis

 for its first homology group. Note that in the classical marking of Riemann surfaces,

 instead of specifying a homeomorphism / between the base surface and the varying

 Riemann surface S, one can as well specify a basis for the first homotopy group of S.
 In the case where the surface is the torus, the Teichmiiller and the Torelli spaces

 coincide since the fundamental group of the surface is commutative and thus the first
 homotopy group and the first homology group coincide.

 In the same way, as the Riemann moduli space is a quotient of the Teichmiiller

 space by the mapping class group Mod? = Mod?(S), the Torelli space is a quotient of
 Teichmiiller space by the Torelli group 3g = 3g(S), i.e., the group of mapping classes
 that induce the identity on the first homology group of the surface. The Torelli group

 has no torsion. Indeed, a torsion element of the mapping class group acts as an isometry
 for a certain hyperbolic metric on the surface, and such an isometry, if it is not the

 identity, cannot act trivially on homology (Farkas and Kra 1992, Sect. V.3). The Torelli

 group acts without fixed point on Teichmiiller space, and the Torelli space, which is the

 quotient space of this action, is equipped with a complex manifold quotient structure

 induced from that of Teichmiiller space. The moduli space Mg is the quotient of the
 Torelli group by the quotient group Modg/3g = Sp(2g, Z). The mapping class group
 has torsion, and the moduli space is an orbifold quotient space.

 Andre Weil, in his 1958 Bourbaki seminar (Weil 1958c) and in his paper (Weil
 1958a), used the terminology Teichmiiller surface for the object called today a marked
 Riemann surface. He also introduced the terminology Torelli surface. This choice of

 names is coherent because it reflects clearly the sequence of maps 7g —> Torg —> M?
 between the Teichmiiller, the Torelli and the Riemann spaces.

 A Torelli surface is considered as reinforced, i.e., it carries more structure; the
 adjective is used by Weil (1958a) in the same sense in which a Teichmiiller surface is
 a reinforced Riemann surface.

 It is clear that the period map 7g —► Hg is invariant under the action of the Torelli

 group 3g, and hence it descends to a period map

 Tor,, - 3\7g -» Hg.

 Under the action of the Siegel modular group Sp(2g, Z), we recover the Jacobian map

 J : Mg = Sp(2g, Z)\Torg —» Sp(2g, Z)\Hg.

 11 See Gerstenhaber's review of Rauch's papers in Zentralblatt (Zbl 0067.30502).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory 141

 Let us now quote Rauch (1962) from his paper in which he derives the complex

 structure on moduli space from that on the Torelli space (p. 390):

 The set of conformal equivalence classes of compact Riemann surfaces (hence
 forth: classes) of fixed genus g > 2 can be endowed with the structure of
 a normal analytic space Mg of complex dimension 3g — 3. This structure is

 derived from the structure of a complex analytic manifold, the Torelli space 3g,
 by identification under the action of a properly discontinuous group of analytic
 automorphisms, the reduced mapping class (Siegel modular) group Gg. In this

 description, 3g appears as a branched covering of Mg. P e Sg, the branch locus,
 if and only if it is a fixed point of a nontrivial finite subgroup Gg (P) of Gg, in
 which case P lies over a class (an H-class) in Mg containing a surface S (H
 surface) admitting at least one nontrivial conformal automorphism and G8(P)
 is isomorphic with H (S), the automorphism group of S.

 The local Torelli theorem amounts to the injectivity of the differential of the period

 map at nonhyperelliptic curves, see Kodaira (1964, Theorem 17), where this result is
 attributed to Andreotti and Weil.

 4.4 Teichmiiller space as a bounded complex domain

 This is an important part of TeichmUller theory, but the presentation is too techni
 cal, compared to the rest of the paper, and we have made it an Appendix. The Bers
 embedding, which we describe there, embeds the Teichmiiller space T of a closed
 surface of genus g as a bounded domain in C3^-3, and it can be used to define the
 complex structure of that space. Again, quadratic differentials play here a prominent

 role. In developing this theory, Bers considered a quadratic differential as a Schwarzian

 derivative of the conformal extension of quasiconformal mappings, obtained using the
 Beltrami equation. Ahlfors writes in his 1978 ICM paper (Ahlfors 1978, p. 79):

 The Bers mapping is not concerned with extremal quasiconformal mappings,
 and it is rather curious that one again ends up with holomorphic quadratic dif
 ferentials. The Bers model has a Kahlerian structure obtained from an invariant

 metric, the Peters son-Weil metric, on the space of quadratic differentials. The
 relation between the Petersson-Weil metric and the Teichmiiller metric had not

 been fully explored and is still rather mystifying.

 4.5 Kodaira-Spencer theory

 In 1957, Kodaira and Spencer developed a theory of deformations of compact higher
 dimensional complex manifolds using a notion of universal family (Kodaira and
 Spencer 1958). They gave examples of such families, and the general existence result
 of universal families was solved in Kuranishi (1962, 1965). In this approach, one
 defines an almost complex structure on a manifold M to be a complex vector bun

 dle structure on the real tangent bundle of M. This is given by an endomorphism J

 satisfying J~ = —Id. A famous theorem of Newlander-Nirenberg gives a sufficient

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 142

 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 condition for an almost-complex manifold to be a complex manifold. The condition
 is a kind of commutation condition of complex vector fields with respect to the oper

 ator J, and it is called Frobenius complex integrability. In this theory, the space that

 plays a major role is a cohomology group Hl (M, 0), where 0 is the sheaf of germs
 of sections of the holomorphic tangent bundle (or, equivalently, holomorphic vector
 fields) of the manifold. A deformation of a complex manifold given by an atlas is
 then defined by moving the charts one relative to another, and the infinitesimal vari
 ation of the structure is described as a variation of the collection of chart coordinate

 changes. Such a variation gives rise to a holomorphic vector field on each component
 of the intersection of two charts and this collection of holomorphic vector fields is
 shown to satisfy cocycle conditions which arise from the compatibility relations sat

 isfied by the holomorphic coordinate changes; therefore, they define elements of the
 first cohomology group Hl(S, 0). Using Serre duality and a theorem of Dolbeault,
 the space Hl(S, 0) is identified with the tangent space 7o(T(/?)) of the Teichmiiller
 space T(S) at the basepoint. This makes the relation with our theory. In conclusion,
 Kodaira-Spencer theory makes the space of infinitesimal deformations equal to the
 cohomology space Hl(S, 0).

 In surveying the complex structure of Teichmiiller space, it is natural to talk about

 its Kahler structure. This is what we do in the next and final section.

 4.6 The Kahler structure and the Weil-Peters son metric

 A Kahler metric is a Hermitian metric on a manifold satisfying an integrability condi

 tion which says roughly that the holonomy group of its Riemannian part is contained
 in the unitary group U(n) associated to the underlying complex structure. A Kahler
 structure on a manifold is a kind of unifying structure since it involves at the same
 time a Riemannian structure, a symplectic structure and a complex structure. When
 a certain compatibility condition is satisfied, the three structures together determine

 a Kahler structure. In any case, Kahler geometry is strongly related to the complex
 structure of a manifold, and the fact that a metric on a complex manifold is Kahler has

 many important consequences in algebraic geometry. For example, the Hodge decom
 position of cohomology groups is crucial in the transcendental approach of algebraic
 geometry. Kahler manifolds are also in some sense generalizations of projective vari
 eties.

 It seems that it is Andre Weil who first included the study of Teichmiiller space in

 the setting of Kahler geometry. He introduced in (Weil 1958a) a Riemannian metric

 on Teichmiiller space and he conjectured that it is Kahler. This metric is defined by

 a version of an inner product which had been previously defined by Hans Petersson
 in the context of automorphic forms (hence the name "Weil-Petersson metric"). Weil

 concluded his paper (Weil 1958a) with the following (p. 389):

 This raises the most interesting problems of the whole theory: is this a Kahler

 metric? has it an everywhere negative curvature? is the space 0, provided with
 its complex structure and with this metric, a homogeneous space? It would seem

 premature even to hazard any guess about the answers to these questions.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 143

 Weil comments on that paper, in his Collected Works (Weil 1979, vol. II, p. 546):

 I was asked for a contribution to a volume of articles to be offered to Emil Artin

 in March 1958 for his sixtieth birthday; this led me to the decision of writing
 up my observations, even incomplete, on the moduli of curves and on what I
 called "Teichmuller space." Soon later, I noticed that on more than one point I
 was matching Ahlfors and Bers; these continued their research, and soon after
 they overtook me. As for the questions that I asked at the end of (Weil 1958a),

 they showed that the response is positive for the first two, and negative for the
 third.

 Ahlfors (1961a), in his paper, proved that the metric introduced by Weil on Teich
 miiller space is Kahler. In the same paper, he wrote, as a footnote: "According to
 an oral communication the fact has been known to Weil, but his proof has not been

 published." Besides proving that the Weil-Petersson metric is Kahler, Ahlfors showed

 that its holomorphic sectional and Ricci curvatures are negative. In his commentary
 on his papers (Ahlfors 1961a,b) that he made for his Collected papers edition, vol. II
 (p. 155), Ahlfors wrote:

 Actually, it was Andre Weil's idea to make Teichmiiller space a Riemannian
 space by using the Petersson bilinear product. [•..] Weil knew that the Petersson
 metric was Kahlerian, but had not published the proof. This turned out to be an

 almost immediate consequence of the calculation in Ahlfors (1961a,b) I showed

 through hard work that the metric has negative Ricci and sectional curvatures.
 When I reread the paper I was reminded of Dr. Johnson's remark about the

 dancing poodle; it was not very good, but remarkable that it could be done at all.

 Tremendous developments were done later on Teichmiiller theory. In particular, in

 the 1970, a spectacular new point of view was brought by Thurston. We cannot expand

 that here, since the aim of the article is not to report on the later developments, but
 only on the foundation of Teichmiiller theory.

 Appendix (Teichmiiller space as a bounded complex domain)

 There are several known embeddings of Teichmiiller space as a bounded domain in a

 complex vector space, such that the complex structure on Teichmiiller space is induced

 from this embedding.

 In his paper (Bers 1960a, with the corrigendum published in 1961), Bers showed

 that the Teichmiiller space of a surface of finite type (g, n) has a canonical holomorphic
 embedding as a bounded domain in CN, with N = 3g — 3 + n. In 1964, Bers and
 Ehrenpreis showed that any finite-dimensional Teichmiiller space can be embedded
 as a domain of holomorphy in some CN (Bers and Ehrenpreis 1964). (We recall that
 a domain of holomorphy is a subset of a complex space CN, which is maximal in the

 sense that there exists a holomorphic function on this set which cannot be extended to

 a larger set. This notion is only interesting for higher-dimensional complex variable

 theory since in dimension one every subset of C is a domain of holomorphy.) The Bers

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 144 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 embedding is defined in terms of Kleinian groups, and in that theory, quasiconformal
 mappings and fine properties of their Schwarzian derivatives also play a central role.
 The embedding is based on Bers' simultaneous uniformization theorem. To describe

 this, we briefly review some elements of Kleinian group theory.

 A Kleinian group is a torsion-free discrete subgroup of PSL(2, C). Such a group

 acts by fractional linear transformations on the Riemann sphere S2, identified with the

 extended complex plane C = CU {oo}. This action extends to hyperbolic 3-space, seen
 as the extended upper half-space {(xi, xi, X3) | x\, X2 e R, X3 > 0} with boundary
 the extended complex plane C. We can also view the hyperbolic 3-space as the unit
 ball in 3-dimensional Euclidean space whose boundary is the unit sphere S2.

 Given a Kleinian group V acting on H3, and given a point x in H3, the limit set
 A = Ap of T is the intersection Tx fl 52, and it does not depend on the choice of x.

 It is a closed invariant subset of S2. The group T acts properly discontinuously on the
 complement S2 \ A = Q, called the domain of discontinuity of I\

 A quasiconformal deformation of a Kleinian group T is a quasiconformal home

 omorphism h : S2 -» S2 such that for any g in T there is an associated element
 gh of PSL(2, C) defined by gh = h o g o h~l. The set of such transformations gh
 forms a group called the deformed group Gh = hgh~l, and the map g gh is an
 isomorphism between the group G and the deformed group Gh.

 A quasiconformal deformation of a Kleinian group G with limit set A can be

 described by means of a Beltrami coefficient /x for G, i.e., a Beltrami coefficient /a on
 S2 satisfying /x| A = 0 and the equivariance condition

 M (g(z)) g'(z)/g'(z) = m(z) Vg € G.

 Let S2 be a normalized solution of the Beltrami equation with coefficient
 li. Then, for every g in G, //x o g : S2 x S2 is again /x-conformal, therefore, there is
 a Mobius transformation gi such that f^og — g ;o . In this way, the deformed
 group G^ = fllG( fIJ-)~] is again a Kleinian group. This group is considered as a
 quasiconformal deformation of the group G, and the map

 G G"

 defined by

 is a quasiconformal isomorphism between G and G'1.

 We have Q.(G'J-) = /^(^(g)) and A(GM) = f'1 (A(<?)). Furthermore, the

 restricted map

 f1 : Q(G) -> £2(GM)

 induces a quasiconformal mapping between the (not necessarily connected) surfaces
 Q(G)/G and Q(GA)/G^.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory

 145

 In the case where G is Fuchsian, is said to be quasi-Fuchsian. It fixes the circle

 /''(R). If the Beltrami coefficient \x satisfies the condition

 m(z) = Mz),

 then G'1 is again Fuchsian.

 A quasi-Fuchsian group can also be defined as a Kleinian group the limit set A
 of which is a Jordan curve. The quotient by the group action of the two connected

 components of S2 \ A consists in two Riemann surfaces. There is a preferred marking
 between these two surfaces, and hence between such a surface and a base Riemann

 surface. Such a pair of Riemann surfaces can therefore be considered as an element
 of the product of two copies of Teichmiiller space. Thus, the same quasi-Fuchsian
 group T uniformizes simultaneously (and exactly) two Riemann surfaces, Si = / T
 and 5*2 = ^2/r. This is Bers' (1960a) simultaneous uniformization. Conversely,
 any element in Tx Tdetermines a unique Kleinian group up to conjugation. Bers
 showed that given any two Riemann surfaces of the same finite type and given any

 orientation-reversing homeomorphism between them, there is a quasi-Fuchsian group
 that simultaneously uniformizes the pair. The space of quasi-Fuchsian groups of a
 given type is homeomorphic to a product T x 7 of Teichmiiller spaces of a given
 surface. Fixing an element S in the first factor and taking it as a basepoint, one gets
 an embedding of the second factor Teichmiiller space 1 = T(5) into the space of
 Kleinian groups, and this embedding is called a Bers embedding.

 References

 Abikoff, William. 1986. Oswald Teichmiiller. Mathematical Intelligencer 8 (3): 8-16.
 A'Campo-Neuen, Annette, Norbert A'Campo, Lizhen Ji, and Athanase Papadopoulos. 2013. Commentary
 on Teichmiiller 1944. In Handbook of Teichmiiller theory, vol. IV, ed. A. Papadopoulos. Zurich: European
 Mathematical Society (to appear).

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1935. Zur Theorie der iiberlagerungsflachen. On the theory of covering surfaces. Acta

 Mathematica 65: 157-194. Collected papers, vol. I, pp. 214—251.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1953. Development of the theory of conformal mapping and Riemann surfaces through a

 century. Annals of Mathematics Studies 30: 3-13. Collected papers, vol. I, pp. 493-501.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1954. On quasiconformal mappings. Journal d'Analyse Mathematique 3: 1-58. Collected

 papers, vol. II, pp. 2-48; correction, pp. 207-208.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1960. The complex analytic structure of the space of closed Riemann surfaces. Princeton

 mathematical series, vol. 24, 45-66. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 123-145.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1961 a. Some remarks on Teichmiiller's space of Riemann surfaces. Annals of Mathematics

 74(2): 171-191. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 156-176.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1961b. Curvature properties of Teichmiiller's space. Journal d'Analyse Mathematique 9:

 161-176. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 177-192.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1963a. Teichmiiller spaces. In Proceedings of the international congress of mathematics,

 Stockholm, 1962, 3-9. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 207-213.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1963b. Quasiconformal reflections. Acta Mathematica 109: 291-301. Collected papers,

 vol. II, pp. 215-225.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1964. Quasiconformal mappings and their applications. Lectures on Modern Mathematics

 2: 151-164. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 301-314.

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1966. Lectures on quasiconformal mappings, 2nd ed. With supplemental chapters by C.J.
 Earle, I. Kra, M. Shishikura, and J.H. Hubbard. University Lecture Series, vol. 38. Providence: American
 Mathematical Society, 2006.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1978. Quasiconformal mappings, Teichmiiller spaces, and Kleinian groups. In Proceedings

 of the international congress on mathematics, Helsinki 1978, vol. 1, 71-84. Collected papers, vol. II,
 pp. 485^198.

 146 L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos

 Ahlfors, Lars V. 1982. Collected papers, 2 vols. Boston: Birkhauser.
 Bers, Lipman. 1960a. Spaces of Riemann surfaces as bounded domains. Bulletin of the American Math
 ematical Society 66: 98-103 (1960); correction ibid. 67: 465-466 (1961). Selected works. American
 Mathematical Society, part I, pp. 271-278.

 Bers, Lipman. 1960b. Quasiconformal mappings and Teichmiiller's theorem. In Analytic functions. Prince

 ton mathematical series, vol. 24, 89-119. Selected works, part I, pp. 323-354.

 Bers, Lipman. 1960c. Spaces of Riemann surfaces. In Proceedings of the international congress of mathe

 matics, 1958, 349-361. Selected works, part I, pp. 355-367.

 Bers, Lipman. 1970. Universal Teichmiiller space. In Analytic methods in mathematical physics conference,

 Bloomington, IN, 1968, 65-83. Selected works, part I, pp. 479^497.

 Bers, Lipman. 1976. On Hilbert's 22nd problem. In Proceedings of symposia in pure mathematics, vol. 28,

 559-609. Providence: American Mathematical Society, Selected works, part II, pp. 219-269.

 Bers, Lipman. 1986. On Teichmiiller's proof of Teichmiiller's theorem. Journal d'Analyse Mathematique

 46: 58-64. Selected works, part II, pp. 219-525.

 Bers, Lipman, and Ehrenpreis, Leon. 1964. Holomorphic convexity of Teichmiiller spaces. Bulletin of the

 American Mathematical Society 70: 761-764. Bers' Selected works, part I, pp. 397-400.

 Chern, Shiing-Chen. 1946. Characteristic classes of Hermitian manifolds. Annals of Mathematics 47 (2):

 85-121.

 Earle, Clifford J. 2010. Teichmiiller spaces as complex manifolds. In Teichmiiller theory and moduli problem,

 5-33. Lecture notes series, 10. Mysore: Ramanujan Mathematical Society.

 Earle, Clifford J., and Albert Marden. 2012. Existence and uniqueness theorems for holomorphic families

 of Riemann surfaces. Contemporary Mathematics (to appear).

 Farkas, Herschel M., and Irwin Kra. 1992. Riemann surfaces, 2nd ed. Graduate texts in mathematics,

 Gray, Jeremy. 1986. Linear differential equations and group theory from Riemann to Poincare. Boston:

 vol. 71. New York: Springer.

 Birkhauser. XXV. Second edition, 2000.

 Griffiths, Paul A. 1970. Periods of integrals on algebraic manifolds. Ill: Some global differential-geometric
 properties of the period mapping. Publications Mathematiques. Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques
 38: 125-180. Selected works, part III, pp. 135-190.

 Griffiths, Paul A., and Joe Harris. 1994. Principles of algebraic geometry, 2nd ed. Wiley Classics Library.

 New York: Wiley.

 Grothendieck, Alexander. 1960-1961. Techniques de construction et theoremes d' existence en geometrie

 algebrique. Seminaire Henri Cartan. Tome 13, No. 1. Exposes 1 a 20.

 Grotzsch, Herbert. 1932. Uber moglichst konforme Abbildungen von schlichten Bereichen. Ber Verh Sachs

 Akad Leipzig 84: 114-120.

 Hamilton, Richard S. 1969. Extremal quasiconformal mappings with prescribed boundary values. Trans

 actions of the American Mathematical Society 138: 399-406.

 Klein, Felix. 1882. Ueber Riemanns Theorie der algebraischen Funktionen und ihrer Integrate, Leipzig:
 Teubner. English translation: On Riemann's theory of algebraic functions and their integrals; a supple
 ment to the usual treatises. Translated from the German by Frances Hardcastle. Cambridge: Macmillan
 and Bowes, 1893. Reprint: New York: Dover Publications, 1963.

 Klein, Felix. 1883. Neue Bitrage zur Riemannschen Functionentheorie. Mathematische Annalen 37: 544

 572. Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, vol. III. Berlin: Springer, 1923, pp. 531-710.

 Klein, Felix, and Robert, Fricke. 1897. Vorlesungen uber die Theorie der Automorphen Functionen.

 Stuttgart: Druck und Verlag B. G. Teubner, I (1897), II (1912).

 Kodaira, Kunihiko. 1964. On the structure of compact complex analytic surfaces. I. American Journal of

 Mathematics 86: 751-798. Collected works, vol. Ill, pp. 1389-1436.

 Kodaira, Kunihiko and Donald C. Spencer. 1958. On the deformations of complex analytic structures I, II.

 Annals of Mathematics 67 (2): 328^160. Collected works, vol. II, pp. 772-909.

 Kuranishi, Masatake. 1962. On the locally complete families of complex analytic structures. Annals of

 Mathematics 75 (2): 536-577.

 Kuranishi, Masatake. 1965. New proof for the existence of locally complete families of complex structures.
 In Proceedings of the conference on complex analysis (Minneapolis, 1964), 142-154. Berlin: Springer.

 Lavrentieff, Mikhail A. 1935. Sur une classe de representations continues. Mat. Sb. 42: 407-423.

 4?) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Teichmiiller theory 147

 Lehto, Olli, and Kaarlo I. Virtanen. 1965. Quasiconformal mappings in the plane, 2nd ed. Translated from

 the German by K.W. Lucas. Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Band 126. New York:

 Springer, 1973.

 Birkhauser.

 Monastyrsky, Michael. 1987. Riemann, topology and physics (translated from the Russian). Boston:

 Poincare, Henri. 1884. Sur les groupes des equations lineaires. Acta Mathematica 4: 201-311.
 Ratcliffe, John G. 2006. Foundations of hyperbolic manifolds, 2nd ed. Graduate texts in mathematics, vol.

 149. New York: Springer.

 Rauch, Harry E. 1955a. On the transcendental moduli of algebraic Riemann surfaces. Proceedings of the

 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 41: 42-49.

 Rauch, Harry E. 1955b. On the moduli of Riemann surfaces. Proceedings of the National Academy of

 Sciences of the United States of America 41: 236-238; Errata. Ibid. 421.

 Rauch, Harry E. 1962. The singularities of the modulus space. Bulletin of the American Mathematical

 Society 68: 390-394.

 Remmert, Reinhold. 1998. From Riemann surfaces to complex spaces. In Material on the history of math

 ematics in the 20th century: Proceedings of the colloquium to the memory of Jean Dieudonne, Nice,
 France, January 1996. Marseille: Societe Mathematique de France. Seminar Congress 3: 203-241.

 Riemann, Bernhard. 1857. Theorie der Abel'schen Functionen (The theory of Abelian functions). Journal

 fur die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 54: 115-155. Reprinted in his Gesammelte mathematische
 Werke, H. Weber and R. Dedekind, ed. Leipzig: Teubner. Collected papers, English translation, Kendrick
 Pess, 2004.

 Saint-Gervais, Henri Paul de. 2010. Uniformisation des surfaces de Riemann: Retour sur un theoreme

 centenaire. ENS Editions.

 Teichmiiller, Oswald. 1939. Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Differentiale. Abh.

 Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturw. Kl. 22: 1-197. Collected papers. Springer, pp. 337-531.

 Teichmiiller, Oswald. 1943. Bestimmung der extremalen quasikonformen Abbildungen bei geschlosse
 nen orientierten Riemannschen Flachen. Abh. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturw. Kl. 1943, No.4, 42

 Collected papers. Springer, 637-676. Collected papers, Springer, pp. 712-727.

 Teichmiiller, Oswald. 1944. Veranderliche Riemannsche Flachen. Abh. Preuss. Deutsche Mathematik 7:

 344-359. English translation by Annette A'Campo in: Handbook of Teichmiiller theory, vol. IV, A.
 Papadopoulos, ed. Zurich: European Mathematical Society (to appear in 2013).

 Weil, Andre. 1947. Sur la theorie des formes differentielles attachees a une variete analytique complexe.

 Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici 20: 110-116.

 Weil, Andre. 1958a. On the moduli of Riemann surfaces (to Emil Artin on his sixtieth birthday). Unpublished

 manuscript. Collected papers, vol. II, pp. 381-389.

 Weil, Andre. 1958b. Final report on contract AF A8(603-57). Unpublished manuscript. In Collected papers,

 Weil, Andre. 1958c. Modules des surfaces de Riemann. In Seminaire Bourbaki. Expose No. 168, Mai 1958,

 vol. II, pp. 390-395.

 pp. 413-419.

 Weil, Andre. 1979. Collected papers, 3 vols. Springer, 2nd printing, 2009.
 Weyl, Hermann. 1913. Die Idee der Riemannschen Flache. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:02:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

