 

 

 

 

How do the earliest known mathematical writings highlight the state's management of

grains in early imperial China?
Author(s): Karine Chemla and  Biao Ma
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 1 (January 2015), pp. 1-53
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569649
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:53 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:1-53
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0139-3

 How do the earliest known mathematical writings
 highlight the state's management of grains in early
 imperial China?

 Karine Chemla - Biao Ma

 Received: 4 October 2013/Published online: 11 November 2014

 © Springer-Verlag 2014

 Abstract The earliest extant mathematical books from China contain a lot of

 problems and data about grains. They also betray a close relationship with imperial

 bureaucracy in this respect. Indeed, these texts quote administrative regulations
 about grains. For instance, the Book on mathematical procedures found in a
 tomb sealed ca. 186 BCE, has a section in common with the "regulations on gra
 naries" from the Qin statutes in eighteen domains, known thanks to slips excavated

 at Shuihudi. Mathematical writings also deal with official vessels used to measure

 grains. They cast light on statements from, and practices evidenced by, official
 histories and administrative documents. This article addresses the following issues.

 Communicated by: Han Qi.

 The research leading to these results received funding from the European Research Council under the
 European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No.
 269804 "Mathematical Sciences in the Ancient World (SAW)." The results presented in this article were

 obtained through a discussion between the two authors that started in the summer of 2011. These results
 were presented first on March 9, 2012, and subsequently on March 20 and 26, 2013, within the

 framework of the seminars and conferences of the SAW Project (http://sawerc.hypotheses.org/workshop

 cultures-of-computation-and-quantiflcation/conference-cultures-of-computation-and-quantification-in
 the-ancient-world). We would like to thank the audience for their questions, which helped us refine our
 argument. Most of all, we are grateful to the Director of the SPHERE research group, who graciously

 lent us his office for several weeks, as 18 months after the beginning of the ERC project the University
 had still not provided any space for its activities. We would also like to thank Annick Horiuchi and

 Karen Margolis for kindly helping us prepare the final version of this article. Han Qi's and Jeremy

 Gray's editorial advice was invaluable, and we have pleasure in expressing our gratitude for their careful

 reading.

 B. Ma

 K. Chemla (El)
 ERC Project SAW, SPHERE, UMR 7219, CNRS, University Paris Diderot, Paris, France
 e-mail: chemla@univ-paris-diderot.fr

 Visiting Professor SAW, ill Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan
 e-mail: biaoma@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

 Ώ Spring! ;er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Κ. Chemla, Β. Ma

 Which information about the concrete management of grains can we derive from

 mathematical writings in relation to administrative documents? Which data can we

 find in these writings about continuities and changes in the management of grains in
 the time span between the Qin and Han dynasties? In particular, how can we
 account for the fact that in a later mathematical text, namely, The Nine Chapters,

 probably completed in the first century CE, there was a change in the form in which

 the data about grain equivalences were given, by comparison with the "regulations

 on granaries"? Finally, what do our conclusions imply with respect to the nature of

 the earliest extant mathematical writings. In this article, we gather the various types

 of statement that mathematical writings contain about grains and offer several

 elements of interpretation for the "regulations on granaries" and the related text in

 The Nine Chapters. From this perspective, we offer several hypotheses about the

 management of grain in the Qin and Han dynasties.

 A Pascal Crozet

 Grains were an essential product for the state economy in early China.1 The

 croplands owned by the state were allotted to people who had to pay taxes in return
 mainly in grain. Salaries were generally paid to officials in grain. Soldiers and
 corvée laborers also regularly received food rations in grain.2 These few pieces of

 information suffice to highlight the importance, for the state, of managing grains.

 They also explain why it is essential for historians of early China to understand the

 ways in which the state organized the management of grains. Historians who have

 discussed this issue in early China have mainly relied on documents produced by the
 administration. The main aim of this article is to show how the earliest extant

 mathematical documents from early China provide unique evidence that comple
 ments the administrative documents and thereby allows us to understand features of

 the management of grains that would otherwise remain unattainable. The features

 we focus on are the measuring units with which amounts of grain were measured at

 different moments of the management process. Clarification in this respect allows us

 to interpret administrative statutes dealing with grain. Further, on this basis, we

 suggest hypotheses on the actual processes of managing grains, from the payment of

 taxes up to the payment of salaries or rations. Throughout, the relationship between

 the mathematical writings discussed and the actual activities of the administration in

 charge of grains will appear to be quite close. In conclusion, we return to this issue

 1 When we speak of early China in this article, this refers mainly to the period between the fourth century
 B.C.E. and the third century C.E. During this time period, the state of Qin (one of the "Warring States”）

 defeated the other major states and unified the Chinese empire, establishing in 221 B.C.E. the so-called
 Qin dynasty. This dynasty was short-lived—it lasted between 221 B.C.E. and 206 B.C.E.一and was
 quickly overturned, giving way to the Han dynasty (206 B.C.E.-220 C.E.). The regent Wang Mang 王莽
 (45 B.C.E.-23 C.E.) attempted to overthrow the Han dynasty and establish a new dynastic rule, the Xin

 新 dynasty. The latter was short-lived (9-23 C.E.), and Han rule was reestablished in 25 C.E. This event
 divides the Han dynasty into two periods: the "Western Han dynasty" (206 B.C.E.-9 C.E.) and the
 Eastern Han dynasty (25-220 C.E.).

 2 See, for instance, (Loewe 1961/1962, 1967).

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains

 and suggest how the study of the management of grains can shed some light on the

 nature of these mathematical writings.

 The mathematical documents in question contain, as we see below, data about the

 management of grains. Whenever they overlap with administrative sources, they
 appear to accord with them. Mathematical documents also include mathematical

 procedures as well as problems related to grains, which will prove important for our

 argument. In the first section of this article, we present these documents as well as

 the related evidence on which we are relying, and we offer a preliminary analysis of

 the information on grain that they provide. Interestingly, some of these mathemat

 ical writings discuss questions related to official measuring vessels.3 We shall see

 the intimate connection between these vessels and the measurement of grain. Most

 importantly, one of these books, the Book of Mathematical Procedures (Suanshu shu

 箅數書)，found in a tomb sealed in around 186 B.C.E.,4 actually has a paragraph
 virtually identical to an administrative statute from the Qin statutes and edicts, and

 more specifically from the “Statutes on granaries 食律 cang lù:’5 This latter fact is a

 key element in our argument. Interestingly, this fact reflects a wider phenomenon, i.

 e” the close relationship between mathematical writings and certain administrative
 documents, namely statutes, which are essential for us here. Aside from grain,

 mathematical writings mirror questions raised, and use data provided by, texts of

 statutes.6 Moreover, there is â crucial material connection between these two types

 of sources: in the contexts in which manuscripts dealing with mathematics have
 been discovered, texts of administrative statutes were also discovered.

 Our argument develops along the following three main lines. The second section

 of this article focuses on a table dealing with grains which is contained in The Nine
 Cnapters on Mathematical Procedures (hereafter, The Nine Chapters), a book
 probably compiled in the first century C.E., a fact to which we shall return.8 We will

 show that this table is closely connected to the statute whose text occurs in the Book

 of Mathematical Procedures. Further, the context of The Nine Chapters, that is, the

 problems and procedures contained in the book, allows us to establish that this table

 relates to a phenomenon that affects the largest measuring unit for capacity used in

 the book, namely the hu 斛.In fact, in The Nine Chapters，this measuring unit has

 two distinct meanings. In some contexts, it refers, as usual, to a unit of capacity.

 3 (Bai Shangshu 白尚恕1982, Guo Shuchun 郭書春1988, Volkov 1985, 1995).

 4 Let us recall the fact that the mathematical manuscripts that were excavated, including those discussed

 in this article, were all written on bamboo slips. Originally, the slips were interlinked by vegetable fiber

 cords to make a book. However, the cords decomposed during the two thousand years they remained

 buried underground. A key operation that archeologists face in order to publish critical editions of these

 documents is to attempt to recover the order in which the slips were originally arranged.

 5 Qin statutes, slips 41-43, see (Peng Hao 彭浩 2001，80), note 1.

 6 Peng Hao (2001), passim, made this point clear in relation to the first manuscript discovered, see below.

 Zou Dahai 鄒大海（2005)，translated into English as Zou (2007)，explores the relationship between the
 Qin edicts and statutes found at Shuihudi and mathematical activities in ancient China.

 7 When we present the various manuscripts below, we shall provide reference to publications that
 provide the basis for making this point.

 8 For a critical edition and a translation into French of The Nine Chapters，as well as the commentaries
 handed down with the book through the written tradition, (see Chemla and Guo Shuchun 郭書春 2004).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 However, in other contexts, it represents a unit of value, in a sense we discuss
 below. This unit of value corresponded to different amounts of capacity, depending
 on the grain measured. In this latter use, The Nine Chapters provides evidence
 showing that the various hu were embodied in vessels, precisely the vessels that
 mathematical documents discuss.9

 On this basis, in the third section, we shall return to the statute whose text occurs in

 the Book of Mathematical Procedures and establish, by relying on the problems and
 procedures contained in the book as well as evidence found in other mathematical

 documents, that the same phenomenon affected the largest measuring unit for capacity

 used before it was replaced by the hu，namely the dan 石，whose name occurs in this
 statute. In other words, the dan is used in the text of this statute both as a unit of value

 and a unit of capacity. This fact has remained unnoticed so far, but it has far-reaching

 consequences for the interpretation of administrative documents. This would suffice to

 show the relevance of mathematical documents for general history. In fact, things are

 even more complex in the very same text of the statute, as the term dan is also used to

 designate the highest-order measuring unit for weight. Illuminating this fact draws our

 attention to the part played by one of the various states in which grain is mentioned in

 these texts, namely mi "husked grain," or li mi 糲米，"coarsely husked grain."

 The fourth part returns to the table contained in The Nine Chapters to show that

 in fact “li mi 糲米 coarsely husked grain" plays a key part in the arrangement of the

 grains displayed in the table. This provides us with an important insight to show that

 the same holds true for the statute contained in the "Statutes on granaries," whose

 structure and meaning we can then fully explain. As a result, we can see that despite

 important differences in the type of numerical values used, these two documents,

 namely the table inserted in The Nine Chapters and the text common to the "Statutes
 on granaries" and the Book of Mathematical Procedures, actually have the same
 meaning. In addition, these results allow us to draw some conclusions about the
 origin of the fact that the same name,石 dan, could refer to the largest measuring

 unit for both weight and capacity.

 In conclusion, with respect to the management of grains, we suggest that contrary

 to what was previously believed, it was not the state of unhusked grain but that of
 mi, which we suggest should be translated as "standard husked grain," that played

 the most fundamental role. We can also rely on evidence provided by mathematical

 writings to offer further hypotheses on the actual use of various types of measuring

 units in the management of grains. Lastly, as regards the mathematical manuscripts

 excavated and books handed down, the discussion allows us to express some views
 on their status as well as on their connection to administrative activities.

 1 Sources and issues about grains

 Let us first describe the evidence used in this article and the information it provides

 on measuring units, on the one hand, and the management of grains on the other. To

 9 On these points, see K. Chemla, introduction to chapter 2, in Chemla and Guo Shuchun (2004, 201
 205),

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains

 begin with, we shall concentrate on The Nine Chapters, the earliest extant book

 devoted to mathematics that was handed down through the written tradition—as
 opposed to manuscripts that have been excavated, and which we shall consider
 below.

 1.1 Dealing with grains according to The Nine Chapters

 As an important element of background for this article, we shall say a few words
 about the units of measurement used in The Nine Chapters. In fact, these are

 precisely the units described in the History of the [Western] Han [Dynasty] (Honshu

 ÎÛif, abbreviated History of the Han), an official history written mainly by Ban Gu
 S® (32-92) (Hulsewé 1993). The system of measuring units presented in the
 chapter of this official history entitled "Monograph on Pitch Pipes and the Calendar
 (Lu li zhi #MiÈ)" should denote a system enacted by state institutions (Ban Gu
 etal. 1962, 955-972). However, note that, as far as we know, the system of
 measuring units described in the History of the Han was not one that was used by
 Western Han institutions. When exactly this system began to be used is not

 completely clear. We return to this question below. However, it is certain that when

 the reformer Wang Mang ΞΕ# (45 B.C.E.—23 C.E.) established the Xin iff dynasty
 (9-23), this system was enacted.

 The units of length as described in the History of the Han form the following

 system, the highest-order unit of which (the yin) is not mentioned in The Nine

 Chapters'.

 yin.

 (1) "The standards for measuring length are the fen, the cun, the chi, the zhang, the

 (...) Ten fen make a cun, ten cun make a chi, ten chi make a zhang, ten zhang

 make a yin and the five standards for measuring length are understood»
 m, ft ^ ^ R > 3t (...) +R*5t, +*$
 31, rfo£S#£o".10

 The successive units have a decimal relationship, as is the case for the system of
 measuring units for capacity, which the "Monograph on Pitch Pipes and the
 Calendar" of the History of the Han describes as follows:

 (2) "The standards for measuring capacities are the yue, the ge, the sheng, the dou,

 the hu. (...) Coupling yue's makes a ge, ten ge make a sheng, ten sheng make a

 dou, ten dou make a hu and the five standards for measuring capacities are
 excellent.

 M, (Ban Gu etal. 1962, 967).

 Mill (...)-f&m, +4^4, +4J|

 10 (Ban Gu etal. 1962, 966-967) deals with measuring units of length; the whole system of measuring
 units is presented in chapter 21a. In the present article, we shall number all the passages quoted to enable
 us to refer easily to documents under discussion.

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 6 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 The units of capacity used in The Nine Chapters are taken from this list. They

 include the hu, the dou, and the sheng, whose relationships can be represented as
 follows:

 \hu= 10 dou =100 sheng(l sheng was roughly speaking 0.2 liter)

 In contrast to these two systems, the system for weight that is described is not

 decimal, as is clear from the following quotation of the same monograph:

 (3) “The standards for weighing are the zhu, the liang, the jin, the jun, the dan.

 (...) Twenty-four zhu make a Hang, sixteen Hang make ajin, thirty jin make a
 jun，four jun make a dan.權者，誅、兩ヽ斤、鈞、石也（...）ニ+四铢為兩，
 十六兩為斤，三十斤為鈞，四鈞為石。” (Ban Gu etal. 1962, 969).

 24 zhu =1 lianも16 liang =l /m, jin =1 jun, 4jun =1 dan.

 As will become clear below, the systems of measuring units presented so far are

 valid not only for The Nine Chapters but also for all the documents mentioned here,

 including the earliest ones dating from the third century B.C.E. This fact, which

 points to the stability of official systems of measuring units over quite long a time

 period, holds true aside from one exception that will prove essential for us, namely,

 the highest-order unit of capacity, to which we return.

 As a book handed down through the written tradition, The Nine Chapters was the

 object of commentaries, some of which were selected to be handed down with the

 main text. These commentaries include the one completed by Liu Hui 劉徽 in 263.

 They also include the subcommentary written by a collective of scholars under Li

 Chunfeng's supervision and presented to the throne in 656. Although the label is
 inaccurate, we refer to this subcommentary below as “Li Chunfeng's subcommen
 tary."11 In fact, at the beginning of the Tang dynasty (618-907 C.E.), Li Chunfeng

 also composed the chapters entitled "Monograph on Pitch Pipes and the Calendar"

 for both the History of the Jin [Dynasty] and the History of the Sui [Dynasty]
 (hereafter History of the Sui). In these monographs, Li Chunfeng dealt in minute

 detail with questions related to grain, making use of quotes from both The Nine
 Chapters and Liu Hui's commentary. The facts disclose a connection between the
 production of documents related to administrative activities and mathematical

 books, the same author contributing to the composition of both types of texts and

 quoting the latter sources in his writings on the former range of activities. Moreover,

 it is certainly revealing that this connection occurs precisely on the topic of the

 management of grains. Again, we shall return to this question below.

 Let us now turn to the main document about grains in The Nine Chapters，which

 will be a fundamental piece of evidence in our article. It consists of the following

 table, placed at the beginning of chapter 2, which is entitled "Unhusked and husked
 grains 粟米”.

 11 In what follows, when we quote The Nine Chapters，we use small capitals to distinguish the book from
 the commentaries, which we render in lower case letters.

 姿 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains

 (4) •粟米之法
 粟率五十
 稗米二十七
 御米こ十一
 大麵五十四
 稗飯五十四
 御飯四十ニ
 稻六十
 飧九十
 韓ー百七十五

 糲米三十
 栽米二十四
 小麵十三半
 糲飯七十五
 繋飯四十八
 菽、荅、麻、麥各四十五
 豉六十三
 熟菽ー百三半

 Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains

 The iti for unhusked grain (millet) is fifty，

 FOR COARSELY HUSKED GRAIN THIRTY,

 FAIRLY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) TWENTY-SEVEN,

 FINELY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) TWENTY-FOUR,

 SUPREMELY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) TWENTY-ONE,

 SMALL GRITS OF BARLEY THIRTEEN AND A HALF,

 LARGE GRITS OF BARLEY FIFTY-FOUR，

 12

 COARSELY HUSKED GRAIN COOKED SEVENTY-FIVE,

 FAIRLY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) COOKED HFTY-FOUR,

 FINELY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) COOKED FORTY-EIGHT,

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 FOR

 SUPREMELY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) COOKED FORTY-TWO,

 SOY, MUNG, AND HEMP BEANS, BARLEY, RESPECTIVELY, FORTY-FIVE

 FOR

 PADDY SIXTY,

 FOR

 FERMENTED SOY BEANS (chi3) SIXTY-THREE,

 FOR

 COOKED RICE IN WATER (sunl) NINETY,

 FOR

 COOKED SOY BEANS ONE HUNDRED AND THREE AND A HALF

 FOR SPROUTS OF BARLEY OR BEANS13 ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIVE，’ (Chemla
 Guo Shuchun 2004, 222-223).

 and

 Let us observe some of the main features of this table. The basic grains that

 explicitly appear in it are paddy rice (unhusked rice), and soy, mung, and hemp
 beans, as well as barley. However, the beginning of the table refers to a state of

 grain, "unhusked grain," rather than to a specific grain. Given that millet was the

 12 This identification was provided by Wang Guowei 王國維，“Shi er 釋ニ’’ in (Luo Zhenyu 羅振玉 and
 Wang Guowei 1993, 164). Wang Guowei offered this interpretation on the basis of occurrences in
 bamboo slips from the Han dynasty (Juyan). Yang Lien-sheng 楊聯陸（1950)，quoted from (Yang Lien

 sheng 2006, 8), confirmed this interpretation and established its relationship to this passage of The Nine
 Cnapters.

 13 The Grand Dictionary of Chinese characters 漢語大字典，p. 3163 (Sichuan cishu chubanshe and
 Hubei cishu chubanshe, 1984-1990) gives 蕖 nie as equivalent to 集 nie, relying on the Shuowen jiezi 說

 文解字 dictionary and its 1815 commentary by Duan Yucai 段玉裁.This suggests the interpretation that

 the character refers to sprouts of either barley or beans. The value with which the state of the grain is
 associated in the table seems to support this interpretation, as we can state on the basis of the meaning of
 the table expounded below.

 名 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 most common crop in Northern China at the time,14 it is most probable that the first

 term of the table, "unhusked grain,” referred to millet (that is, to unhusked millet).15

 This is what we suggest in the translation. This feature, namely that the most generic

 terms are used in relation to millet, might somehow reflect the fact that the table is a

 document used by people from the north, for whom millet was the most common

 grain.16 Another explanation for this fact is that millet was â basis for the definition

 of official standards and thus perceived as the most fundamental of all crops. This
 status of millet is reflected by the use of this grain to define the basic measuring

 units in the “Monograph on pitch pipes and the calendar" of the History of the

 Han}1 We prefer the second explanation, for reasons to be made clear below. In any

 event, millet is clearly the grain that appears most often in The Nine Chapters. And

 it is always designated by generic terms. These facts might, among other things, be

 an indication of the higher status of a book like The Nine Chapters in comparison to

 the manuscripts that have been discovered recently.

 In addition to the basic grains listed above, the table mentions a huge variety of

 states of these grains: unhusked or husked, in different degrees of fineness, cooked,

 fermented, and in the form of grits or sprouts. Moreover, the table associates each

 type of grain or each state of grain to an integer, and no unit of measurement is
 attached to its expression. Two exceptions must be mentioned, since for two
 numerical values the fraction “one half’ appears. This can be accounted for easily if

 we note that the table apparently aims to offer numerical values stating equivalences

 between all forms of grain by means of integers that are all relatively prime to each

 other. The twice-repeated use of “one half’ thus enables the retention of smaller

 integers for all the other numerical values.

 The first question to be asked is: What was the meaning and function of this table?

 We just stated that it provides equivalences between forms of grain. However, we

 must clarify the meaning of these equivalences and explain how the numerical values
 in the table were understood and used. Some authors have suggested that the table

 expressed rates of exchange between grains on markets or in general barter.18 Is this

 the case? We shall see that answering the questions just raised provides an essential

 key to understand the management of grains in ancient China.

 In The Nine Chapters, the table opens chapter 2, which is titled "Unhusked and

 husked grains." Immediately following the table, a general and abstract formulation

 14 For a study of the evolution of crops in northern China, see (Li Qiufang 李秋芳 2012). Although millet

 was the most common plant in the north, note that both millet and paddy could be found in the north from

 a very early period onwards.

 15 In contexts in which we believe that su also designates the unhusked state of millet in particular, we

 shall translate as follows "unhusked grain (millet)." Whether li mi，bai mi and zuo mi were states of grain

 specifically attached to millet or could be attached to other types of grain is a topic awaiting further
 research. We shall thus translate them as states of grain, as is done in the table, adding “(millet)’’ in

 brackets. Zou Dahai (2005,538-540) discusses the various terms used to designate these states of grain in

 different documents and attempts to account for why The Nine Chapters differs from several other
 documents in this respect.

 16 Peng Hao (2012, 196) obtained a similar conclusion by studying the occurrence of the same term in
 various contexts in the mathematical manuscripts. We return to this question below.

 17 Ban Gu etal. (1962, 966-970). Vogel (1994) discusses this feature.

 18 See, for instance, (Shen Kangshen etal. 1999, 141-142), in particular note 1.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains

 of the rule of three, an operation called "suppose" in The Nine Chapters，is provided,

 outside the context of any problem. It reads as follows:

 (5) “今有（…commentary •••)

 術日:以所有數乘所求率爲實。以所有率爲法。（... commentary ...)责如法
 而一。”

 "Suppose. (... commentary …）
 Procedure: One multiplies，by the quantity of what one has, the lO of what one

 SEEKS, WHICH MAKES THE DIVIDEND； ONE TAKES THE LÛ OF WHAT ONE HAS AS DIVISOR.

 (... commentary "•)• Dividing the dividend by the divisor makes the result"
 (Chemla and Guo Shuchun 2004, 222-225).

 A few words about the meaning of the procedure will prove useful below. The

 procedure refers to the three numerical values entering â rule of three using a special

 terminology that distinguishes between the data in two ways. On the one hand, it

 refers to the data related to the thing that the rule of three has to transform using the

 expression "what one has," in contrast to the other data, referred to as "what one

 seeks." On the other hand, the terminology opposes quantities to lii. Quantities, that

 is, the "quantity of what one has" and the quantity of what one seeks, are actual

 amounts, in contrast to /«, which are numerical values defined only relative to each
 other. Thus, the two numerical values used to express the equivalence between
 ‘‘what one has’’ and "what one seeks’’ in a problem solved by a rule of three are
 referred to as lii (“lù of what one has," ‘‘lii of what one seeks"). In relation to their

 designation by the term lii, the values can be transformed in correlation with each

 other, both, for instance, being transformed through adequate operations into
 mutually prime integers, before performing the operation.

 In The Nine Chapters, this abstract rule of three is followed by thirty-two problems

 devoted to grains, all similar to the first one, which we translate as follows:

 (6) (Problem 1 from chapter 2)

 “今有粟一斗，欲爲糲米。問得幾何。
 荅日:爲糲米六升。
 術日:以粟求糲米，三之，五而一。

 Suppose that, having one dou of unhusked grain (millet), one wants to make

 COARSELY HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET). ONE ASKS HOW MUCH JJ YIELDS.

 Answer: it makes six sheng of coarsely husked grain (mdxet).

 procedure : If, having unhusked grain (millet), one seeks coarsely husked grain
 (millet), one three-folds this, and one divides by five’’ (Chemla and Guo
 Shuchun 2004, 224-225).

 The seventh-century commentator Li Chunfeng elucidates the relationship
 between the table, the abstract procedure for the operation "suppose," and the

 specific procedure for solving this problem. First, in this problem, the unhusked grain

 is what one has, whereas the coarsely husked grain is what one seeks. The data for

 unhusked and coarsely husked millet are taken from the table: They are, respectively,

 50 and 30. These are, Li Chunfeng explains, the lii of the unhusked grain of millet and

 を)Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 10 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 the lii of the husked grain. As lii, they can then be transformed in correlation with each

 other, here into 5 and 3. This is how, here and below, Li Chunfeng accounts for the

 specific procedures following the first thirty-two problems of the chapter as well as for

 the numerical values they use, in relation to the table.

 With The Nine Chapters, we have examined the earliest known mathematical

 document handed down through the written tradition, which we agree to date from the

 first century CE, a point to which we return below. However, in recent decades,

 archeological excavations in China, combined, unfortunately, with the antiquities

 market, have provided us with an entirely new kind of textual evidence, since they have

 unearthed documents that had remained untouched for more than two thousand years.

 These documents give grains pride of place, and their treatment of grains corresponds

 closely with what we find in The Nine Chapters. Let us now examine evidence they

 contain in this respect. They will give us subsequent opportunities to complement the

 information contained in The Nine Chapters about the management of grains.

 1.2 Dealing with grains according to the Book of Mathematical Procedures

 The first mathematical book excavated was the Book of Mathematical Procedures,
 unearthed in 1984 from tomb 247 at Zhangjiashan (Hubei Province). The other
 documents buried in the same tomb indicate that the book could not have been written

 later than around 186 B.C.E. (Peng Hao 2001). It thus belongs at the latest to the early

 period of the Western Han dynasty. In the same tomb as this mathematical writing,

 archeologists found a set of statutes of the early Western Han dynasty, entitled Statutes

 and edicts ofyear 2 {of Empress Lii) {Ernian lii ling ニ年律令)，and other books which
 all seem to indicate that the owner of the tomb could have been an ofncial.19

 The Book of Mathematical Procedures has measuring units all identical to those

 used in The Nine Chapters, except for one key difference, mentioned above. Instead of

 using the hu 斛 as the largest measuring unit for capacity, the Book of Mathematical
 Procedures uses the dan ，that is, a measuring unit whose name is the same as the

 largest measuring unit for weight. This is an essential point to which we return.

 We mentioned above another important feature of the book, which will play a

 central role in our article: The Book of Mathematical Procedures contains a passage

 concerning grains in common with another document unearthed in 1975 at Shuihudi

 (Hubei province) and containing administrative laws and statutes from the Qm

 dynasty.20 This latter document is of the same type as the one found in the same

 19 On these statutes, see the introduction of (Zhangjiashan er si qi hao Han mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu 張
 家山ニ四七號漢墓竹簡整理小組 Group of editors of the bamboo strips from the Han tomb 247 at
 Zhangjiashan 2001,1)，a book containing an annotated critical edition of the text (pp.131 -210).

 20 As mentioned above, the parallel was first noticed in (Peng Hao 2001). See the edition of Edicts and

 statutes of the Qin dynasty, especially the slips 41-43, in (Shuihudi Qin mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu 睡虎
 地秦墓竹簡整理小組 Group of editors of the bamboo strips from Qin tombs at Shuihudi 1990, 29-30).
 Hulsewé (1985) contains a complete English translation of these statutes. (Ikeda Yûichi 池田雄一 2008，
 147-195) (chapter "Kohoku Unbô Suikochi shinbo kanken 湖北雲夢睡虎地秦墓管見）(Personal ideas
 about the Qin tombs at Shuihudi (Yunmeng, Hubei)") suggested that Edicts and statutes oj the Qin

 dynasty deals with regulations related to officials' management of several types of activities as well as to
 duties they had to carry out. Ma Biao 馬彪（2013, 88-102) (chapter 6 "Unbô Soôjô no nijyû no seikaku
 雲夢楚王城の二重の格（The double nature of the Chu royal city at Yunmeng") further puts forward

 )carry

 旬 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 11

 tomb as the Book of Mathematical Procedures. However, Statutes and edicts of year

 2 {of Empress Lii), and the Qin statutes from Shuihudi, cover completely different

 aspects of regulations.

 Let us quote this common passage in the version found in the Book of

 Mathematical Procedures. Note that this version bears the mark that its text was

 checked by a certain "Wang," who put his signature at the bottom of the first of the

 three slips on which the section is written. In fact, the text of the statute as found in
 the mathematical text seems to be much closer to the original statute than the

 version known through the copy of the Qin edicts and statutes found in tomb 11 at
 Shuihudi. The publication of the Book of Mathematical Procedures has helped
 towards finding a new approach to the issue of the edition of the statute. The
 correctness of the mathematical book in this respect, in contrast to the legal

 document, is a striking phenomenon that still requires further discussion. In quoting

 and translating the text now, we shall point out the nature of measuring units as they

 are commonly understood一a point to which we return later:

 (7) “程禾程日:禾黍一石為粟十六斗泰(犬)半斗，舂之為糲=米=一:=石=，（糲
 米一石)為檠=米=九[=]21斗=，（槃米[九]斗)為毁(毀)米八斗。王/88/

 程日：稻禾一石為粟廿斗’舂之為米十斗’為毁（殺）粲米六斗泰(大）
 半斗。麥十斗麵(zhi)三斗

 程日:麥、菽、荅、麻十五斗一石，稟毁(穀)、檠22者，以十斗
 為一石。/90/

 Footnote 20 continued

 the idea that the Edicts and statutes of the Qin dynasty are almost all about statutes and regulations for

 local administrative offices dispatched by the court.

 21 Peng Hao (2001, 80), note 3, comments that the repetition mark was omitted. Evidence for this is
 provided by the parallel text in the Qin statute. Unless otherwise stated, here we follow Peng Hao's
 edition of the text.

 22 Peng Hao (2001, 81), note 7, explains that he reads here on the slip another character (整)，which was
 erroneously copied instead of zuo, which we use here. On p. 5, however, he seems to suggest that the
 former is borrowed to write down the latter. Cullen (2004, 130) takes up the former character, without
 mentioning a difference. Chôka zan kankan Sansûsho kenkyûkai 張家山漢簡『算数書』研究会編 The
 research group on the Han bamboo strips from Zhangjiashan Book of Mathematical Procedures (2006,52)
 suggests reading the character on the slip as 藥.Dauben (2008,137) quotes the same text for this section

 of the slip. We also follow the reading of the Japanese edition. The latter three publications provide

 translations. Note that we do not punctuate in the same way as previous authors, even though the Japanese

 translation, the Chinese one, and the two English translations follow this punctuation. All these authors

 discuss the meaning of the grains and compare these slips, on the one hand, with the text of the Qin
 regulations and, on the other hand, with The Nine Chapters (Chôka zan kankan Sansûsho kenkyûkai
 2006, 52-56, Cullen 2004, 66-68, Dauben 2008,137-139). In particular, they quote the corresponding

 text of the Qin regulation for the last sentence here. It reads “稟穀稗者，以十斗為石 bing hui bai zhe, yi
 shi dou wei dan" In this parallel text, the character of the Book of Mathematical Procedures under

 discussion is, in fact, replaced by bai 稗.Peng Hao (2001, 80-81), note 3, observes that, except for this set
 of slips quoted here, zuo never recurs in the Book of Mathematical Procedures. Elsewhere the state of
 millet corresponding to the same degree of fineness is always referred to as bai, as in the version of the

 sentence under discussion found in the Qin regulation.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 12 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Regulation for cereal plants. The regulation says: one dan (unit of weight)23 of

 broomcorn millet (that is, the cereal just harvested) makes sixteen dou two-thirds of
 a dou (unit of capacity) of unhusked grain (millet). Husking this makes one dan
 (unit of capacity) of coarsely husked grain (millet) (/z mi); one dan (unit of
 capacity) of coarsely husked grain (millet) makes nine dou of finely husked grain

 (millet) (zuo mi); nine dou of finely husked grain (millet) makes eight dou of highly

 finely husked grain (millet) (hui mi).24 (text checked by Wang).

 The regulation says: One dan (unit of weight) of paddy stalks (that is, cereal

 just harvested) makes twenty dou (unit of capacity) of unhusked grain (rice).25
 Husking this makes ten dou (unit of capacity) of husked grain (rice), makes six dou

 two-thirds of a dou of highly refined rice (hui can mi, compare Hulsewé 1985,42).26

 Ten dou of barley is three dou of grits.

 The regulation says: Fifteen dou (unit of capacity) of barley, or soy, mung, and

 hemp beans is one dan (unit of ???). If one grants highly refined or finely husked

 grain, one takes ten dou as one dan (???).”27

 23 Peng Hao (2001,80), note 2, rightly suggests that this measuring unit dan，as well as the corresponding

 one below, designate a measuring unit for weight.

 24 We see here that the relationship between three different degrees of fineness in the husking, namely, li

 mi, zuo mi, hui mi, is defined by the ratios between, respectively,10, 9, and 8 dou. The table included in

 The Nine Chapters contains numerical values with the same ratios for, respectively, li mi, bai mi, and zuo

 mi (namely, 30, 27, 24). It thus seems that the definition of zuo mi changed between the time of the Qin

 statute and the moment when The Nine Chapters was composed (Peng Hao 2001, 80-81, note 3, and Zou

 Dahai 2005). However, it is worth noticing that these occurrences of the expression zuo mi are the only

 occurrences in all the manuscripts. By contrast, in all statements that assert a ratio of 10 to 9 between two

 degrees of husking in the mathematical manuscripts, from the oldest one known, these states of grain are
 referred to as, respectively, li mi and bai mi, that is, by means of the same expressions as those found in
 The Nine Chapters. See for instance, the Book of Mathematical Procedures, slip 98 (Peng Hao 2001, 84),
 or the Qin manuscript discussed below, Mathematics, (Zhu Hanmin 朱漢民 and Chen Songchang 陳松
 長 zhubian 主編（gen. ed.) 2011), slip 0822 (editors' number 94), in which one reads: “one shertg of li
 (mi) makes nine tenths sheng of bai (mi)耦湖)一升為样十分升九 ” (see also Xiao Can 肖媒 2011，56).
 These facts indicate that further research is required on the history of the use of the term zuo mi and the

 state of grain it designated at different time periods.

 25 This "unhusked grain suy, must be "rice." We encounter evidence below that the expressions
 "unhusked rice 稻粟” and "husked rice 稻米” were used.

 26 Peng Hao (2012，195) shows that the text as preserved in the Book of Mathematical Procedures is

 correct in this respect. He points out further that in contrast to the system of states of grain deriving from
 millet, the system of states of grain deriving from paddy had only two degrees: one called mi
 (Mathematics, slip 0756, calls this state 稻米 dao mi "husked rice") and a second one called hui can mi or

 simply hui mi.

 27 Peng Hao (2001, 80-81) provides an annotated edition of the text quoted above, and as mentioned, in

 his note 1,he notes the parallel between the Qin statute contained in slips 41-43 in question and the Book
 of Mathematical Procedures. Peng Hao (2012, 194-196) summarizes different scholars' contributions to

 the establishment of the text of this Qin statute and shows how one can rely on the Book of Mathematical

 Procedures to restore the text as transmitted in the extant copy of Qin statutes. See (Hulsewé 1985,42) for
 a translation into English of the Qin statute parallel to the paragraph of the Book of Mathematical
 Procedures under discussion. Regarding the final sentence of the text, (Peng Hao 2012, 199), in
 conformity with his punctuation of the text, suggests following the editors of the Qin regulations in

 reading huizuo as a single word, designating states of millet with finer degrees of husking. He interprets

 this sentence in the context of Qin regulations, as referring to special ways of measuring rations of grains

 for officials in mission, in relation to their degrees in the hierarchy. Chôka zan kankan Sansûsho kenkyûkai

 (2006, 52), Cullen (2004, 67-68), and Dauben (2008, 139) interpret the text as referring to two types of

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 13

 Like the table quoted above, this passage deals with equivalences between

 different kinds of grain. The parallel between the two excavated documents, an

 administrative one and a mathematical one, indicates that this passage of the Book of

 Mathematical Procedures was related to the context of granaries. The way in which
 the scribe who wrote the mathematical book perceived the status of the text he or

 she was quoting is made explicit, since the clauses of the passage are all introduced

 by the same expression: "The regulation says 程日.’’ The parallel also suggests that

 these documents must have been linked in practice. It is striking that the two types

 of documentation present the most intimate connection in relation to the topic of
 determining equivalent amounts of different grains. Also note that both unearthed

 writings were found in tombs of men who were apparently local officials. This
 suggests that these documents were written and used in relation to the state
 bureaucracy.

 In the last paragraph of the passage quoted, we indicated by the insertion of

 repeated question marks problems raised by the usual interpretation of measuring

 units in this text. Indeed, in both of its last occurrences, dan does not seem capable

 of designating a unit of measurement of capacity as is usually understood.

 If that were the case, to begin with, how could one make sense of a statement

 asserting that 15 dou makes a dan, when according to the official system,10 dou

 should make a dan! To underscore the first point, we have to be more precise about

 the system of measuring units used during the Qin dynasty. In the same set of

 statutes as the one containing the passage from the "Statutes on granaries" translated

 above, we find another section making clear the legal system of measuring units that
 officials had to use. Inserted in the set of statutes entitled “Xiao lii Statutes on

 checking,’’ this section describes the measuring units by listing the fines to be taken

 from ofncials using inaccurate measuring standards. The fines are determined in

 relation to the degree of inaccuracy of the standard used. In this context, the largest

 vessel used to measure capacity一and at the same time the largest measuring unit
 for capacity一is referred to as tong 桶/8 Moreover, according to this section of the

 Qin statutes, dan was only a measuring unit for weight and not one for capacity. Did

 we make a mistake when we asserted that the term dan also referred to the largest
 unit in the capacity system?

 In fact, this is not the case, because at the same time，and for reasons that need to

 be explained, actual statutes, included in the same set of slips and mentioning
 administrative practice, also use dan as the highest-order measuring unk for
 capacity. This is what can be deduced from the following text of a statute, which

 Footnote 27 continued

 grain. Cullen admits that the text is difficult to understand, whereas Dauben suggests that the two types of
 grain could refer more specifically to millet. Peng Hao (2012,195-196) establishes that the finer state of

 rice can be designated as hui，that is, with the same term as the finer state for millet (see previous
 footnote). The two terms zuo and hui could thus either designate all states of rice and millet finer than the

 coarsely husked state, or alternatively, in each of the series deriving one from rice and the other from

 millet, respectively, the second state of grain after the state of "coarsely husked grain." For the inter
 pretation of dant see below.

 28 Xiao liiy slips 3-7, in (Hulsewé 1985, 93-94, Shuihudi Qin mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu 1990, 69-70).
 Qiu Guangming 丘光明 etal. (2001, 215-217) also describe a vessel named tong，whose inscription
 records that one tong has a capacity of 10 dou.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 包 Springer

 14 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 prescribes monthly rations to be distributed to various types of workers: “小妾、舂
 作者，月禾一石ニ斗半斗；Small bond-women and grain-pounders who are
 working receive a millet grain ration of one dan two and a half dou per month.”
 (Shuihudi Qin mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu (1990, 32) and Hulsewé (1985, 31)whose

 English translation is slightly revised). In this clause, the expression of the quantity

 combines the dan with the dou, which is undoubtedly a measuring unit for capacity.

 The same type of phenomena occurs in the Book of Mathematical Procedures, for

 instance in slip 96, and in this context, there is no doubt that the measuring unit dan
 makes 10 dou. This establishes beyond doubt why there is a problem with the
 statement, “fifteen dou ... is a dan，” read on the last slip of the passage translated

 above, if we interpret dan as a measuring unit for capacity.

 The last sentence of the same text raises similar difficulties. If it deals with dan as

 a measuring unit for capacity and it is the case that one dan is ten dou—a fact used

 in the previous clauses of the same text~what is the significance of stating this

 common fact again? Clearly, there are phenomena here related to the measuring unit

 dan that we do not understand. One of the aims of this article is to clarify these
 questions. To the questions on dan listed above, we can add many others. Why,

 although dan seems to have been only a measuring unit for weight, do we also find k

 in administrative practice as a measuring unit for capacity? What is the origin of this

 phenomenon? And why was dan later replaced, precisely in its role as a measuring

 unit for capacity and only there, by 斛 hul When did that change occur? Resolving

 this question is essential for dating The Nine Chapters since this book makes use

 only of hu, whereas all the manuscripts excavated never use hu and mainly use dan

 as the highest-order measuring unit for capacity.29

 If we now compare the text inserted in both the Book of Mathematical Procedures
 and the Qin statutes (Text 7) with the table from The Nine Chapters quoted above

 (Text 4)，we observe some interesting similarities and differences. To begin with, if

 we focus on the types of grain mentioned in both documents, the cereals occurring

 in the two texts are the same: millet, rice, and soy, mung, and hemp beans, as well as

 barley. However, the table in The Nine Chapters contains a much greater variety of

 states of grain, when compared to the other document. There is one exception to be
 mentioned: Rice seems to be considered in a greater number of states in the Book of

 Mathematical Procedures than in The Nine Chapters. We return to this point below.

 The fact is that in contrast to the table in The Nine Chapters, in Text 7 millet is

 mentioned explicitly. It is also mentioned before paddy. In other words, the main

 crops from the north and the south both appear, but the millet, placed in the first
 position, is granted a higher status. This fact evokes the fundamental character
 millet has in The Nine Chapters. The Book of Mathematical Procedures contains

 procedures and problems dealing with millet as well as rice, even though millet
 occurs more frequently. Moreover, often~but not always—generic terms are used

 to refer to millet in its different states. This fact recalls the practice in The Nine

 Chapters. To conclude on this point, it appears that millet plays a more fundamental

 29 This question was raised by K. Chemla in the introduction to chapter 6 (Chemla and Guo Shuchun
 2004, 477ィ78).

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 15

 part in The Nine Chapters, which, as we suggested above, might indicate a
 comparatively more official status for the book.

 The statute quoted in the Book of Mathematical Procedures and the table in The

 Nine Chapters are also quite different with respect to the nature of numerical values

 they use to state equivalences. In contrast to The Nine Chapters, which only uses

 integers (with the exception of the fraction one half) without measuring units, the

 text in the Book of Mathematical Procedures makes use of quantities expressed by

 means of integers and fractions both associated with various types of measuring

 units. So far, in this text, we have identified measuring units for capacity and for

 weight. We shall soon establish that the situation is even more complex.

 Lastly, the structure of the two texts is apparently different. The table in The Nine

 Chapters seems to be putting all types of grain and all kinds of states on the same

 level. By contrast, in the text from the Book of Mathematical Procedures, one has
 four enumerations of quantities of grain, each enumeration stating equivalent
 quantities between different states of the same grain.

 However, despite all these differences, most of the relationships stated in the Book

 of Mathematical Procedures are quantitatively the same as those stated in the table of

 The Nine Chapters. So, it seems that the same numerical relationships were expressed

 by means of two completely different types of texts. What accounts for this difference

 between textual forms? This is a question we shall address in what follows.

 In addition to the text just analyzed, the Book of Mathematical Procedures
 contains several mathematical procedures related to grains or presented in relation
 to grains. Let us mention a few examples, which will also illustrate the close
 relationship between these procedures and those presented in The Nine Chapters
 with respect to grains. A first pair of slips illustrates a rule enabling the
 transformation of unhusked grain into husked grain. The section recorded on these

 slips has a title indicating the task to be carried out. It is followed by a rule that is

 formulated outside the context of any problem and enables one to execute the task.
 This rule is exactly the procedure used in The Nine Chapters after problem 2.1
 quoted above. The use of the same terms (su, mi) and the same values (5, 3)
 indicates that the states of grain meant are both associated to millet, a point that we

 indicate in the translation. Lastly, the rule is followed by a punctuation sign and then

 a problem, itself followed by another related procedure.30 The beginning of the
 section reads as follows:

 (8) “粟求米粟求米，因而三之，五而成一。•今有粟一升七分31三，當為米幾

 何じ?日:為米七分升六。術日:…/113广

 "Having unhusked grain (millet), one seeks husked grain (millet). If, having

 unhusked grain (millet), one looks for husked grain (millet), one three-folds
 it (i.e., the quantity of unhusked grain) by the yin multiplication and
 five becomes 1(i.e., one divides by 5). • Suppose there is one sheng and

 30 The structure of the text is interesting, but this is the topic of another publication.

 31 Peng Hao (2001, 89), note 1,thinks that after the character “part fen 分，” used to express the
 fraction, the measuring unit of capacity 升 sheng, which occurs after the integral part of the result,
 was omitted.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ô Springe

 16 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 three-sevenths of (a sheng) (3/7 sheng，literally, three (parts) of (a sheng)

 divided into seven parts) of unhusked grain (millet), how much husked grain

 (millet) must this make? L It is said: this makes six sevenths of a sheng of

 husked grain (millet). Procedure: „.”32

 A few remarks on this text will highlight the relationships between the various

 documents mentioned. First, despite the fact that the statute stating relationships

 between grains included in the Book of Mathematical Procedures (7) has numerical

 values of â nature different from those in table (4) of The Nine Chapters, integers without

 measuring units and mutually prime still occur in the Book of Mathematical Procedures.

 Secondly, both the states of grain mentioned, the equivalences between them and the

 numerical values used in the rules of three are exactly the same in all our documents.

 Other slips in the Book of Mathematical Procedures offer sets of rules of three to

 transform a state or a type of grain into other states or other types of grain. Again,

 they correspond perfectly with both the procedures, the numerical values, and the

 types of grain mentioned in The Nine Chapters. Some of these procedures, however,
 present a slight deviation with respect to the terms encountered in The Nine
 Chapters. Let us quote the following example:

 (9) “粟為米麻、麥、寂、荅三而當米ニL,九而當粟十L。粟五為米三L,米

 十為稗九L，為毀(穀)八L。麥三而當稻粟四，禾粟楊/109/
 五為稻粟六。”/110/

 "If unhusked grain (millet) makes husked grain (millet). Three of hemp beans,

 barley, soy，or mung beans are equivalent to two of husked grain (millet). L Nine

 are equivalent to ten of unhusked grain (millet). L Five of unhusked grain (millet)
 make three of husked grain (millet). L Ten of husked grain (millet) make nine

 offinely husked grain (millet). L make eight of highly finely husked grain (millet).

 L Three of barley are equivalent to four of unhusked rice, of unhusked millet

 (hesu) (text checked by) Yang/109/five make six of unhusked rice./l 10/"33

 As above, the section has a title indicating the type of rules it contains. In contrast

 to The Nine Chapters, it provides sequences of equivalences between grains outside

 the framework of problems, and their clauses are separated by punctuation marks.

 As a result, the presentation is more compact than in The Nine Chapters. However,

 no connection is established with concepts like that of lu，contrary to what we find in

 The Nine Chapters. The numerical values allowing the reader to transform grains

 into each other are strictly the same as in The Nine Chapters. They all correspond to
 the statements of the Qin statute quoted above. In these slips of the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures, however, the numerical values are now expressed m the

 form of integers without measuring units. They were simplified in the same way as

 in the corresponding procedures that followed problems in The Nine Chapters. One

 feature, however, is specific to this text of the Book oj Mathematical Procedures and

 does not occur in The Nine Chapters—the mention of specific types of unhusked

 32 See the whole text in Peng Hao (2001, 89), slips 113-114.

 33 Peng Hao (2001, 88-89), slips 109-110. We use the same convention as above for the translation of

 names of grains.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 17

 grain, which we emphasized with bold characters: unhusked rice and unhusked
 millet. In fact, the way of computing equivalences between these two types of
 unhusked grain is the topic of the last clause. This information will prove valuable
 below.

 As above, this sketchy presentation does not exhaust the wealth of information

 contained about the management of grains in the Book of Mathematical Procedures.

 At an appropriate future moment, we shall quote other pieces of evidence and add
 further remarks. Let us now turn to a second manuscript whose text became
 available only recently, namely Mathematics.

 1.3 Dealing with grains according to Mathematics

 The mathematical book entitled Shu 數(Mathematics) was dated by its editors from
 the Qin dynasty (221 B.C.E.—206 B.C.E.).34 This book was bought in December

 2007 on the Hong Kong antiquities market, being the product of illegal excavations.

 We believe it is authentic.35 It is now kept in the Yuelu Academy 嶽麓書院（Hunan

 University) along with other documents that were bought in the same lot (more than
 1,300 bamboo slips altogether) and are believed to come from the same site
 (Chen Songchang 陳松長 2009, 75). In August 2008, a collector from Hong Kong
 bought a second lot (more than 30 slips) and donated it to the Yuelu Academy 嶽麓

 書院（Hunan University). On the basis of the shape of the slips, the writing, and the
 content, the two lots are believed to have come from the same tomb (Chen

 Songchang 陳松長 2009, 75).36 The set of slips among which Mathematics was
 discovered include other texts of the same kind as those excavated from the tomb in

 which the Book of Mathematical Procedures was found. In particular, a set of

 statutes belongs to the purchased lots and is in the process of being published.37

 These facts again indicate the probable relation between the owner of the slips and
 the bureaucracy. They also confirm the link between the use of mathematical

 34 On these two pieces of information, see (Chen Songchang 2009, 75, 85), respectively. The title is on
 the verso of slip 0956 (editors' number 1 verso), and its photograph is reproduced in (Zhu Hanmin and
 Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) 2011,3).

 35 One key reason for this is that it clearly uses the character 券 quart in a way quite similar to the use of

 quan by another mathematical manuscript, and only this one. However, the slips of this other manuscript
 showing that use of quan were only published in 2008. See (Chemla and MA 2011).

 36 Several papers devoted to different aspects of the book Mathematics appeared in 2009: (Xiao Can and
 Zhu Hanmin 2009a, b, Zhu Hanmin and Xiao Can 2009). In 2011, the contents of the book were made

 public through (Xiao Can 2011) and the critical edition of Mathematics, with reproductions and
 annotations, published in (Zhu Hanmin and Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) 2011). Xiao Can and Zhu Hanmin

 (2009b) focus in particular on the units of measurement for quantities of grain in Qin China. Since the

 topic is close to that of our article, let us sketch their relevant results. In their terms, they mainly discuss
 the conversion, for grains, between measuring units of volumes and weights. Their conclusion is that
 Mathematics records many coefficients expressing the ratios between volume and weight for grains.

 Moreover, they suggest that in the third century B.C.E., before the unification of the Chinese empire,

 people usually measured grains by means of measuring units of volume and then used these coefficients
 to compute the related weight. We show below why we have come to different conclusions.

 37 See (Chen Songchang 2009, 86-87). According to the description given there, the statutes seem to be
 comparable to those found in Shuihudi and mentioned above.

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 18 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 writings and the practice of regulation in ancient China. This will prove to be quite

 important in relation to grains.

 Let us now turn more specifically to the evidence provided by Mathematics on

 the management of grains. As we already emphasized, grains are granted pride of
 place in the book. In this respect, the statements and procedures included in

 Mathematics have many similarities with both the Book of Mathematical Procedures

 and The Nine Chapters. In fact, the topic of grain is one key common topic to all
 these early mathematical books. Moreover, despite differences, the common
 characteristics in this respect between the three books reveals a close relationship

 between them, representing one of the major links between them. Let us examine

 some similarities and differences in greater detail.

 First, the systems of measuring units used in Mathematics are the same as those

 used in the Book of Mathematical Procedures and The Nine Chapters. However, the

 same exception as above can be noted. Like the Book of Mathematical Procedures，

 and thus unlike The Nine Chapters，Mathematics uses dan not only as the largest

 measuring unit for weight, but also the largest measuring unit for capacity.38

 The extant set of slips gives access to what is probably only part of the contents

 of the book entitled Mathematics and contains no paragraph comparable to the table

 from The Nine Chapters or the statute on grains quoted in the Book of Mathematical

 Procedures. However, the grain types mentioned in Mathematics are exactly the

 same as those in both the Book of Mathematical Procedures and The Nine Chapters.

 The list of states of the various grains occurring in Mathematics is closer to that
 found in the Book of Mathematical Procedures than it is to The Nine Chapters.
 Furthermore, the standards of equivalences between grains and states of grain to

 which Mathematics bears witness presents no contradiction with what is stated in

 either the Book of Mathematical Procedures or The Nine Chapters. These facts, with
 others presented below, show that with respect to grains, Mathematics reflects a

 system of management of grains that corresponds closely to the systems reflected by

 the other mathematical writings.

 Similarities can also be noted in the types of procedures included in Mathematics.

 For instance, slips 0756 and 0776 record rules of three quite comparable to those

 found in the Book of Mathematical Procedures or in The Nine Chapters (texts 5, 8, 9

 quoted above).39 Let us quote some of these rules to allow the reader to see these
 similarities and also to be able to refer

 (10) “以稻米求毀(穀)粲米，三母倍赛(實)(•••"excavation number 0756; edi

 tors numbering 87/40

 38 See, for example, Mathematics, slip 0939 (editors' number 11)(Zhu Hanmin and Chen Songchang
 (gen. ed.) 2011,4). This slip also confirms that in this system one dan is equal to ten dou.

 39 This article does not provide the scope to analyze extensively the various formulations of the rules of
 three contained in these books (several different formulations in the same book, as well as similarities and

 differences across books), their relationships with each other, and what these facts reveal in terms of

 conceptual history. Such a systematic study is interesting and important. It will be the topic of another
 publication.

 40 Zhu Hanmin and Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011, 13).

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 19

 If, having husked rice, one seeks highly refined rice, one three-folds the
 denominator and doubles the dividend."

 The statement of the rule, outside the context of any problem, reminds us of the

 quotations from the Book of Mathematical Procedures (8). The terminology and the

 type of numerical values used to carry out the transformation are similar to both The

 Nine Chapters (6) and the Book of Mathematical Procedures (8). However, the terms

 found here to refer to types of grain are not found in either the Book of Mathematical

 Procedures or The Nine Chapters. More precisely, the latter statement holds true, if

 we exclude Text 7, which the Book of Mathematical Procedures shares with the Qin

 statutes. But, importantly enough, these terms occur in Text 7. In addition, despite

 differences between the formulations of numerical values, the equivalence that the

 Qin statute provides between these two states of rice is quantitatively the same as

 that employed in the rule of three contained in Mathematics. This is an extremely

 important piece of evidence since it suggests a relationship between Qin statutes and
 Mathematics.

 Another rule of three provided by Mathematics formulates an equivalence that

 can also be found in the Book of Mathematical Procedures:

 (11) "(...)以稻粟求叔(菽）、荅、麥，三之，四成一。（..O/excavation number

 0776; editors' numbering 101/

 If, having unhusked rice, one seeks soy or mung beans, or barley, one three

 folds this and makes four become one (i.e., one divides by four).’’ Zhu Hanmin
 and Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011，15)

 Text 9 from the Book of Mathematical Procedures，slip 109, states the same

 equivalence between unhusked rice and barley. If we add to this the information

 stated in Qin statute (Text 7), namely that the terms soy or mung beans or barley

 occur in equivalences in exactly the same way, we see that the statements in both
 books refer to the same transformation. At first sight, the Qin statute or The Nine
 Chapters do not seem to provide this information. However, our conclusions allow

 us to show that in fact both texts give it. This point will become clear below. In

 conclusion, these statements of Mathematics correspond perfectly with the evidence
 of the other documents.

 In addition to procedures, Mathematics also contains tables of clauses stating
 other types of equivalences related to grains. These are of the utmost importance for
 the argument made in this article. Let us first look at a table which assembles

 statements of a kind that are only documented in Mathematics. There is no doubt

 that for a given amount of a single type of grain and a single state of grain, each of

 these statements provides equivalences between its weight and the corresponding
 capacity. To illustrate such clauses, let us mention some that will prove useful
 below:

 (12) “黍粟廿三斗六升重一石。（•••）。 糢(糲)米廿斗重一石。

 麥廿一斗ニ升重一石。/excavation number 0780; editors' numbering 103/
 (...)稻粟廿七斗六升重一石。（...)/excavatioii number 0981; editors' num
 bering 104/

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 20 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Twenty-three dou six sheng of unhusked millet (shu su)41 has a weight of one
 dan. (...)

 Twenty dou of coarsely husked grain (millet) has a weight of one dan.

 Twenty-one dou two sheng of barley has a weight of one ぬ《./excavation

 number 0780; editors' numbering 103/

 (...) Twenty-seven dou six sheng of unhusked rice has a weight of one dan.
 (...)/excavation number 0981; editors' numbering 104广’ (Zhu Hanmin and
 Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) 2011,15)

 We can see that for each type of grain, these statements invariably give the

 measurement in capacity units corresponding to the same unit of weight. These
 statements reveal a very important fact. Various types of measuring units were used
 to measure a given amount of grain. Accordingly, specific types of statements were
 shaped, and listed here in tables, to deal with conversions between different systems
 of measuring units. Moreover, the type of conversion depended on the grain used.42
 Note that no such clause occurs either in the Book of Mathematical Procedures or in
 The Nine Chapters. In our conclusions, we try to interpret this fact.

 In Mathematics, another table systematically gathers a second type of statement

 quite similar to the latter in shape, but different in terms of the relationships stated.

 At first sight, one may be tempted to believe that, taking each clause for one type of

 grain and a given state of that grain, they provide the volume of grain corresponding

 to the largest unit of capacity. Let us read one of the clauses:

 (13) “麥ニ尺四寸ー石。/excavation number 0760; editors' numbering 107/
 (A volume of) two chi four cun of barley is one dan” (Zhu Hanmin and Chen
 Songchang (gen. ed.) 2011, 16).

 Before discussing these clauses, let us mention the fact that in addition to the

 table, such clauses also appear in problems. Since these problems provide important
 information that will be useful below, let us translate one of them:

 (14)

 “倉廣五丈，袤七丈，童高ニ丈，今粟在中，盈與童平，粟一石居ニ尺七寸，
 問食積尺及容粟各幾/excavation number 0801; editors' numbering 177/
 可(何)?日:積尺七萬尺，容粟ニ萬五千九百廿五石廿七分石廿五。述(術）
 日:廣褒相乘，有(又)以高乘之，即尺。以ニ尺/excavation number 0784;

 editors，numbering 178/

 41 The expression by means of which one refers to unhusked millet here is different from that used in the

 Book of Mathematical Procedures (Text 9). Note that the manuscript writes down these tables by means of

 registers, which we indicate with spaces. In the translation, each clause is translated in a separate
 paragraph.

 42 It is this development that (Xiao Can and Zhu Hanmin 2009b) interpreted as the introduction in third

 century B.C.E. China of the concept of specific gravity.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 21

 A granary has a width of five zhang, a length of seven zhang，and a height of the

 heap43 of two zhang. Suppose there is unhusked grain (millet) in it, in such a way

 that it fills the granary up to the highest level. One dan of unhusked grain

 (millet) occupying two chi seven cuit, one asks the amount, respectively, of the

 chi of the volume of the granary and the unhusked grain (millet) it contains.44/

 excavation number 0801；editors' numbering 177/ It is said: the chi of the volume

 are seventy thousand chi, and it contains twenty-five thousand nine hundred and

 twenty-five dan twenty-five twenty-sevenths dan. Procedure: width and length

 being multiplied by each other, one further multiplies this (result) by the height,

 hence the chi (of the volume). One takes two chi ..."45

 We highlighted the clause in which we are interested in bold type. Before discussing

 the main problematic feature of these clauses, namely the interpretation of dan, we

 shall first explain the system used to express volumes.46 The measuring units chi and

 cun are basically designed to express lengths (see Text 1).In fact, they are also used to

 express volumes, as is the case here, by means of the following principle. A basic unit

 is chosen, in this case the chi. The length “two chi seven cun" designates the height of a

 parallelepiped whose square base has a side of length one chi. The numerical value
 “two chi seven cun" also expresses a volume equal to that of this parallelepiped. In this

 system, whether cun represents a unit of length or a unit of volume, its relation to the

 unit chi is the same:1 chi equals 10 cun. One could alternatively take the cun as the

 basic unit; the height expressed would then be that of a parallelepiped with a square
 basis of 1 cun side, and the relation between the chi and the cun would remain

 invariable. In the latter case, the same volume as above would be expressed by means

 of the quantity 2,700 cun, which occurs in our documents, as shown below.

 Let us now turn to the main problem, namely, the interpretation of dan in these

 statements. If we compare the two clauses quoted above (texts 13 and 14), we see that

 we have here two different volumes associated with 狂 single measuring unit dan,

 depending on whether we are dealing with barley or unhusked grain, which we
 interpret here as millet for reasons to be explained. So far, we only have two
 possibilities.

 43 The term long 童 that we translate as “heap’，and interpret as "granary" occurs in The Nine Chapters as

 well as in the Book of Mathematical Procedures. Xiao Can (2011, 85)，note 1，and Zhu Hanmin and Chen

 Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011,127), note 1，suggest relying on the third century commentator Liu Hui's gloss
 on this character in The Nine Chapters to interpret it. Liu Hui writes: “凡播芻有上下庚日童 Every time

 when, piling up forage grass, in the (shape constructed) there is a higher width and a lower width, one calls

 (the shape) tong" We suggest that the character tong could be a character borrowed to write chong 重"heap."

 The meaning could thus have been extended to designate the “height of the granary" itself.

 44 For the moment, we translate rong loosely. We shall return to this concept below, as its interpretation
 demands revision. Note that we also translate “jichi the chi of the volume" loosely. The precise
 interpretation is the topic of another publication.

 45 Zhu Hanmin and Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011，25). The procedure solving the problem is not
 complete, since the editors could not identify the following slip among the extant slips. A similar
 mathematical problem can be found on slips 175 and 176 (editors' numbers), Zhu Hanmin and Chen
 Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011，24,126).

 46 The explanation of the system was first published in (Li Jimin 李繼閔1998,768-778). We are grateful
 to Zhu Yiwen for having called our attention to the first publication explaining a feature now universally

 accepted.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 22 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Could dan be the measuring unit for weight? It is clear, from the problem
 contained in Mathematics quoted above (Text 14), that this is not possible. The term

 used in the answer to the problem to refer to the value obtained with respect to the

 unit dan is 容 rong，which we have so far translated loosely as “contain.’’ Whatever

 the interpretation of this term may be, it is not the term used in Mathematics to refer

 to weight: Text 12 clearly uses the term zhong 重 for this purpose.47

 Could dan then be the measuring uràt for capacity? If, in each of these contexts, dan

 was the unit of capacity of the same name, how would it be possible that the volume

 corresponding to it changes in relation to the grain? To formulate the puzzle in

 contemporary terms for the sake of clarity, this would involve a vessel containing

 1liter or 2 liters, depending on the liquid poured into it. This is clearly a phenomenon

 that awaits explanation, and this is the key question that the present article aims at

 solving. This question is all more intriguing in that we encounter exactly the same

 phenomenon, relating to the same type of clauses, in The Nine Chapters.

 In chapter 5, titled ‘‘Discussing works 商功 shang gong，” we find the statement of

 three clauses of the same type as the ones examined: They relate a volume and what

 appears to be the largest measuring unit of capacity, namely the hu. Note that in this

 other context, the phenomenon affects the measuring unit for capacity unambiguously,
 since, as we explained above, the name of the highest-order measuring unit for

 capacity in The Nine Chapters is no longer the same as that for the weight system. That

 is, it is no longer dan，but hu Also note that in The Nine Chapters, these clauses are

 referred to as 程 cheng，which we have translated so far as “regulation.” In other words,

 the term used to designate their status is the same as the one used by the scribe who
 copied the text of the "Regulation for cereal plants” (Text 7) in the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures. Let us represent the three clauses inserted in The Nine
 Chapters in the form of the following table.

 Problem 5.23

 Problem 5.24

 Problem 5.25

 Grain

 The volume of

 1斛 Am is

 Unhusked grain
 (millet)粟

 2 chi 1 cun

 Soy beans 菽

 2 chi 4 cun

 3/10 cun

 Husked grain
 (millet)米

 1 chi 6 cun

 1/5 cun

 47 Peng Hao (2012, 199-201) endorses this interpretation, and this is a key point where our explanations

 of the measuring units used for grains diverge. In fact, the weights he believes these statements refer to

 are not coherent. On p. 200, he suggests at the same time that the expression in Text 14 refers to the

 quantity of unhusked millet corresponding to a weight of the plant with stalks and leaves (he establishes

 that heshu 禾黍 refers to this on p. 195) and also that the weight is that of the unhusked grain (1 dan
 would be the weight of 2 chi 7 cun or 16 dou 2/3 dou of unhusked millet). However, on p. 196, he showed

 these weights were different (a weight of 1 dan of harvested plant yields 16 dou 2/3 dou of unhusked
 millet, after deletion of stalks and leaves). As a result, Peng is compelled to conclude that the similar

 clauses found in The Nine Chapters either derive from compilers' mistakes or refer to artificial problems.
 Further, he is compelled to think that the commentaries on The Nine Chapters also made the same
 mistake. In the interpretation we suggest, all these sources are perfectly clear and coherent.

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 23

 Not only is the shape of the statement quite similar, but also the numerical values
 are basically the same. If we observe the volume associated with one hu of
 unhusked grain (which we again interpret as millet), we find it is exactly the same as

 that quoted in the problem of Mathematics (Text 14). In fact, the same relationship

 between this amount of volume and 1 dan is also quoted in a problem in the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures (Peng Hao 2001, slips 146-147, 105-106). We thus have
 quite a strong congruence between all mathematical documents with respect to

 another feature related to grains: Not only do we have the same type of clauses in

 the three books, linking volumes and the largest measuring unit for capacity, but

 also the same actual numerical value. Note, however, that the value provided for

 soybeans in The Nine Chapters, which, for reasons explained above, should be the

 same as that for barley, presents a slight difference when compared to the clause

 contained in Mathematics (Text 13). The fraction does not appear in Mathematics, a
 fact that awaits further research.

 However, the most striking element of correspondence lies elsewhere. Again, for

 the name of the highest-order measuring unit of capacity, we have different volumes
 associated with it, depending on the grain dealt with. This is precisely the
 phenomenon underlined above on the basis of the evidence provided by
 Mathematics. Despite the fact that the name of the measuring unit for capacity
 was changed between the third century B.C.E. and the moment when The Nine
 Chapters was compiled, we encounter the same striking use of this name.
 Supposedly, according to the context, the volume of a measuring unit for capacity

 differed depending on the grain measured.

 Note that we are thus facing a phenomenon relating to the highest-order
 measuring unit of capacity and the measurement of grain that persisted for more

 than four centuries. Moreover, the recurrence of the phenomenon in an excavated
 document as well as a source handed down by the written tradition helps us to
 dismiss the easy interpretation that this is due to mistakes made by scribes who did

 not understand what they were writing.

 The present article offers a solution to this puzzle by establishing a third meaning

 for the term dan—and accordingly, a second meaning for the term hu.48

 48 Zou Dahai (2009,513-515) is the publication that went farthest in the direction explored in this article.

 As we suggest here, Zou Dahai understood that in addition to being a measuring unit for weight and

 capacity, dan had a third meaning in relation to the measurement of cereals and on the basis of capacity.

 However, he did not address the question of the meaning of this measuring unit. Nor did he establish the

 link with the similar phenomenon related to hu. Further, Zou Dahai rightly perceived that a state of

 husked millet and husked rice allowed this third meaning of dan to correspond with the capacity amount

 of 1 dan，without, however, bringing to light the specific part played by "standard husked grain" in

 structuring the system of grains (see below). Zou seems also not to understand the use of this measuring

 unit as we do for states of grain finer than the "standard husked grain." Finally, because Zou treats volume

 and capacity together, he did not address the question of the part played by volume, as opposed to

 capacity, in the statement of norms relating to grains. Various clues indicate that the management of grain
 in early imperial China made use of distinct types of measuring units in various instances. Zou Dahai
 seems to think that capacity measurement played a central role, a point we question below.

 姿 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 24 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 dan”/“large dan”

 1.4 The problem with dan (or hu) and its resonance with the enigma of “small

 The phenomena described revealed a complex use of measuring units called dan，
 which is reflected in mathematical sources. Such a conclusion recalls a problem

 related to documents of the practice that has been discussed in many publications
 since the 1950s and is still not satisfactorily solved. Indeed, administrative
 accounting books were found in the northwestern part of China, at 居延 Juyan and

 敦煌 Dunhuang. Most of them date from the Western Han dynasty, although some

 probably date from Wang Mang's time or the Eastern Han dynasty. That is to say,

 these documents were produced during a time period that partially overlapped with
 the period during which the mathematical documents discussed above were
 produced. Finally, these documents were found in a desert area, at that time at the

 margins of the Chinese empire.

 The key point for us is the nature of the unsolved problem these documents

 raised, since it relates precisely to measuring units called dan. In these documents,

 one regularly finds not only dan，in relation to measures of capacity, but also “小七！

 xiao dan small dan” and “大石 da dan large dan,’ that is, different types of dan.
 However, no agreement has been reached on the meaning and nature of these

 measuring units, or regarding how they were used. The clarification on dan that this
 article offers on the basis of the earliest extant mathematical documents in China

 also helps us to elucidate this other puzzle.

 Before we present our solution to the problems outlined above, let us recapitulate

 the data and information collected about the measurement of grain in the various

 documents we have mentioned, mainly mathematical writings. We have emphasized

 several times that on the topic of grain, the three mathematical works referred to
 displayed strong correspondences. In our summary, we shall emphasize similarities
 and differences.

 We have listed several types of data, and several kinds of statements related to grains.

 First, we have seen that except for the case of Mathematics, mathematical books

 like the Book of Mathematical Procedures and The Nine Chapters contain texts
 stating numerical values expressing equivalences between different types and states

 of grain. The two books deal with the same list of grains, although they do not

 mention the same variety of states for these grains.'

 i.49 Moreover, as a whole, the

 numerical values state the same relationship between the types and states of grain
 that are common to both books. However, the nature of the quantities used to

 express these equivalences, as well as the structure of the texts in which they occur,

 differ depending on the book they appear in.

 Second, we have discussed the fact that our three mathematical writings contain

 sets of rules of three to compute equivalent amounts of different types and states of

 grain, according to the standards formulated in the texts just mentioned. Despite
 differences between the three books concerning the way the rules of three were

 49 Many states of the grain that appear in the table contained in The Nine Chapters (Text 4) are not
 mentioned in the Book of Mathematical Procedures. On the other hand, the state of "highly refined rice
 hui can mi" seems not to occur in The Nine Chapters.

 自 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 25

 formulated, a point we leave for another article, the procedures, and the numerical
 values they use are basically the same. Moreover, the values used in the rules of

 three are of the same type.

 Third, we have seen that Mathematics was the sole book to offer clauses of the

 type "Twenty-seven dou six sheng of unhusked rice has a weight of one dan，” (Text
 12) which allow conversion of a measurement of grain using measuring units of

 capacity into measuring units of weight. However, we should add that in slips 48

 and 49 of the Book of Mathematical Procedures (Peng Hao 2001, 61), apparently a

 mixture of measuring units of weight and measuring units of capacity is used to

 express quantities of unhusked grain. By contrast, The Nine Chapters do not seem to

 refer to the use of weight measuring units to assess quantities of grain.

 Fourth, it appears that all three books provide clauses of the same type, and generally

 with identical numerical values, for transforming an amount of grain expressed by

 means of measuring units of volumes into what appeared to be measuring units for

 capacity. The key example for this is the statement that we find in Mathematics: “one dan

 of unhusked grain (millet) occupies two chi seven curi' (Text 14). Note that the
 numerous rules of three contained in our three mathematical books are all devoted to the

 computation of equivalences between grains, but that none relates to the other types of

 conversion (between weight and capacity, or between volume and what seems to be

 capacity) for which the mathematical books provide standards.

 Altogether, the evidence gathered shows that different types of measuring units
 (weight, volume, capacity...) were used to assess amounts of grain. Why did
 actors need to use such a variety of measuring units? In which phase of the
 management of grains was each of these measuring units used? Do the various
 mathematical books echo the same practice of grain management or not? Which

 features of the management of grains are the same and which could be different?

 Given that we do not have the answer to these questions yet, we must be careful
 in using the evidence the books provide. In relation to the use of weight
 measuring units, does the difference between Mathematics and the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures, on the one hand, and The Nine Chapters on the other,
 reflect another way of handling grain or the fact that the books are of different

 types? How do the various books relate to the evidence provided in documents of
 practice? Which light do they shed on the management of grains and the
 mathematical knowledge required to carry out the tasks it involved? Finally, in
 addition to the complexity of the measuring units used, we have revealed another
 type of complexity, which relates to the measuring units called dan and later hu.
 According to our sources, these units are affected by very strange phenomena
 that need to be explained. This is the task to which we now turn.

 2 First decoding of the table "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains"

 The key piece of evidence for clarifying the question of hu comes from The Nine
 Chapters. It is associated with a set of problems (problems 23-25 in chapter 5)
 which play an important role in our argument. Let us thus first quote them:

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 26

 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 (15) “今有委粟平地，下周一十ニ丈，高ニ丈，問積及爲粟幾何。

 荅日：

 積八千尺。（...commentary...)
 爲粟ニ千九百六十ニ斛二十七分斛之二十六。（...commentary...)
 今有委菽依垣，下周三丈，高七尺，問積及爲菽各幾何。
 荅日：

 積三诌五十尺。（...commentary...)
 爲菽ー百四十四斛二百四十三分斛之八。（.• .commentary...)
 今有委米依垣内角，下周八尺，高五尺問積及爲米各幾何。

 荅日：

 積三十五尺九分尺之五。（...commentary...)
 爲米ニ“!一^斛七百二十九分斛之六百九i^一、(...commentary...)

 Suppose there is unhusked grain (millet) piled upon a flat ground (so to make a

 SOLID WHOSE) LOWER CIRCUMFERENCE IS TWELVE ZHANG AND WHOSE HEIGHT IS TWO ZHANG.

 One asks how much the volume is and how much unhusked grain (millet) it makes.

 Answer:

 The volume is eight thousand chi.

 It makes, in unhusked grain (millet), two thousand nine hundred sixty

 two HU TWENTY-SIX TWENTY-SEVENTHS OF A HU.

 Suppose there is a heap of soy beans piled up against a wall (so as to make a solid

 WHOSE) LOWER CIRCUMFERENCE50 IS THREE ZHANG AND WHOSE HEIGHT IS SEVEN CHI. ONE

 ASKS, RESPECTIVELY, HOW MUCH THE VOLUME IS AND HOW MUCH SOY BEANS IT MAKES.

 Answer:

 The volume is three hundred fifty chi.

 It makes, in soy beans, one hundred forty-four HU eight two hundred

 FORTY-THIRDS OF A HU.

 Suppose there is a heap of husked grain (millet) piled up against the corner

 OF A WALL (so AS TO MAKE A SOLID WHOSE) LOWER CIRCUMFERENCE51 IS EIGHT CHI

 AND WHOSE HEIGHT IS FIVE CHI. ONE ASKS, RESPECTIVELY, HOW MUCH THE VOLUME IS

 AND HOW MUCH HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) IT MAKES.

 Answer:

 The volume is thirty-five: chi five ninths of a chi.

 It makes, in husked grain (millet), twenty-one HU six hundred ninety-one

 SEVEN HUNDRED TWENTY-NINTHS OF A 肌’’52

 50 As the commentator explains later on, the circumference here designates the half-circumference,

 which is the lower dimension of the heap, which has the shape of a half-cone.

 51 As the commentator explains later on, the circumference here designates a quarter of the circumference of

 a cone. It is the lower dimension of the heap, which now has the shape of a quarter of a cone.

 52 A critical edition with annotations can be found in (Chemla and Guo Shuchun 2004, 446-453). Here,

 we simply summarize the main point of the argument, since it provides a foundation for the following part

 of the article. See the discussion in relation to the problem of hu in K. Chemla, introduction to chapter 2,
 in (Chemla and Guo Shuchun 2004, 201-205).

 Ô Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 27

 These three problems each deal with grain piled up in such a way that the heap

 constitutes, respectively, a cone, half a cone, or a quarter of a cone. The grain used for

 each problem differs, which is the important point here. Note first that the lengths of two

 dimensions of the solid created are given, namely the lower circumference and the

 height. They are naturally expressed using measuring units for length. This illustrates

 how measuring units for length can be used to assess an amount of grain. The procedure

 for solving the first part of the problems, namely that yielding the volume of the heap,

 enters these two data into the algorithm, given earlier in The Nine Chapters，that

 computes the volume of a cone. We do not need to look at that part of the procedure

 except to emphasize the fact that in the end, the amount of grain is measured using

 measuring units of volume, as explained above. Let us summarize the data and first result

 of each problem in the following table.

 Problem Problem 5.23 Problem 5.24 Problem 5.25

 Grain Unhusked grain (millet)粟 Soy beans 菽 husked grain (millet)米

 Shape of the Pile Cone A half-cone A quarter cone

 Circumference and height allow determining the volume in chi

 Amount of Volume 8,000 chi 350 chi 35 chi 5/9 chi

 Capacity in hu 2,962 hu 26/27 hu 144 hu 8/243 hu 21 hu 691/729 hu

 It is in this context, and at this point, that the text of The Nine Chapters mentions the

 clauses explaining how to transform measuring units of volume into hu，which is

 precisely the task to be carried out in the second part of each of the solutions to the

 respective problems. Let us quote these clauses, which we already mentioned above,

 adding Liu Hui's commentary on them. They read as follows:

 (16) “程粟ー斛積ニ尺七寸；ニ尺七寸者，諝方一尺•深ニ尺七寸，凡積ニ千七百

 寸•其米ー斛積一尺六寸五分寸之ー；六百こ+寸。其菽、

 答、麻、麥ー斛皆ニ尺四寸十分寸之三。こ千a百三十寸.

 One hu of unhusked grain (millet)，by regulation, has a volume of two chi seven

 cun. Two chi seven cun means a parallelepiped with a square base and a side of

 one chi and a depth of two chi seven curt, making the total volume two thousand seven

 hundred cun. One //t/of the husked grain (millet), by regulation, has a volume of

 one cm six cwvone-fifth of a cun, which means a volume of one thousand six hundred

 twenty cun. One huof soy, mung, hemp beans and barley, by regulation, are all two

 cm four cun three tenths of a cun, which means a volume of two thousand four

 hundred thirty cun." (Chemla and Guo Shuchun 2004,450-453)

 Our discussion of such clauses, above, referred to the problem with understanding hu

 as â measuring unit for capacity. If hu were the largest measuring unit for capacity here,
 how could we account for the fact that the associated volume varies in relation to the kind

 of grain measured, as was made clear above, using the following table?

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 28 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Problem 5.23

 Problem 5.24

 Problem 5.25

 Unhusked grain
 (millet)粟

 Soy beans 菽

 Husked grain
 (millet)米

 The volume of 1

 2 chi 7 cun

 2 chi 4 cun 3/10 cun

 1 chi 6 cun 1/5 cun

 Grain

 斛 hu is

 In any event, the second part of the solution to each of the problems 5.23 to 5.25

 requires that the volume of the heap be divided by the volume associated with the hu

 linked to the grain dealt with, in order to yield the number of hu stated in the answer. The

 way the results are given thus implies that the different volumes associated with the hu

 in relation to the different grains are put into play.

 The issue becomes even more complex when we notice that in other contexts, the

 measuring unit hu is used in a completely different way, even though exactly the same

 types of grain are involved. To make this point, it suffices to mention the following

 problem, in which the answers and the procedure make clear that the same measuring

 unit for capacity hu, that is, a hu with the same volume throughout, is used to express

 measurements for each of these grains. Problem 6 of chapter 6 reads as follows:

 (17) “今有人當稟粟ニ斛倉無粟，欲與米一、菽ニ，以當所稟粟問各幾

 何。

 荅日：

 米五斗一升七分升之三，
 菽ー斛ニ升七分升之六。

 Suppose a person must grant two hu of unhusked grain (millet). Since in the

 STATE GRANARY, THERE IS NO UNHUSKED GRAIN (MILLET), HE WANTS TO GRANT

 HUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) AND SOY BEANS IN A PROPORTION OF ONE TO TWO IN SUCH A

 WAY THAT THIS AMOUNTS TO THE UNHUSKED GRAIN (MILLET) THAT SHOULD BE

 GRANTED. ONE ASKS HOW MUCH FROM EACH (THE PERSON GRANTS).

 Answer:

 Five dou one sheng three-sevenths of a sheng of husked grain (millet);
 One hu two sheng six sevenths sheng of soy beans." (Chemla and Guo

 Shuchun 2004, 506-507)

 After the procedure presented in The Nine Chapters, the commentary written under Li

 Chunfeng’ s supervision explains the reasons why that procedure is correct. In particular,

 it shows that the numerical values associated with unhusked grain (millet), husked grain

 (millet), and soy beans in "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains 粟米之法，，

 (Text 4) were used to compute equivalences between the various grains and complete the

 solution of the problem.

 What makes the difference between these two uses of hu? Why is it that in some

 contexts, the volume associated with the hu varies depending on the grain and, in

 others, it does not? To get insight into the solution to these puzzles, we must rely on

 two sets of documents. One of these is Liu Hui's commentary, completed in 263, in

 particular the commentary on Text 16. The other set consists of the chapters
 "Monograph on Pitch Pipes and the Calendar" that the second commentator, Li

 必 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 29

 Chunfeng, composed for insertion in the History of the Jin and the History of the Sui，
 respectively. In these monographs, Li Chunfeng quotes Liu Hui's commentary
 precisely on topics related to grains and provides us with important pieces of
 evidence. On this basis, we can establish that the hu mentioned in problems 5.23 to
 5.25 are each associated with a standard vessel (Liu Hui uses the term 器 qï) also
 called hu. In other words, each type of grain or each state of a grain has a vessel

 associated with it whose capacity is expressed as "one hu,’，and whose volume is

 given by the clauses quoted in Text 16 from The Nine Chapters.

 The key to this use of hu is given by Li Chunfeng, when in the context of the
 "Monographs on Pitch Pipes and Calendar," that is, in the context of official

 historical writing on systems of measuring units and their history, he comments on

 these different types of hu mentioned in The Nine Chapters. Let us note in passing

 that this fact alone shows that Li Chunfeng believes the evidence provided by The

 Nine Chapters on these hu，and Liu Hui's interpretation of them actually constitutes

 reliable historical information. This highlights that Li Chunfeng regards these two

 earlier mathematical writings as closely related to official institutions.

 In the context of the “Monographs on Pitch Pipes and the Calendar," Li
 Chunfeng states the following about this use of hu: "(These hu) cause the values to

 be at the same level/be equal, but do not equalize the amount of cun of the volumes
 of these vessels. (...)使價泰而不等其器と積寸也。”53 In other words, according
 to Li Chunfeng's explanation, when using hu in this way, one hu of a given grain

 measured with the vessel associated with this grain has the same value, whichever

 grain is considered. This is what lies behind the variability of the unit Am 斛：In these

 contexts, and in fact in these contexts only in the cited passages in The Nine
 Chapters, hu is a unit of value, and the different volumes of grain corresponding to â
 hu，depending on the grain considered, correspond to the same value. Note the

 correlation between value and volumes in Li Chunfeng's statement, which precisely
 echoes the relation between value and volumes stated by the clauses inserted in Text

 16. We have thus established a second meaning of hu as a measuring unit: As The
 Nine Chapters evidences, the term hu is not only used as a measuring unit for
 capacity, but also refers to a measuring unit for value.

 Our first conclusion is thus that the clauses quoted above, in Text 16, express the
 volume of â given type of grain or a given state of grain that is needed to make a
 unit of value hu. Now, we have seen that such clauses also occur in Mathematics

 (see texts 13 and 14). For instance, Mathematics has the following statement, quoted
 above: "One dan of unhusked grain (millet) occupying two chi seven cun."
 Moreover, we mentioned that the Book of Mathematical Procedures also uses â

 clause of this type, with exactly the same value (slip 146).

 In these other cases, the clauses link what seems to be the largest measure of
 capacity, namely, in these other contexts, dan, and a volume. Further, different

 clauses, for different types or states of grain, provide different volumes for the dan.

 We can thus assume that the continuity in the type of statement as well as the

 53 Our emphasis. In fact, we could interpret the term 價 as "price" as well as "value." However, we
 believe that the interpretation as “value” is here more accurate (Fang Xuanling et al.房玄龄等1973,492,
 Wei Zheng et al.魏徵等1973, 409).

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 30 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 continuity in the amount across all mathematical sources is most probably correlated

 with continuity in meaning and in practice. If true, this would indicate that the same

 phenomenon affected dan from the Qin dynasty onward. In other words, dan was

 not only the name of a measuring unit for weight and capacity, but also for value.

 We provide evidence below to support this assumption. We shall see how such an

 interpretation of dan reveals the strong coherence of the system it enables us to

 perceive. Note, for the moment, that if these clauses were defining units of value,

 this would easily explain the stability in the quantities that occur in these statements.

 To conclude on this use of the measurement unit hu 斛(and its precursor 石 dan),

 we have seen that in such contexts as those of problems 5.23 to 5.25 (respectively,
 the related problems from the Book of Mathematical Procedures and from
 Mathematics), actors wanted I hu M (resp.,1 dan 石）of a given grain to
 correspond to the same value whatever the grain under consideration. This is what

 the unit hu measures in this context, and it corresponds to a system of vessels一at

 least, this is what The Nine Chapters seems to indicate and how its commentators

 interpreted its text.

 In this case, the determination of amounts of grain having the same value could

 be carried out by mere manipulation of the vessels. This raises two sets of questions.

 First, were there similar vessels at the time this passage of The Nine Chapters was

 written? Were there similar systems of vessels at the time the Book of Mathematical
 Procedures and Mathematics were composed? We know that vessels that could
 fulfill these criteria were found. However, we have not yet been able to do research
 on them to establish this point. Secondly, which grain in The Nine Chapters

 corresponded to the hu as the regular measure of capacity? The first set of questions

 is still open. In what follows, we shall suggest an answer to the second.

 We have reached the essential point. In fact, in order to determine amounts of

 different types of grain or different states of these grains having the same value, one

 could choose between three distinct practices for which The Nine Chapters provides
 pieces of evidence. First, for each type or each state of the grains involved, one

 could use the vessel specifically associated with it. Taking the same number of times

 the amount of grain corresponding to the capacity of the vessel associated with a

 given grain, and repeating the operation for the different grains each time with the

 appropriate vessel, yields amounts of grain having the same value. In this context,

 the equivalent amounts of grain yielded for these different grains have different
 volumes.

 Alternatively, for each of the grain types, one could convert the given value,

 expressed using hu as a measuring unit of value, into the volume corresponding to it.

 To do this, one could simply use clauses of the type evidenced in Text 16. One thus

 determines the volume corresponding to a given value for each grain and measures

 these amounts for each of these grains using volume measurement. Again, in this
 case, the volumes differ, but the value is the same.

 Finally, and this is what is shown in problem 6.6 (Text 17), one could use hu as a

 measuring unit for capacity and thus only use a single vessel for all grains. In this

 context, the same amount of hu refers to the same volume of the various grains dealt
 with. However, since these same volumes do not have the same value, to determine

 amounts of grain with the same value one picks out the numbers related to the grains

 を! Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 31

 dealt with from the table "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains” (Text 4).

 Using rules of three of the type evidenced in our three mathematical books (see texts

 6, 8,10,11),one determines the amount of any type or state of grain equivalent to a
 given amount of any other type or state of grain, all expressed with capacity
 measuring units. The key reason why this alternative method works in the same way
 as the two others mentioned above is that the numbers inserted in the table "Norms/

 divisors for unhusked and husked grains" have the same ratio as the ratio between

 the volumes provided by the clauses. To illustrate this claim, let us give the example

 of unhusked and coarsely husked millet. In Text 16 from The Nine Chapters, and in
 Liu Hui's commentary, the volumes attached to these two states of grain are,
 respectively, "2,700 cun'' and “1,620 cwn," and their ratio is the same as 50 and 30,
 as shown in the table. This last remark highlights the essential connection between

 clauses of the type listed in Text 16 and the table "Norms/divisors for unhusked and

 husked grains," both found in The Nine Chapters. Before we conclude what this

 reveals with respect to the table, let us refer to a piece of evidence showing that the

 connection just established was meaningful for actors in early China.

 In fact, the scholar Zheng Xuan 鄭玄（127-200) associates the title of the table,

 "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains 粟米之法，” with a relationship of

 the type listed in Text 16. This fact appears clearly in Zheng Xuan's commentary on

 the vase fu if mentioned in the canonical work called the Rites of the Zhou. In this
 book, the fu is said to have a capacity of 6 dou and 4 sheng, whereas in the
 Commentary by Master Zuo, it is said to have a volume of 1,000 cun.54 It is by

 relying on what he calls "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains" that

 Zheng Xuan states the amount expressed in capacity by which these two numerical

 values fail to correspond to each other. When the subcommentator Jia Gongyan 賈

 公彥 accounts for the result stated by Zheng Xuan, he explicitly states that the

 correspondence thereby indicated by Zheng Xuan relates one dan to 1,620 curt. We

 have seen earlier that this was precisely the clause corresponding to coarsely husked

 grain (millet) in The Nine Chapters. What is important for us is that Zheng Xuan’ s
 use of the expression "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains 粟米之法’’

 to refer to such relations confirms the reading we propose for the table.55

 To conclude on The Nine Chapters, problems 5.23 to 5.25 provide evidence of a

 system of vessels, each measuring a unit of value hu for a specific grain. As a whole,

 this system embodies the fact that hu is a measuring unit of value. On the other

 hand, The Nine Chapters testifies to a system of rules of three (texts 5, 6,17), which

 reflects the numbers attached to each type of grain in the table "Norms/divisors for

 unhusked and husked grains." These two facts indicate the meaning of the table: It

 assembles numbers that can be used to express any ratio between the volumes of the

 various measuring units for value called hu associated with the different grains. The

 table is thus intimately linked to the concept of value introduced by Li Chunfeng in

 the "Monograph on pitch-pipes and the calendar." Note that these ratios between

 54 On the history of these two canonical books, compare (Boltz 1993, Cheng 程艾藍1993).

 55 On the analysis of Jia Gongyan's computation in the context of the subcommentary on Zheng Xuan's
 commentary on the Rites of Zhou, see Zhu Yiwen, forthcoming. We are grateful to Zhu Yiwen for
 drawing our attention to this piece of evidence. We shall see below that in the case of "coarsely husked
 millet," the unit of capacity hu coincides with the unit of value hu.

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 32 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 volumes of the same value generally remain stable between the time when
 Mathematics was composed and the time when The Nine Chapters was compiled.56

 Further, note that in the table "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains,"

 these relationships are expressed by means of abstract "integers."

 We have thus proved, on the basis of the evidence provided by The Nine

 Chapters and its commentators, that the measuring unit hu，the use of which these

 writings testify to, was both a measuring unit for capacity and a measuring unit for
 value. How did actors differentiate between the two uses when they read the
 character hu in a document? And how did they decide which hu should be used in

 each different context? These are some of the questions that await further research.

 We shall now proceed to establish that the same conclusion holds true for dan in the

 earlier time period.

 dan”，large dan”

 3 First decoding of the “Regulation for cereal plants" and the issue of “small

 We shall now analyze in greater detail the section entitled "Regulation for cereal

 plants.” The Book of Mathematical Procedures shares this text with the "Granary

 statutes” from Qin statutes and edicts (Text 7). Our attention will be mainly focused

 on the meaning of the measuring units that appear in the text.

 Slips 88 and 89 from the Book of Mathematical Procedures begin as follows:

 "The regulation says: one dan of broomcorn millet (that is, the cereal just harvested)
 makes ..." and “The regulation says: One dan of paddy stalks (that is, cereal just

 harvested) makes..." Given the state of the plants designated by the terms, there is
 no doubt that the dan occurring in these statements refers to a measuring unit of
 weight. This point was emphasized by Peng Hao. All present-day authors agree on

 it. Moreover, as all historians noted, the relevant entries of the dictionary Shuowen

 jiezi，completed around 100 by Xu Shen 許'填，confirm this interpretation. It is worth

 noting that the parallel part played by weight measuring units in the two series
 deriving from millet and rice is made clear in the structure of the text of the statute

 as quoted in the Book of Mathematical Procedures. However, the damaged version
 kept in the copy of the Qin statutes buried in tomb 11 at Shuihudi concealed this

 parallel.

 After these initial statements, measuring units for capacity, mainly the dou，
 clearly occur. Naturally, the dan also occurs. However, on the basis of the

 explanations above, we have reason to be careful about the interpretation of this

 character. Note, in particular, that every time the measuring unit dou occurs in Text

 7, only the dou is used, even for quantities higher than 10 dou, i.e., for quantities for

 which the dan could be used. For example, the quantity "sixteen dou two-thirds of a

 dou’' is not expressed as "one dan six dou two-thirds of a dou:’ However, we quoted
 earlier another passage from a Qin statute in which both dan and dou are used to

 56 More precisely, the values used in the rules of three have exactly the same ratio in all the books.

 However, as we stressed above, the volume that Mathematics associates with one dan of barley slightly

 differs from the one The Nine Chapters mentions.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 33

 express an amount of capacity: “Small bond-women and grain-pounders who are

 working receive a ration of millet grain of one dan two and a half dou per month.”
 Moreover, we encounter a similar phenomenon in the Book of Mathematical
 Procedures (slip 76, Peng Hao 2001, 74.)

 As we emphasized above, Text 7 begins with two sequences of processing of

 grain starting, respectively, with "millet 禾黍’’ and “paddy 稻禾.’’ For each of these

 kinds of grain, in the related slip, there is a state of the grain called "unhusked grain

 su 粟，” which refers to the grain obtained through threshing. In Text 9 from the

 Book of Mathematical Procedures，we saw that this state of "unhusked grain su 粟”

 for the two types of grain (millet and paddy) occurs in the rules of three. However,
 we also emphasized that when the character su occurs alone, it generally refers to

 this state of the grain for millet.

 After "unhusked grain，” several other states are mentioned in slips 88 and 89.

 The question we want to address now is: What is the meaning of the equivalences

 presented in Text 7?

 In slips 88 and 89, the same phenomenon occurs: the state of the grain that is listed
 following "unhusked grain，” namely, “(coarsely) husked grain," is constantly
 associated with 1 dan (once formulated as 10 dou). Note that this state is followed by

 other states of further refined husking. This means there is one degree of husking for

 which the related measure is precisely 1 dan，and this holds true in both slips. For

 both slips, whether we deal with millet or paddy, there is a state of the grain whose

 associated measure is 1 dan，in relation to the fact that the harvested amount of plants

 from which it derives weighed 1 dan—the latter dan being a weight measuring unit.57
 We shall return to this remark. For the moment, let us concentrate on the overall

 meaning of the table.

 For millet, the ratio between 1 dan of this state, namely (coarsely) husked grain,

 and the 16 dou 2/3 dou of unhusked grain is exactly the same as the ratio recorded for

 these two states of the grain in the table in The Nine Chapters (Text 4). In all these
 cases, it is 3 to 5. The same ratio is also found in all the rules of three related to these

 two states of millet. We mentioned earlier that both Mathematics and the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures give the following clause to state dan in relation to
 measuring units for volume for unhusked millet: “One dan of unhusked grain (millet)

 occupying two chi seven cun" (Text 14). We have seen that the ratio between this

 volume and that associated with husked grain was also 5 to 3 in The Nine Chapters.

 This was a key element for establishing that hu was a measuring unit of value.

 An analysis of Text 7 and other documents with the help of measuring units of

 volume now proves essential. Let us thus first consider the evidence we have about

 how the official measuring units for capacity were related to amounts of volume. In

 the fourth century before the Common Era, the minister of the State of Qin, Shang

 Yang, carried out key reforms in relation to war and agriculture.58 One of the

 important measures attached to the latter domain, and more particularly to the tax

 system and the management of grains, was the reform of measuring units. Part of the

 Peng Hao (2012,196) noticed the relationship between these two data. He emphasized the simplicity

 in the management of grains that such a relationship entailed.

 58 On Shang Yang, see, for instance, (Vandermeersch 1965), in particular chapter 1.

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 34 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 reform consisted in instituting a bronze vessel as standard for one of the central

 measuring units for capacity: the sheng (one tenth of the dou and one hundredth of

 the dan). An example of the standard, called "Shang Yang's parallelepipedic sheng
 商戟方升，”59 is now kept in Shanghai museum 上海博物館.It bears an inscription
 from Shang Yang's time which indicates the date 344 B.C.E., which is crucial for

 our purpose. The inscription contains the following statement about the measure
 ment of the vessel:“(…)鞅爰積十六尊(寸)五分尊(寸)壹為升[Shang] Yang
 took the volume of sixteen cun (one) fifth of a cun as a sheng.” The measurement of

 the volume is expressed using the same principle as that explained above, namely, it
 utilizes measuring units of length. Moreover, it uses fractions. Using a decimal

 representation of the amount of cun yields a volume of 16.2 cun as a sheng. The

 corresponding unit of capacity dan is accordingly related to the volume 1,620 cun.

 Note that this numerical value for the volume corresponds to that associated with

 coarsely husked grain in The Nine Chapters, in which it is expressed as “one chi six

 cun one-fifth of a cun" (Text 16), i.e., in a way quite close to the content of the

 inscription quoted above. We shall return to this remark below. More than a century

 later, during the Qin dynasty, another inscription was added to the base of Shang

 Yang's parallelepiped sheng. It refers to the standardization of measuring units for

 weights and measures carried out by the first emperor, Qin Shihuang, after the

 unification of the Chinese empire. This addition of an official inscription indicates

 that the Qin rule continued using the same measuring standard for the sheng. More

 than two centuries later, Wang Mang, the emperor who attempted to overthrow the

 Han dynasty and enacted â new system of measuring units, hâd a bronze measuring

 vessel made to embody the system of measurement units for capacity. This vessel,

 called by Liu Hui in 263 and by later scholars "Wang Mang's bronze hu，” was thus
 named after the largest measuring unit for capacity, at that time hu. It also bore a

 complex inscription, discussed through the following centuries by scholars versed in

 mathematics.60 Only one point of this inscription is of interest to us here, namely,

 the statement of the relationship between the hu and measuring units for volumes.
 The corresponding statement reads: “律嘉量斛方尺而圜其外，庞旁九釐五毫，冥
 (冪)百六十ニ寸，深尺，積千六百二十寸，容十斗。The most common standard
 capacity vessel hu, enacted by edict, has a (fictitious) square of side one chi (inside)
 and a circle outside of it. The distance between the interior and the exterior61 is 9 li

 5 hao. The area is 162 cun, the depth 1 chi, the volume 1,620 cun, the capacity
 (rong)10 dou:’62

 59 For a discussion of Shang Yang's vessel with a photograph of the vessel and its inscriptions, as well as

 a transcription of the inscribed text, see (Qiu Guangming etal. 2001, 165-166).

 60 See the translation and annotation of passages in (Chemla and Guo Shuchun 2004,182-185,452-453,
 456-457).

 61 This translates the term tiaopang, which commentators interpreted as the distance between the inner

 circumference of the vessel and the vertices of the fictitious square inscribed in its center (‘‘what exceeds/

 goes beyond on the side"). Note that the hao is about 0.02 mm, which implies that the order of magnitude
 of accuracy probably has no relation to the actual design of the vessel.

 62 For a photograph of the vessel and a discussion of its inscription, see (Qiu Guangming etal. 2001,221
 222). We return below to the term rong used here to designate the capacity.

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 35

 We see that again the volume attached to the largest measuring unit of capacity is

 still 1,620 curt, despite the fact that its name was changed to hu. Finally, this is also,

 as we have seen, the numerical value that Zheng Xuan uses in his commentary on

 the Rites of Zhou to connect the measuring unit of capacity and those of volumes.

 On this basis, we can assume that the relationship has remained unchanged over the

 whole period we consider. In particular, it held true at the time when the statute

 whose interpretation we are discussing was used in the Qin statutes or in the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures. Let us now use this numerical value to analyze the

 volumes corresponding to some of the capacities mentioned in Text 7. We show the
 results of the analysis by replacing some of the capacity measurements in the
 translation by the corresponding volumes:

 (7’） The regulation says: one dan (unit of weight) of broomcorn millet (that is, the

 cereal just harvested) makes 2,700 cun of unhusked grain (millet). Husking

 this makes one dan (1,620 cun) of coarsely husked grain (millet) (li mi) (...)
 The regulation says: 2,430 cun of barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans is
 one dan (...)63

 This conversion brings to light several important features of the text.

 First, we see that the measures of capacity attached to each of the grains we kept
 from the text are related to amounts of volumes we know quite well and have

 already encountered above, some in the Book of Mathematical Procedures, some in

 Mathematics, and all in The Nine Chapters. These amounts of volumes are precisely
 those with which units of value for the same grains are defined in The Nine
 Chapters.

 Second, whether we look at the ratios between the volumes, or between the

 related capacities, for the grains underlined, these ratios are the same as those
 involved in the rules of three inserted in all the three books that enable the

 determination of equivalent amounts of grain. In fact, if we now rely on the text as a

 whole and focus on the ratios between the capacity measures it mentions for most of

 the types of grain and most of the states of grain included, these ratios do indeed

 reproduce the ratios used in the related rules of three.64 It is thus probable that in the

 same way as "Norms/Divisors for unhusked and husked grains" (Text 4) provided
 numbers whose ratios reproduced the ratios between the volumes of the hu as

 63 Peng Hao (2012,199一200, 201) also uses the tool provided by volumes to analyze the text. In Peng
 Hao (2013, 30-01-2013, at 10:42)，he comes back to this point. For this, in both publications, he relies on
 Shang Yang's parallelepipedic sheng. However, our conclusions are different. With respect to our
 conclusions, see the explanations above and below. Peng Hao, for his part, uses the relationship between

 the first measuring unit for weight dan and the corresponding volume of unhusked grain to propose a

 hypothesis: In his view, unhusked grain was the foundation from which the whole system of grain was

 derived on the basis of determining conversions between unhusked grain and all the other grains and
 states of grain. One key difference, as will emerge below, is that he does not establish any connection
 between Shang Yang's parallelepipedic sheng and coarsely husked grain.

 64 This statement is generally true, with the exceptions mentioned earlier. First, the state the text calls zuo

 mi (finely husked grain (millet)) is called bai mi in the rules of three inserted in all three texts. However,

 in The Nine Chapters, the term zuo mi is used to refer to what is in this text called hui mi. Secondly, in fact

 the volume associated with barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans in Mathematics is 2,400 cun and not
 2,430 cun, as it is the case in Text 7 and Text 16 from The Nine Chapters. Finally, for the moment, the

 final statement of Text 7 cannot be explained in these terms.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 36 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 measuring unit of value, Text 7, namely the text shared by the Book of Mathematical

 Procedures and the Qin statutes, expresses, by means of amounts of capacity, the

 ratios between the different volumes associated with each type or each state of grain

 and having the same value.

 Lastly, and most importantly, if, on the basis of the previous discussion, we

 return to a sentence that appeared difficult to understand in Text 7, namely
 "Fifteen dou (unit of capacity) of barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans is
 one dan，” the analysis developed allows us to interpret it quite naturally. It further

 brings to light an essential fact. We mentioned above the problem of interpreting
 this statement, by raising the following question: If dan and dou are both
 measuring units of capacity, the dan being 10 dou, how can one explain that in this
 sentence,15 dou is associated with 1 danl Seen from the viewpoint of the volume

 associated with the 15 dou, the statement becomes "2,430 cm of barley, or soy,
 mung, and hemp beans, is one dan.” This statement is clearly identical, up to some

 details, to the statement with which The Nine Chapters defines the unit of value hu

 for the same grains. From this perspective, we can now suggest two interpretations.

 The first is that in this statement of the Qin statute, dan is a measuring unit of
 value, exactly as we have proved that hu is. This interpretation makes the
 statement crystal clear. Moreover, this conclusion indicates that some of the dan
 that occur in this text must be interpreted as units of value. The alternative
 interpretation is that the statement provides the relationship between unhusked

 barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans, on the one hand, and the related husked

 grains, which would have one dan of capacity and thus a volume of 1,620 cun. In

 this case, the statement would establish an equivalence between two states of the

 grain. It may be the case that some occurrences of barley in Juyan slips refer to an
 opposition between unhusked and husked barley. However, we need more research
 on this topic. If this is confirmed, we would then adopt the latter branch of the
 alternative, which is the least favorable for the argument we want to make that
 here dan means a unit of value. Let us stress that in the latter case, in Text 7, for

 the husked grain here and in the parallel statements, the measure in capacity units

 would constantly be the same as the measure in value units. We shall return to this

 point later. If we opt for the former branch of the alternative, in one occurrence,

 the dan associated with the husked grains in all statements has the meaning of unit
 of value only, and not the double meaning, and could also assume this meaning
 elsewhere in the text.

 Given the inconclusive nature of the argument at this point, let us prove by other

 means that in the earliest manuscripts, dan not only has the meaning of measuring

 unit for weight or capacity, but also for value. To establish this point, we shall first
 return to Text 14, which deals with a question of a granary in the context of

 Mathematics. The outline of the problem provides the dimensions of a parallelepi

 pedic granary. In addition, it makes clear that “one dan of unhusked grain (millet)

 occupies two chi seven cun." On this basis, the problem asks for the volume of the

 granary and the number of dan it contains. The results given make clear that the

 volume is computed by the usual means and expressed in the measuring unit for

 volume chi. The fact that the volume is divided by 2 chi 7 cun to yield the number of

 dan contained excludes the possibility that the dan computed refer to a capacity. We

 姿 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 37

 have seen that if such were the case, the volume should have to be divided by 1 chi

 6 cun 1/5 cun. We have already shown (see note 47) that here dan could not be a

 measuring unit for weight. The amount of dan given as a result can thus only be

 assessing the number of measuring units of value contained in the granary. Note that

 this amount is given in dan and fractions of dan，and thus without using dou or

 sheng. Also, note that the amount is designated by the term rong 容.This term is

 usually interpreted as referring to the capacity. However, in this case, it must refer to

 the amount in terms of value.65 We shall return to this problem later.

 The Book of Mathematical Procedures offers a problem that is similar to this one

 and unambiguously requires that we also interpret the dan occurring there as
 referring to a unit of value. The problem reads as follows:

 (18) “旋粟旋粟高五尺，下周三丈，積百廿(二十)五尺。•ニ尺七寸而一石，為
 粟册(四十)六石廿(二十)七分石之八。其述(術)日:下周自乗，以高ノ146/乗
 之，卅六成一。•大積四千五百尺。/147/66

 Making a cone of unhusked grain (millet). Making a cone of unhusked grain

 (millet) with a height of five chi and a lower circumference of three zhang, the

 volume is one hundred and twenty-five chi, • two chi seven cun making one dan，

 this makes forty-six dan eight twenty-sevenths of a dan. The corresponding

 procedure: the lower circumference being multiplied by itself, with the height/

 146/，one multiplies this, thirty-six generates one (i.e., one divides by thirty-six). •

 The volume of the large (solid)67 is four thousand five hundred chiJl^lT

 Again, the transformation derives from dividing the volume of the cone by 2 chi 7 cun.

 As above, the result expressed in dan assesses the number of units of value in the heap of

 unhusked grain (millet) by counting one such unit for each 2 chi 7 cm.68 Note that all

 these cases are strictly identical to problems 5.23 to 5.25 from The Nine Chapters. They

 all require determining an amount of value on the basis of, and in relation to, a volume.

 They all make use of the statements linking volume and value that occur in all the books.

 Finally, they are clearly all used in the context of the management of granaries. In all these

 cases, whether we are dealing with dan or hu，the meaning of the measuring unit is clearly

 neither weight nor capacity, but can only be value. Note that in all these cases, the use of

 dan as a measuring unit of value is intimately connected to its use as a measuring unit for

 capacity. This fact brings us back to Text 7, which occurs precisely, we recall, among the

 Qin statutes in the "Statutes on granaries."

 65 The same conclusion holds true in The Nine Chapters. If we observe the problem similar to this one,

 which is included in Chapter 5 (problem 5.27), the problem deals with a granary and relates volume and

 measuring units of value. It is again the term rong that designates the amount in measuring units of value,

 this time designated as hu.

 volume of the cone sought.

 66 Peng Hao (2001,105-106). We opt for the interpretation of xuari suggested by Peng Hao in first page note.

 67 This expression refers to the volume of the parallelepiped, which is to be divided by 36 to yield the

 68 This is one of the main points where our interpretation differs from that presented in Peng Hao (2012,
 199-200). In that passage, Peng Hao explains why he believes that these dan must be interpreted as
 measuring units for weight. As we explained above (see note 47), we think this interpretation is not
 feasible. We do not understand how this interpretation fits with Peng Hao’ s interpretation of dan as
 referring to "capacity" in assessing millet (p. 197).

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 38 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Now that we have established that dan was also used as a measuring unit for value at

 the time our manuscripts were composed, one can state the following: Whichever

 branch of the alternative for the sentence discussed above from Text 7 we adopt, we are

 forced to the same conclusion about the nature of the text. In Text 7, all the grains

 opening the given lists, and all the states of grain deriving from them, are associated

 with the amount of capacity that expresses a unit value of 1 dan for the corresponding

 grain. There is therefore no doubt about the reference of Text 7. From this, we must,

 however, exclude two final statements of the text. First, the final equivalence in slip 89

 states: "Ten dou of barley is three dou of grits.” This statement, as we confirm below,

 associates equivalent amounts of barley and grits of barley, the value of which is not

 equal to one dan. Second, the last statement of Text 7 seems to state something about

 the measuring unit dan that we cannot yet interpret. However, if we exclude these two
 statements, the reference of Text 7 is clear.

 We believe one can go a step further and state that this is what Text 7 explicitly

 states, by making use of dan as a measuring unit of value as well. The reason why we
 believe dan can be interpreted as a measuring unit of value when it can be also

 interpreted as a measuring unit of capacity in Text 7 is that, clearly, when this was not

 the case, the authors of the statute preferred to use 10 dou instead of 1 dan (remember
 the quantities we emphasized above:16 dou 2/3 dou, or 20 dou). The opposition
 between cases in which they used 10 dou and cases in which they used 1 dan is, we

 suggest, meaningful. It can be interpreted as an emphasis on the double meaning of

 dan, when it occurs. In conclusion, we can thus reproduce Text 7 with a new analysis of

 the measuring units appearing in it as follows:

 (7") "Regulation for cereal plants. The regulation says: one dan (unit of weight)

 of broomcorn millet (that is, the cereal just harvested) makes sixteen dou two

 thirds of a dou (unit of capacity) of unhusked grain (millet). Husking this

 makes one dan (unit of capacity and unit of value) of coarsely husked grain
 (millet) (/z mi); one dan (unit of capacity and unit of value) of coarsely
 husked grain (millet) makes nine dou of finely husked grain (millet) (zuo mi);

 nine dou of finely husked grain (millet) makes eight dou of highly finely
 husked grain (millet) (hui mi). (Text checked by) Wang.

 The regulation says: One dan (unit of weight) of paddy stalks (that is, cereal just

 harvested) makes twenty dou (unit of capacity) of unhusked grain (rice). Husking

 this makes ten dou (unit of capacity, equivalent to unit of value) of husked

 grain (rice), makes six dou two-thirds of a dou of highly refined rice. Ten dou (unit

 of capacity，not equivalent to unit of value) of barley is three dou of grits.

 The regulation says: Fifteen dou (unit of capacity) of barley, or soy, mung, and
 hemp beans is one dan (unit of value, and, in the context of the second

 interpretation, also capacity). If one grants highly refined or finely husked

 grain, one takes ten dou as one dan (unit of value)."

 In other words, the meaning of this statute is quite similar to the meaning of the
 table "Norms/Divisors for unhusked and husked grains” (Text 4) in The Nine
 Chapters. It is the key to the definition of equivalences between values for the
 different grains. Moreover, we have seen how this text was connected to such
 statements as "one dan of unhusked grain (millet) occupies two chi seven cun''

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 39

 namely, statements closely associated with the formulation of value from the time

 when Mathematics was composed until the time of The Nine Chapters.

 Let us recapitulate what we have discovered about the use of the term dan during the

 periods when Mathematics and the Book of Mathematical Procedures were composed.

 Dan could be the name of a measuring unit for weight, for capacity, or for value, the

 latter two being related to each other. In relation to the assessment of value, one needed

 different amounts of capacity, possibly expressed in terms of dan，to obtain the same

 value, depending on the grains associated with them. With respect to capacity and

 value, the use of dan is quite similar to that of hu，as reflected in The Nine Chapters.

 Further, only in the case of husked grain was there an identity between the dan

 measuring unit of capacity and the dan measuring unit of value.

 As we said earlier, the complexity of the use of the measuring unit dan just revealed

 echoes problems related to the interpretation of dan in documents of practice from
 Juyan and Dunhuang. Now that on the basis of mathematical documents, we have â

 better grasp of the interpretation of dan，how can we offer an interpretation of the

 phenomena related to dan in these other documents? The first point worth noting is that

 the phenomena referred to in relation to dan in the documents of practice also seem to

 indicate that when used in contexts unconnected with weight, dan sometimes relates to

 different volumes or, in other words, different capacities. This is precisely the situation

 the terms xiao dan "small dan” and da dan "large dan” explicitly refer to. In other

 words, the phenomena whose interpretation raise problems in these documents of
 practice are of the same kind as those dealt with above. Moreover, the ratio between da

 dan "large dan” and xiao dan "small dan” that the documents manifest is that of,

 respectively, 5 to 3.69 In the context of the previous discussion, it is indeed quite natural

 69 See some samples of evidence in slips 13 or 16, in document W2 from Wayen-torei (Loewe 1967,334-335)

 (volume 1，plate 41，and see pp. 317—331 for a general introduction on this set of slips). Let us summarize the

 discussion that has been developed since the 1950s about this vexed issue. Lao Gan mentioned the existence of

 the "small dan" and the "large dan” as well as the problem raised by their interpretation as early as 1950 (Lao
 Gan 勞幹1950). He put forward two ideas. First, he suggested that "small dan" was a measuring unit used by

 officials, in contrast to "large dan，” which was used by ordinary people. Secondly, he offered several examples

 taken from Han bamboo slips, which evidenced conversions at the time between "small dan" and "large dan"

 At the same time，(Yang Lien-sheng 1950) (quoted here on the basis of the reprint in Yang Lien-sheng 2006)

 discussed this problem and made three further points. First, in his view, "small dan” and "large dan" did not

 correspond to different vessels but were only nominal units used in computations, being both equal to a single

 actual measuring unit of capacity: the dan. Secondly, "small da”，’ referred to the use of dan when assessing

 unhusked grain (millet), whereas "large dan’’ designated the use of dan in relation to husked grain (millet).

 Thirdly, he pointed out the ratio of 5 to 3 as that between "large dan，’ and "small dart,” respectively. Later

 authors criticized the association he made between types of grain and types of dan. In 1951，Utsunomiya
 Kiyoyoshi 宇都宫清吉 published “Zoku Kanshi hyakkan jyuhorei-ko sairon 總漢志百官達奉例考再論

 Resuming discussion on the Salary of Government Officials according to the Sequel to the Treatises of (the

 History ofLater) Han (Dynasty)," which we quote from the reprint (Utsunomiya 1955). He dealt with this issue

 in a passage there (Utsunomiya 1955,221). To begin with, he suggested that different vessels were used during

 the Han dynasty to measure different species and states of grains • Accordingly, the same name (dan) could refer

 to different actual measurement units. "Small dan” and "large dan’’ are an example thereof, but in his view, this

 phenomenon also affected dou and sheng. Moreover, he argued that to measure unhusked grain (millet), one

 would use "large dan,’，whereas for husked grain (millet), one would use the "small dan.” Later on, Yang Lien

 sheng accepted the view that there may have been two distinct measuring units. Finally, Utsunomiya put

 forward the hypothesis that using such vessels would enable officials to carry out conversions. Subsequently,
 the problem was actively debated on these bases, without reaching a conclusion generally accepted. The reader
 can find a summary of the debate in (Loewe 1961/1962) and (Loewe 1967, vol.1,330-331).

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 40 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 to associate da dan "large dan” andxiao dan ‘‘small dan” with two vessels embodying
 the dan for unhusked millet and that for husked millet.

 Following on the first publications on the topic, the debate about these units that

 developed from the 1940s onward basically offered two options: Either “small dan”

 and "large dan” referred to two different vessels, or they designated two ways of

 using the same measuring unit of capacity, the relationship between da dan “large
 dan" and xiao dan "small dan" being established by means of conversion.
 Interestingly enough, this reproduces the alternative in practice that we suggested
 could account for the evidence provided by The Nine Chapters. In spite of the
 differences between these two views, deriving mainly from Yang Lien-sheng and

 Utsunomiya, they have key features in common. Both consider dan as a measuring

 unit for capacity. Moreover, both relate the ratio of 5 to 3 between da dan "large

 dan" and xiao dan "small dan" to the ratio between equivalent amounts of unhusked

 grain (millet) and husked grain (millet).

 In recent decades, discussion has focused on the following issues, which have

 remained unanswered. First, no evidence has been found in the Han slips to confirm

 the existence of two different types of vessels for a da dan "large dan” and a xiao

 dan "small dan•” Secondly, in the Han documents, each of these units can be used to
 formulate an amount in both unhusked (millet) and husked (millet) grain. The

 association of any of them with only one type of grain is thus problematic. Thirdly,

 the slips found in Juyan and Dunhuang confirm that da dan "large dan" and xiao dan

 "small dan” were used to express amounts for all kinds of grain. How, then, can one
 explain the occurrence of only two dan that actually relate more precisely to
 unhusked and husked millet?

 Let us outline our way of answering these questions.
 In relation to the first question, it has already been argued that before the Qin

 dynasty was established, vessels of different capacity existed for the same
 measuring unit (Gao Ziqiang 高自強1962). Now, with respect to the Han dynasty,

 in fact, in Juyan and Dunhuang documents of practice, we not only find evidence of

 da dan "large dan” and xiao dan “small dan:’ but the phenomenon also appears to
 have influenced other measuring units of capacity as well as weight: da dou “large
 dou” and xiao dou "small dou，’’ da sheng "large sheng” and xiao sheng "small

 sheng，’’ da quart 大權“large standard weight’’ and xiao quart 小權 “small standard

 weight’’ are also used in these documents. The latter references can only relate to

 actual measuring standards. This supports the idea that da dan "large dan” and xiao
 dan "small dan” were also measuring vessels. In addition, archeologists have

 excavated measuring vessels of a size of the order of magnitude of dan and some

 seem to possibly embody the da dan "large dan.’’70 Lastly, we have seen that the
 commentators of The Nine Chapters associated â measuring vessel with each
 sentence of the type "One hu of unhusked grain (millet), by regulation, has a
 volume of two Chi seven am’’ (Text 16). Since we have shown above that the same

 type of clauses occurs in Mathematics and in the Book of Mathematical Procedures，

 70 For example, a vessel bearing an inscription from the Qin dynasty and measuring 1 dan 6 dou in Qin

 measuring units is mentioned in (Qiu Guangming etal. 2001,183-184). Qiu Guangming etal. suggest that
 this vessel could embody the da dan "large dan.”

 自 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 41

 and that they refer to the same use of the dan as The Nine Chapters bears witness for

 the hu，it is highly probable that in the former books, too, these clauses concur with

 the use of different vessels, depending on the grain measured. In conclusion, we

 have different types of evidence showing the existence of vessels associated with

 measuring units designated by the same name but with different volumes.

 With respect to the second problem, it is relatively easy, on this basis, to explain

 that da dan "large dan” and xiao dan "small dan” could be used to express amounts

 of either unhusked or husked millet. In fact, if an official from a granary staff only

 had a large vessel corresponding to da dan "large dan” to measure amounts to be

 dispensed, he could use it not only for unhusked millet, but also for husked millet. In

 the latter case, he would simply have to compute, using a rule of three, the amount

 of "large dan’’ corresponding to the number of dan ("small dan”、in husked grain

 that had to be dispensed. The official would then write not only the number of
 vessels (da dan "large dan") given in the account book, but also the value, in small

 dan，corresponding to it. In other words, whereas granaries could theoretically make
 use of specific vessels to dispense each type of grain, in practice actors limited

 themselves to using a single type of vessel and computing, using rules of three, the

 amount to be given with this vessel for each type of grain. Such an interpretation is
 supported by a passage from the San Guo Zhi 三國志 Records on the three

 kingdoms. The passage records the answer the king of Wei kingdom, Cao Cao, gave
 to someone who expressed concern that the grain stocks in the granary were
 insufficient. The answer reads: “可以小斛以足之。One can use the ‘small hu’ to

 make it enough." The document further reports that the trick was discovered by the

 soldiers, who bemoaned they had been cheated.71 This piece of evidence clearly

 highlights the use of different vessels in the context of the granary, all called hu. If

 this statement can also be taken as supporting the hypotheses just formulated about

 dan，this derives from our conclusion that as measuring units of both capacity and

 value, in practice dan and hu were used in the same way.

 On the same basis, we can also suggest a hypothesis for the fact that only these

 two types of vessels were used, even to measure other grains. We should recall that

 the documents of practice found in Juyan and Dunhuang were thus produced in the

 northwestern part of China and reflect the official distribution of grain and fodder to

 soldiers. On the one hand, any type of vessel could be used to dispense any type of

 grain, as long as it was used in relation to rules of three. The officials guaranteed fair

 distribution. On the other hand, given the context in the northwestern area, the grain
 most likely to be dispensed was millet. This explains the predominance of vessels

 related to millet in granaries.

 These conclusions echo what we saw earlier about the complex uses of dan. The
 practice of da dan "large dan” and xiao dan "small dan” we just described is one

 way of bringing to light how actors implemented the notion of measuring unit of
 value that linked all grains with each other. They knew how to determine amounts

 of grain with the same value in practice, and they could do so with any available
 measuring vessel. Conversely, the existence of these units of value, which we have

 established, accounts for the existence of phenomena such as da dan "large dan”

 (Chen Shou 陳赛1959, 55)，Chapter 1，Book of Wei. Annals of Emperor Wu.

 舍 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 and xiao dan “small dan，” since they clarify why there were measuring units which

 had the same name dan but corresponded to different volumes.

 4 Second decoding of the table in The Nine Chapters and the “Regulation

 for cereals plants : ‘husked grains nil" as the key of the system

 Our analysis of the "Regulation for cereal plants’’ (Text 7 or its revised version 7")

 revealed a fact to which we now return. For the types of grain mentioned in the text,

 most states are associated with specific and different amounts expressed in capacity

 measuring units, except the first state of grain obtained by husking. This is the state

 called "coarsely husked grain (// mi) or, simply "husked grain (/m),’’ in relation to

 millet, and "husked grain (mi)" in relation to rice. Compared with other states of

 grain, this state represents an exception in two respects. First, in relation to this state

 of husked grain (mi), the dan has two meanings, as we showed above. In addition, in

 all regulations, husked grain (mi) is constantly associated with 1 dan or 10 dou. This

 fact has a very important consequence. Whereas for all states of the grain except

 “husked grain (m/)，’’ the amount expressed in measuring units of capacity and the

 value of that amount expressed in value units dan differ, these two figures remain

 constantly the same for "husked grain (mi)." The amount corresponding to the value
 of one dan for husked grain (mi) has a capacity of one dan (where dan is now a

 capacity measuring unit). This fact holds true for any type of grain. These remarks
 lead us to formulate the following hypothesis, whose consequences we shall
 explore. “Husked grain (mi)'9 has been chosen as the basis for defining the
 measuring units for capacity as well as the value unit. As a result, we suggest
 translating mi as “standard husked grain.’’ This hypothesis contradicts the common
 assumption that "unhusked grain (su)" was the basis of the system of management

 of grains.72 In other words, we postulate that "standard husked grain’’ (li mi or mi)
 has played an essential role.

 With this issue in mind, let us return to "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked

 grains’，(Text 4).

 4.1 Second decoding of "Norms/divisors for unhusked and husked grains"

 In contrast to the "Regulations for cereal plants,’’ this table brings all types and

 states of grain in relation to each other, giving each of them the same status and

 associating each of them with an abstract “integer.’’ The fact that the first nineteen

 problems of chapter 2 in The Nine Chapters all have the same pattern and deal with
 changing "unhusked grain (millet)’’ into any of the grains and states of grain
 gathered in the table shows how all of them were treated equally.

 We have suggested above that the beginning of the table ("unhusked grain,"
 “coarsely husked grain") referred to millet even though it was expressed in generic

 72 For expressions of this view, and related ideas, see Utsunomiya Kiyoyoshi, “Zoku Kanshi hyakkan
 jyuhorei-ko sairon," quoted from the reprint (Utsunomiya 1955, 221—231)，and more recently, (Peng Hao
 2012).

 必 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 43

 terms. Indeed, millet, the most widespread crop in northern China and the most

 fundamental grain for theoretical purposes, would otherwise not be mentioned in the

 table. This leaves no doubt that it is the crop that lies behind the generic terms

 opening the table. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the ratio between the
 various states of the grain mentioned at the beginning of the table are those
 associated with the sequence of states deriving from millet.

 Now, we shall show that, in fact, things are more complex than the explanation so

 far. We can show this by comparing "Regulations for cereals plants” and "Norms/

 divisors for unhusked and standard husked grains" (Text 4). Let us first observe that

 in the table of Text 4, the grain corresponding to ‘‘paddy” has the same ratio to

 "coarsely husked grain (li m/)” as unhusked grain deriving from “paddy stalks" had

 in "Regulations for cereals plants” to the "husked grain (mi)" corresponding to it. In

 both cases, the ratio between either "unhusked rice" or "paddy" and "husked grain"
 is 2 to 1.Several important consequences can be derived from this observation.
 First, it indicates that “paddy” in the table has to be interpreted as designating the

 state of "unhusked grain." Moreover, and more importantly, "coarsely husked grain

 (li mi)” in "Norms/divisors for unhusked and standard husked grains" is not only the

 first state of husked grain associated with millet, but also refers to the first state of

 husked grain for rice. Secondly, the fact that in "Regulations for cereals plants," the
 same amount, in capacity as well as value, was associated with the first state of
 "husked grain" ["standard husked grain (mi)"] correlates with the fact that these two
 states were united in the table in The Nine Chapters. It thus appears that the
 dispositif presented in "Regulations for cereals plants" allowed actors to connect the
 series of different states of grain associated with distinct crops via the bridge

 constituted by "standard husked grain (w/).’’ As for the table, "standard husked

 grain" appears to constitute its pivot.

 These facts are confirmed by similar observations one can make with respect to

 "barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans." Let us remind the reader that above we
 suggested two possible interpretations for the following statement that occurs in

 "Regulations for cereal plants” (text 7): "Fifteen dou (unit of capacity) of barley, or

 soy, mung, and hemp beans is one dan (unit of value, and perhaps also capacity)."

 According to the second interpretation offered, one dan here would refer to the

 state of "husked grain," whereas "barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans" would

 designate unhusked grain. Note that this interpretation fits well with the title of the
 table in The Nine Chapters: "Norms/divisors for unhusked and standard husked

 grains.’’ If this is the case, then exactly the same conclusion holds as above. Namely,

 in the table of The Nine Chapters, "husked grain (li mi)” also designates the first

 state obtained through husking "barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans." The ratio

 between this husked grain and unhusked "barley, or soy, mung, and hemp beans" is,

 in both texts, 2 to 3. This would reinforce the conclusion about the centrality of the

 state "standard husked grain" as a basis of the system. In all these cases, all grains

 would be connected at the level of the state "standard husked grain" for which the

 unit of capacity dan would merge with the unit of value dan. The table in The Nine

 Chapters and the "Regulations for cereal grains” would each express this fact in ks

 own way.

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 If we opt for the first interpretation, “one dan” in this statement of "Regulations

 for cereal plants" would only refer to a unit of value, and this statement, by defining

 the unit of value for these grains, would allow the connection of barley, or soy,

 mung, and hemp beans to the other grains, by means of their state as "husked grain."

 In this last respect, "standard husked grain" would still remain the pivot of the

 system of grain. Note that one further step is taken in the table of The Nine Chapters

 to incorporate states of grain deriving from barley into the general system. The

 reader may recall that we emphasized that in “Regulations for cereal crops," there

 was a sentence that did not fit the overall scheme, namely, "Ten dou of barley is

 three dou of grits.’’ We can see that in The Nine Chapters, this latter state of barley

 has been included in the table as “small grits of barley," associated with the number

 "thirteen and a half.’’ The ratio of this state to barley is 3 to 10. Further, another state

 "large grits of barley’’ has been added to the system. In this respect, "Norms/divisors

 for unhusked and standard husked grains" develops and integrates further the set of

 grains presented in "Regulations for cereal crops," through enriching the series of

 states deriving from barley.

 In conclusion, "standard husked grain’’ appears to be a state of all grains, or of the

 most important ones, which provides a basis for expressing all types of cereals. This

 central position of "standard husked grain" is reflected in an essential fact. We have

 mentioned Shang Yang's parallelepipedic sheng，designed in the fourth century B.

 C.E. and officially used or a long time afterward. We have also mentioned Wang
 Mang's bronze hu. We should recall that their inscriptions all testified to the
 relationship between capacity measuring units and volume measuring units as
 follows:1 hu (or 1 dan) makes 1,620 cun. The numerical value chosen to make the

 bridge between capacity and volume is precisely the one that corresponds to
 "standard husked grain" in all the texts from Mathematics to The Nine Chapters.
 This means that "standard husked grain" was chosen as the basis for defining
 measuring units. Its centrality in this respect was formulated explicitly once again

 by Li Chunfeng, who stated in the “Monograph for pitch-pipes and the calendar" of

 the History of the Sui: "One takes the hu of the standard husked grain as the standard
 以米斛為正.” (Wei Zheng et al.魏徵等1973, 409). Note the crucial fact that in
 choosing the "standard husked grain" as the basis for connecting capacity and
 volume, actors chose the state of grain that allowed a vessel embodying a measuring

 unit of capacity simultaneously to embody the unit of value for the "standard husked

 grain."

 To conclude, we confirm here what we have begun to understand in relation to

 "Regulation for cereal crops，” namely, that "standard husked grain" was central to

 the system of grains. It was central in three respects. First, it was the basis for the
 system of value measuring units hu (or dan). Secondly, it was the basis for the

 definition of the measuring unit of capacity. Thirdly, it was the state that allowed

 different types of grain to be related to each other. "Norms/divisors for unhusked

 and standard husked grains" express all these facts.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 45

 4.2 Second decoding of “Regulations for cereal crops’’

 Let us return to "Regulations for cereal crops’，for the last time. We have already

 seen that this text listed series of states deriving from basic crops and associated

 with each of them (except two exceptions) the measure in capacity expressing the

 amount having the value 1 dan. Moreover, we have shown that this 1 dan in Text 7

 occurred in general in association with the state "standard husked grain" and in

 relation to the expression of the value, bringing the various sequences of grain into

 relation with each other. In this respect, the use of the "Regulations for cereal crops”

 is comparable to the use of "Norms/divisors for unhusked and standard husked

 grains."

 However, there is a huge difference between the two, namely, the part played by

 weight measuring units. Weight measuring units never occur in The Nine Chapters

 in relation to grains. By contrast, they play a role in "Regulations for cereal crops.”

 We see that the two sequences of states of grain deriving from millet and paddy

 stalks both start from the plant just cut, with stalks and leaves. Measuring units for

 weight are used to assess their amount. Moreover, in Text 7, the two sequences start

 from the same amount of plants, whether it is millet or paddy, namely, the amount

 corresponding to â weight of 1 dan. How can we interpret this striking echo between

 the equal weights from which the two series start and the fact that these amounts in

 weight correspond precisely to 1 dan，this time as a measuring unit for capacity, for

 the coarsely husked grain?

 We suggest two elements for the answer to this question.

 First, the largest measuring unit for capacity dan, which has the same name as the

 largest measuring unit for weight, derived from the latter precisely on the basis of

 the transformation that leads from the plant just cut to standard husked grain. In

 "Regulations for cereal crops,” this would give us a key way in which the definition

 of capacity relies on the definition of weight on the basis of the management of
 grains. The fact that grains provided essential elements in the definition of
 measuring units is also evidenced in the "Monograph on pitch-pipes and the
 calendar" of the History of the HanP It is interesting that in the case of
 "Regulations for cereal crops," the establishment of measuring units for capacity on
 the basis of weight is shown to occur for both millet and paddy.

 Second, through the state of standard husked grain, the measuring unit for value

 dan receives its foundation by relying on the largest measuring unit for weight: The

 amount of standard husked grain having the value 1 dan is the one deriving from an

 amount of plants weighing 1 dan. In this respect, this relation gave the foundation of

 dan as an absolute measuring unit for value through “standard husked grain." It is

 by the derivation from this basic measuring unit for value that the value units for the
 other states of grain could be obtained. This is precisely the meaning of
 "Regulations for cereal crops" and "Norms/divisors for unhusked and standard
 husked grains."

 Such an explanation reveals how the measuring unit dan for both capacity and

 value originates from the measuring unit of weight bearing the same name, dan. It

 See above, note 17.

 姿 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 46 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 also provides clues as to what was at stake in the reform carried out by Wang Mang,

 when he simply substituted hu for dan as the name of the largest measuring unit for

 capacity and for value. In doing so, he severed the essential link that had existed

 between weight and capacity-value measuring units. One can thus speculate that he

 was discarding weight as the basis for the definition of other measuring units and
 was promoting another way of defining value and capacity. This is perhaps the

 construction of the system of measuring units on the basis of grains that is presented

 precisely in the “Monograph on pitch-pipes and the calendar" of the History of the
 Han.14 Moreover, perhaps such a transformation occurred together with the
 promotion of a single grain, namely millet, as the basic grain, a fact reflected in both
 The Nine Chapters and the "Monograph on pitch-pipes and the calendar" of the
 History of the Han. Could the split introduced between weight and capacity be
 related to a change in the management of grains? This is not impossible. In fact, The

 Nine Chapters contains no instance of weight measuring units used in relation to
 grain. By contrast, we have seen that Mathematics provided standard clauses to

 relate weight and capacity for various plants (Text 9). On the other hand, throughout

 the time period studied, the definition and measure of value remained closely related

 to capacity measurement: The name of the key measuring unit for value remained
 that of the measuring unit for capacity and the measurement could be done by
 vessels.

 5 Conclusions

 The above arguments have led to several conclusions that we summarize in three

 main points before suggesting some hypotheses on the actual deployment of the
 various kinds of measuring units that, as we have seen, could be used to assess
 grains.

 5.1 Capacity, weight, value, and the nature of early Chinese mathematical

 writings

 Mathematical writings provide evidence that allowed us to establish that dan, in the

 Qin and Western Han dynasty, and hu in the period of Wang Mang and the Eastern

 Han dynasty, had a key feature in common. They were both the highest-order

 measuring units for capacity as well as measuring units for value. This last feature
 seems to have been overlooked in previous historical accounts of the systems of
 measuring units. Let us emphasize the importance for us, in facilitating
 understanding of this fact, of having the context of use of these measuring units
 that mathematical books provide. Without the books, this feature would have

 probably remained unremarked. One feature, however, appeared to differ between

 dan and hu; namely, dan was also the name of the highest-order measuring unit for

 74 At the beginning of the “Monograph on pitch-pipes and the calendar" of the History of the Han, Ban

 Gu，its author, makes clear that he has used texts by the scholar who helped Wang Mang to implement his
 reforms, namely, Liu Xin 劉歆（Ban Gu etal. 1962, 955).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 47

 weight, whereas hu had no relation with the weight system. Does the fact that both

 dan and hu were used as measuring units for value explain why officials could be

 ranked by means of the number of dan they received as salary? We know that such
 officials could be paid in any type of grain. Is the dan in occurrences referring to

 officials in terms of expressions such as "six hundred dan” or "two thousand dan” to

 be interpreted âs â unit of value?75 This question awaits further study. In any event,

 the fact that in mathematical sources the unit of value dan could be used, regardless

 of the type of grain, appears to confirm that this concept of value must have been
 absolute.

 If we believe the evidence provided by mathematical sources, dan or hu seem to
 have been used as measuring units for value especially in close connection to

 granaries. In this context, we have suggested that from the time when Mathematics

 was compiled until the time when The Nine Chapters was completed, the term rong

 容 designated the assessment of the content of granaries in measuring units of value.
 Mathematical sources thus provide evidence about key features of the use of

 measuring units in relation to grain. Note that this holds true for documents that

 were handed down as well as for documents provided by archeology.

 Seen from another perspective, these facts show how closely the sources
 documenting mathematical practice in early China were related to the bureau
 cracy. Let us recall the features demonstrating the close relationship of
 mathematical documents with the activities of officials, especially with respect
 to grains, which was our main purpose in this article. First, we remember that the
 Book of Mathematical Procedures has a section in common with the chapter
 "Statutes on granaries" from the Qin edicts and statutes and that many of its
 procedures show continuity with the data provided in this section. This can be

 correlated with the fact that, like other mathematical manuscripts, the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures was found in a tomb that also contained a set of statutes

 and edicts. Secondly, The Nine Chapters provides a table that appears to define
 units of values, in that it yields numbers whose ratios are the same as the ratios

 between the value units hu associated, the text says, by "regulations cheng 程，，’

 with various types of grain. One may assume that the content of this table reflects
 a statute of the same type as that contained in the "Statutes for granaries" and
 quoted by the Book of Mathematical Procedures. In any event, when Li Chunfeng

 wrote a technical monograph in the seventh century on the history of measuring

 units for the official histories of, respectively, the Jin and the Sui dynasty, he used
 the evidence provided by The Nine Chapters and Liu Hui's commentary on

 measuring units in relation to grains as if they were unquestionably reliable. This
 shows indirectly that he understood that these documents reflected official

 practices in these respects.

 In addition, other features of mathematical sources indicate a close connection to

 officials' activities. We have seen how problems and data contained in at least some

 of these documents, perhaps particularly in some of the chapters of The Nine

 Chapters, reflected actual practices, and more specifically, practices related to edicts

 7 See Utsunomiya, "Zoku Kanshi hyakJcan jyuhôrei-kô saiwn，” published in (Utsunomiya Kiyoyoshi
 1955, 221-231) and (Bielenstein 1980, 4-5).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 48 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 and statutes. For instance, problems related to granaries, to the distribution of grain,

 and to the stockpiling of grain appeared to have counterparts in actual practice
 (Peng Hao forthcoming). These remarks not only cast light on some characteristics

 of these books, but also invite historians to take the evidence provided by these

 problems and data more seriously as historical evidence.

 These facts seem to suggest that for the local officials who used them at the time,

 the mathematical documents excavated recently were considered, at least partly, as

 auxiliary books to the administrative documents for the issue of edicts and statutes.

 Do the theoretical sections in these books enable practical action, or are they
 developments spurred by other motivations? The answer to this question should be
 determined by closer analysis. We leave it open here.

 5.2 The central role played by standard husked grain

 In contrast to previous conceptions with respect to grains, we were led to suggest

 that the central role in the management of grains was played by mi ‘‘husked grain,"

 which we also suggested interpreting as "standard husked grain." This central role is

 evident in the relation between this state of grain and the definition of dan as a unit

 for value. In Qin and Western Han China, we have seen that this state for different

 types of grain was the basis for the definition of a dan that was the measuring unit

 for value. The same conclusion appears to have held true for the hu during Wang

 Mang's time period and the Eastern Han dynasty. These units of value were each

 closely related to the two texts (texts 4 and 7) that we have studied. Each in its way,

 these two texts, headed, respectively, "Regulations for cereal crops” and "Norms/

 divisors for unhusked and standard husked grains," represent two modes of mutually

 interrelating all types of grain and different states of these grains through the state of

 "standard husked grain." Given the connection established between different types

 of grain through "standard husked grain,” the dispositifs described by these two texts

 provided a definition of value that was absolute for "standard husked grain." The
 relative concept of value for the other states specifically related to each grain
 derived from this value.

 The centrality of "standard husked grain" and its role in a statute inserted in the

 "Statutes on granaries" suggest a hypothesis on the origin of dan as a measuring unit

 for capacity and value. In other words, dan as a measure of capacity derived from
 dan as a measure of weight through the administrative definition of "standard

 husked grain." The basic relation was established by the fact that a weight of 1 dan

 of harvested grain corresponded to a capacity of 1 dan of "standard husked grain."

 Accordingly, grains appear to have played a central role in the definition of the

 system of measuring units. This evokes the part played by grain in the "Monograph

 on pitch-pipes and the calendar" included at the end of the first century in the

 History of the Han and probably written by the scholar who defined the hu in bronze

 for Wang Mang. Even though the uses of grain in the two contexts were different,

 the parallel seems to support our hypothesis about the origin of dan from a unit of

 weight.

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 49

 5.3 Vessels

 Further, the central part played by "standard husked grain" is also reflected by the
 fact that it offered an absolute basis for the definition of a standard measuring unit

 for capacity, called either dan or hu，in relation to the volume of 1,620 curt. This
 connection between capacity and volume based on the definition of the value unit

 1 dan for "standard husked grain" is embodied in two official vessels whose use was

 enacted by successive governments in China: the parallelepipedic sheng designed

 by Shang Yang 商戰 in 344 B.C.E. and the bronze hu promoted by Wang Mang 王
 莽.Their inscriptions are unambiguous on this question. In the first half of the

 seventh century, Li Chunfeng explicitly stated the connection with "standard husked

 grain" when he wrote, "One takes the hu of the standard husked grain as the
 standard 以米斜局正.’’ In short, the generic hu and probably the generic dan were

 vessels connected to "standard husked grain" and consequently defined, for this

 state of the grain, its measure both in terms of capacity and value units. In other
 words, "standard husked grain" was the only state of grain for which a single
 measurement vessel was to be used. For all the other states, the measurement of the

 capacity and the measurement of the value required different vessels. The vessels
 attached to "standard husked grain" were, we suggest, those to which the “xiao dan

 小石 small dan” used in Juyan and Dunhuang refers. By contrast, another vessel,

 attached to "unhusked millet” and specifically measuring its value, seems to have
 been used in parallel to measure all types of grain. This use of a second vessel
 accounts for the introduction in the documents of the other measuring unit, “da dan

 大石large dan.，’ This is our suggestion for a solution to the appearance in these

 sources of two measuring units for capacity associated with the name dan. Of these
 two units, one, the "small dan，” had an absolute meaning. This is probably

 connected to the fact that the use of the single term dan in these texts also refers to

 the standard measuring unit dan，that is, to "small dan.’’ By contrast, the unit "large

 dan” was only defined relatively to the latter.

 Altogether, the documents studied seem to bear witness to a remarkable
 continuity in the system of the management of grains, despite differences to be
 found in mathematical texts and that await further study.

 5.4 What hypotheses can we make on the management of grains based on

 mathematical and administrative texts?

 At the end of this investigation, we saw that many distinct types of measuring units

 were used in the past in relation to the management of grains, that is, measuring
 units of length, volume, capacity, weight, and value. This naturally provokes
 questions as to the contexts in which each of these sets of measuring units was

 chosen and the explanation for the choice of different types of measuring units. In

 what follows, we suggest hypotheses inspired for the most part by the evidence

 provided by mathematical sources. In presenting them, we shall make clear on
 which kind of evidence we rely and where we add assumptions.

 を! Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 50

 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 Clearly, officials used measuring units of capacity when they determined (and

 expressed) the tax to be paid in grain for a certain kind of cropland. Evidence for

 this is provided by many problems included in mathematical manuscripts, such

 as the following, which is found in the Book of Mathematical Procedures'.

 (19) “租吳(誤)券田ー畝租之十步一斗，凡租ニ石四斗。今誤券ニ石五斗，

 欲益耍其步数，問益耍幾何。（...)/96/

 When levying taxes, erroneously inscribing on tne certificate. A cropland
 (having an area of) one mu (NB: one mu is a unit specific to area and
 represents 240 bu) is taxed one dou for ten bu，which adds up to a total tax of

 two dan four dou. Suppose that, having erroneously inscribed one dan five dou

 on the certificate, one wants to vary the quantity of bu corresponding (to the

 tax of one dou), one asks how much it should vary (".)/96/’，.76

 Such problems show how officials established a relationship between the area of

 the cropland and the tax to be paid. That at this stage, officials used measuring units

 of capacity seems to indicate that taxpayers also used capacity measuring units to

 assess the amount of grain to be paid to the taxation office. At this stage of the

 management of grains, what accounts for the use of measuring units of capacity is

 the simplicity of the measure.

 一 On the basis of the evidence provided by Mathematics (text 12) that at some

 point conversions between measuring units of capacity and measuring units for
 weight were used, we assume that tax officials used weight measures to check the

 grain brought to pay tax. What may account for this practice is the accuracy of such
 a measure. Note that it would be surprising for accurate scales to be widespread
 outside the relevant offices of the bureaucracy. This hypothesis raises two questions:

 (1)Why is it that only in Mathematics we find evidence of such conversion between

 weights and capacities for grain? The fact is that whereas the Book of Mathematical
 Procedures still mentions the use of a measuring unit of weight in relation to grain,

 such mentions are completely absent from The Nine Chapters. (2) How does this
 relate to the reform carried out by Wang Mang and to the separation between

 measuring units for weight and for capacity? This question remains unanswered.
 一 It is clear that in some cases, for instance when dispensing daily rations of

 grain, officials working in granaries made use of measuring vessels. We provided
 evidence for this above. Such a method was certainly practical for rations. However,

 paying salaries with grain would be a rather lengthy process if it involved using such
 vessels to measure amounts of the order of magnitude of dozens, or even hundreds

 and thousands of dan. This is precisely the situation dealt with in Text 18 from the

 Book of Mathematical Procedures and text 15 from The Nine Chapters. This leads us

 76 Peng Hao (2001, 83). Mathematics also provides evidence that measuring units of weight are used to

 express amounts to be paid for tax. However, this does not occur in relation to grains, but in relation to
 rather coarse stuff. See, for instance, Zhu Hanmin and Chen Songchang (gen. ed.) (2011,41). This use of

 weight measuring units can be compared to their use to measure amounts of cereal crops that were just
 harvested, as evidenced in Text 7 ("Regulation on cereal crops"). It must be distinguished from the use of

 weight measuring units explained below, in relation to grains.

 Ê Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 51

 to suggest that when paying significant amounts of grain, officials working in
 granaries could use the method described in these two texts: make a heap of grain,

 measure its dimension by means of measuring units of length, compute its volume,
 and use the conversion between volume and units of value (Texts 9,13
 (Mathematics),18 (Book of Mathematical Procedures),15,16 (The Nine Chapters))
 to determine the number of measuring units of value a given heap of grain
 contained. These are the cases, we suggest, for which measuring units for length,

 volume, and value were used. The reason for using such practices and such units

 would be the speed of the measure.

 一 Perhaps the content supervision of granaries, i.e., how many measuring units of

 value they contained (rong), also required making use of the relationship between

 volumes and value measuring units. This is, perhaps, what Text 14 (Mathematics)
 tells us. One may assume that similar practices were implemented to check the

 capacity of vessels.

 All these cases reveal the key part played by mathematical documents in

 addressing issues important for history in general. Naturally, many questions remain

 open, and we intend to return to them in the future.

 References

 Bai Shangshu 白尚恕.1982. Cong Wang Mang liangqi dao Liu Xin yuanlû 從王莽量器到劉歆園率
 (From Wang Mang’ s measuring vessel to Liu Xin’ s value for k. Beijing shifan daxue xuebao (ziran
 kexue ban)北京師範大學學報(自然科學版）(2): 75-79. ノ

 Ban Gu 班固 etal. 1962. Hanshu 漢署(History of the [Western] Han [Dynasty]). Beijing 北京:Zhonghua

 shuju中華書局.

 Bielenstein, Hans. 1980. The bureaucracy of Han times. Cambridge, GB: Cambridge University Press.
 Boltz, William G.1993. Chou li 周禮.In Early Chinese texts: A bibliographical guide，ed. Michael
 Loewe, 24-32. Berkeley: The Society for the Study of Early China and the Institute of East Asian
 Studies, University of California, Berkeley.

 Chemla, Karine, and Biao Ma. 2011. Interpreting a newly discovered mathematical document written at
 the beginning of Han dynasty in China (before 157 B.C.E.) and excavated from tomb M77 at
 Shuihudi 睡邊地.Sciamvs 12:159-191.

 Chemla, Karine, and Shuchun Guo. 2004. Les neuf chapitres. Le Classique mathématique de la Chine

 ancienne et ses commentaires. Paris: Dunod.

 Chen Shou 陳奪.1959. San Guo zhi 三國志 Records on the three kingdoms. Beijing 北京：Zhonghua

 shuju中华书局.

 Chen Songchang 陳松長.2009. Yuelu shuyuan suocang Qinjian zongshu 嶽麓書院所藏秦簡綜述

 (Synthetic presentation of the Qin bamboo strips kept at the academy Yuelu). Wenwu 文物(Cultural
 Relics) (3): 75-88.

 Cheng 程艾藍，Anne. 1993. Ch'un ch'iu 春秋，Kung yang 公羊，Ku liang 毅梁 and Tso chuan 左傅.In

 Early Chinese texts: A bibliographical guide，ed. Michael Loewe, 67-76. Berkeley: The Society for

 the Study of Early China and the Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
 Chôkazankankan Sansûsho kenky ûkai 張家山漢簡『算數書』研究去編.Research group on the Han bam
 boo strips from Zhangjiashan Book of Mathematical Procedures. 2006. Kankan Sansûsho 漢簡『算
 數書』（The Han bamboo strips from Zhangjiashan Book of Mathematical Procedures).京
 都 Kyoto:朋友書店 Hôyû shoten.

 Cullen, Christopher. 2004. The Suan shu shu 箅数書 ‘Writings on reckoning': A translation of a Chinese
 mathematical collection of the second century BC, with explanatory commentary. Edited by
 Christopher Cullen. Vol.1，Needham Research Institute Working Papers Cambridge: Needham
 Research Institute.

 包 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Dauben, Joseph W. 2008.算数書.Suan Shu Shu (A Book on Numbers and Computations). English

 Translation with Commentary. Archive for history of exact sciences 62: 91一178.

 Fang Xuanling etal.房玄龄等.1973. History of the Jin [Dynasty]晉書.Beijing 北京：Zhonghua shuju

 Li Jimin 李繼閔.1998. Jiuzhang suanshu daodu yu yizhu 九章算術導諫與_註(Guidebook and

 annotated translation of The Nine Chapters on Mathematical Procedures).西安 Xi'an:陝西人民教
 育出版社 Shaanxi renmin jiaoyu chubanshe.

 Li Qiufang 李秋芳.2012. Shiqian shiqi huabei pingyuan liangshi zhongzhi jiegou zhi bianqian 史目げ時期

 華北平原粮食種植結構之變遷（Changes in the structure of cereal plants in the Northern China
 plain in Prehistoric times). Huanan nongye daxue xuebao 華南農業大學學報(Journal of South
 China Agricultural University) (1): 151-156.

 Loewe, Michael. 1961/1962. The measurement of grain during the Han period. T'oung Pao 1-2: 64-95.
 Loewe, Michael. 1967. Records of Han administration, University of Cambridge oriental publications, no.

 11-12. London: Cambridge U.P.

 Luo Zhenyu 羅振玉，and Guowei Wang 王國維.1993. Linsha zhuijian 流沙墜簡(Bamboo slips fallen in

 the flowing sands), Beijing: Zhonghua shuju 中華書局.

 Ma Biao 馬彪.2013. Shin teikoku no ryàdo keiei : Unbô Ryùkô shinkan to Shikôtei no kin.en 秦帝国の領
 土経営.•雲夢龍尚秦簡と始皇帝の禁苑（The Qin empire's management of the territories: the Qin
 slips from Longgang (Yunmeng) and the Imperial Park of the First Emperor) Kyoto 足都：Kyoto
 daigaku gakujulsu shuppankai京都大学学術出版会.

 Peng Hao 彭浩.2001. Zhangjiashan hanjian «Suanshu shu» zhushi 張家山漢簡《算数書》注釋

 (Commentary on the Book of Mathematical Procedures, a writing on bamboo strips dating from the
 Han and discovered at Zhangjiashan). Beijing 北京：Kexue chubanshe 科學出版社（Science Press).

 Peng Hao 彭浩.2012. Qin he Xi Han zaoqi jiandu zhong de liangshi jiliang 秦和西漢早期簡賸中的糧去

 計量(Measurement of grains according to excavated documents of the Qin and the early Western
 Han time periods). Chutu wenxian yanjiu 出土文献研究(Research on excavated documents)10:
 194-204.

 52 K. Chemla, B. Ma

 中華書局.

 Gao Ziqiang 髙 _ 強.1962. Handai da xiao hu (dan) wenti 漢代大小斛(石)問題（The problem of the

 large and small hu (dan) in the Han dynasty). Kaogu 考古1962(2): 92-94, 98.

 Guo Shuchun 郭書春.1988. Liu Hui yu Wang Mang tonghu 劉徽如王莽銅斛（Liu Hui and Wang
 Mang's bronze hu). Ziran Kexueshi Yanjiu 自然科學虫研究(Research in the History of Natural
 Sciences) 7(1):8-15.

 Hulsewé, Anthony F.P. 1985. Remnants of Ch 'in Law, Sinica Leidensia. Leiden: Brill.

 Hulsewé, Anthony F. P. 1993. Han shu 漢書.In Early Chinese texts: A bibliographical guide，ed. Michael

 Loewe, 129-136. Berkeley: The Society for the Study of Early China and the Institute of East Asian

 Studies, University of California, Berkeley.

 Ikeda Yûichi 池田雄一.2008. Chùgoku kodai no ritsuryô to shakai 中国古代の律令と社会(Ancient

 China 's regulations and society). Tokyo: Kyûko shoin 汲古書院.

 Lao Gan 勞幹.1950. Longgang za ji一Da dan yu xiao dan 龍岡雜記(ニ):大石興小石（Various notes on
 Longgang (2): Large dan and small dan). Dalu zazhi 大陸雑志(Journal of continental China) 1(11):
 21. “

 Peng Hao 彭浩.2013 (30-01-2013, at 10:42). Guanyu "Qin he Xi Han zaoqi jiandu zhong de liangshi
 jiliang" de yi dian buchong IS!於“秦和西漢早期簡讀中的糧食計量”曲ー點補充（A supplemen
 tary note to "Measurement of grains according to excavated documents or the Qin and the early
 Western Han time periods”). Wuhan daxue jianbo wang 武漢大學簡帛網(Wuhan University
 Website on bamboo and silk). http://www.bsm.org.cn/show_article.php?id=1827.

 Peng Hao 彭浩.Forthcoming. Salary of government officials and national tax income as seen in Qin and
 Han dynasty bamboo strips一with a focus on mathematical documents. In Mathematics and
 Administration in the Ancient Worlds, ed. Cécile Michel and Karine Chemla.

 Qiu Guangming 丘光明，Long Qiu 丘隆，and Ping Yang 楊平.2001. Zhongguo gudai kejishi

 (Duliangheng juan)中國古代科技史(度量衡卷）(History of science and technology in China
 (volume on measuring units)). Beijing 北京：Kexue chubanshe 科學出版社.

 Shen Kangshen, John N. Crossley, and Anthony W.-C. Lun. 1999. The nine chapters on the mathematical

 art. Companion and commentary. Oxford and Beijing: Oxford University Press and Science Press.
 Shuihudi Qin mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu 睡虎地秦À竹簡整理小組 Group of editors of the bam

 boo strips from Qin tombs at Shuihudi 1990. Shuihudi Qin mu zhujian 睡虎地秦墓竹簡(Bamboo
 slips from Qin tombs at Shuihudi). Beijing 北京：Wenwu chubanshe 文物出版社.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematical writings highlight the state's management of grains 53

 Utsunomiya Kiyoyoshi 宇都宮清吉.1955. Kandai shakai keizaishi kenkyû 漢代社會經濟史研宄

 (Research on the social and economic history of the Han dynasty). Tokyo 東京：弘文堂 Kobundo.

 Vandermeersch, Léon. 1965. La formation du légisme. Recherche sur la constitution d'une philosophie

 politique caractéristique de la Chine ancienne. Paris: Ecole Française d'Extrême-Orient.

 Vogel, Hans Ulrich. 1994. Aspects of Metrosophy and Metrology during the Han Period. In Sous les
 nombres, le monde. Matériaux pour l'histoire culturelle du nombre en Chine ancienne, ed. Alexei
 Volkov, 135-152. Saint-Denis: Presses Universitaires de Vincennes.

 Volkov, Alexei. 1985. Priédvaritiérnyié riézoul'taty kolitchiéstviénnogo analiza ancvniékitaïskikh

 ètalonnykh sosoudov (Preliminary results of a quantitative analysis of ancient Chinese standard

 measuring vessels, in Russian). In 17th Proceedings of the Annual Congress of Sinologists "Society
 and State in China’’, 145-150. Moscow: Nauka.

 Volkov, Alexei. 1995. Quantitative analysis of Liu Xin's standard measuring vessels. In East Asian

 science: Tradition and beyond, ed. Keizô Hashimoto, Catherine Jami, and Lowell Skar, 377-384.
 Osaka: Kansai University Press.

 Wei Zheng et al.魏徵等.1973. History of the Sui [Dynasty]隋書.Beijing 北京:Zhonghua shuju 中華書

 局.

 Xiao Can 肖燥.2011. Yuelu shuyuan cang Qin jian “Shu”yanjiu 银麓書院藏秦簡《數》研究(Research
 on the Qin strips "Mathematics" Kept at the Academy Yuelu). Ph. D. thesis in history, Academy
 Yuelu 嶽麓書院，Hunan University 湖南大學，Changsha 長沙.

 Xiao Can 肖煤，and Hanmin Zhu 朱漢民.2009a. Yuelu shuyuan cang Qin jian "Shu" de zhuyao neirong

 ji qilishi jiazhi嵌麓書院藏秦侖《数》的主要内容À歷史價值（Main contents of the book on
 bamboo slips from the Qin Mathematics, kept at the Academy Yuelu, and its historical value).
 Zhongguo shi yanjiu 中國史研究(Research on the History of China) (3): 39-50.

 Xiao Can 肖煤，and Hanmin Zhu 朱漢民.2009b. Zhou Qin shiqi guwu cesuanfa ji bizhong guannian 周
 秦時期穀物測算法及比重觀念(The measurement of grains in the Zhou and Qin time periods and
 the concept of specific gravity). Ziran kexueshiyanjiu 自然科學史研宄(Research on the History of
 Natural Sciences) 28(4): 422-425.

 Yang Lien-sheng 楊聯陞.1950. Handai dingzhong, linji, misu, daxiaodanzhizhi《漢代丁 中、縻給、米
 粟、大小石ム制》（The systems of conscription, gratification in grain, husked and unhusked grain
 and small/large dan in the Han dynasty). Guoxue jikan 國學季刊(Journal of Sinological Studies) 7
 ⑴.“

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ê Springe

 Yang Lien-sheng 楊聯陸.2006. Zhongguo yuwenzhaji. Yang Lien-sheng Lunwenji 中國語文札記•榻聯

 陞論文集(Notes on Chinese language. Collected papers by Yang Lien-sheng). Beijing 北京：
 Zhongguo renmin daxue chubanshe 中國人民大學出版社.

 Zhangjiashan er si qi hao Han mu zhujian zhengli xiaozu 張家山 ニ 四七號漢墓竹簡整理小組 Group of edi

 tors of the bamboo strips from the Han tomb 247 at Zhangjiashan. 2001.Zhangjiashan Han mu zhujian
 (erbai sishi qi hao mu)張家山漢墓竹簡(ニ四七號墓）Bamboo slips from a Han tomb at
 Zhangjiashan (Tomb number 247). Beijing 北京:Wenwu chubanshe 文於出版社.

 Zhu Hanmin 朱漢民，and Songchang Chen 陳松長 zhubian 主編（gen. éd.). 2011. Yuelu shuyuan cang

 Qin jian (er)嵌麓書院藏秦簡(Qin Bamboo slips kept at the Academy Yuelu (2)). Shanghai
 上海:Shanghai cishu chubanshe i海辭書出版社.

 Zhu Hanmin 朱漢民，and Can Xiao 肖煤.2009. Cong Yuelu shuyuan cang Qin jian "Shu" kan Zhou Qin

 zhi ji de jihexue chengjiu從麓書院藏秦簡《数》看周_之際的条何_成就（The geometrical
 contributions of the period between the Zhou and the Qin from the perspective of the Qin book on
 bamboo slips Mathematics, kept at the Academy Yuelu). Zhongguo shi yanjiu 中國史研究
 (Research on the History of China) (3): 51-58.

 Zou Dahai 2007. Shuihudi bamboo strips of the Qin Dynasty and mathematics in Pre-Qin Period.

 Frontiers of History in China 2(4): 632-654. doi:10.1007/sl 1462-007-0030-8.

 Zou Dahai 鄰大海.2005. Shuihudi Qin jian yu xian Qin shuxue 睡虎地秦簡與先秦数學(The Qin slips

 from Shuihudi and pre-Qin mathematics). Kaogu 考古(Archeology) 2005(6): 537-545.

 Zou Dahai 鄰大海.2009. Guanyu "Suanshu shu”，Qin lii he shanggu liangmi jiliang danwei dejige wenti

 關於“算数書”，秦律和上古糧米計量單位如幾個問題（On some problems regarding the Book of
 Mathematical Procedures, Qin regulations and the ancient measuring units for cereals). Neimenggu
 shifan daxue xuebao (ziran kexue hanwen ban)内蒙古師範大學學報(自然科學漢文lk) Journal of
 Inner Mongolia Normal University (Natural Scienco-Chinese Edition) 38(5): 508-515.

