 

 

 

 

How Woodin changed his mind: new thoughts on the Continuum Hypothesis
Author(s): Colin J. Rittberg
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 2 (March 2015), pp. 125-151
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569622
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:20 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:125-151
 DOI10.1007/S00407-014-0142-8

 How Woodin changed his mind: new thoughts
 on the Continuum Hypothesis

 Colin J. Rittberg

 Received: 7 March 2014 / Published online: 16 December 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract The Continuum Problem has inspired set theorists and philosophers since

 the days of Cantorian set theory. In the last 15 years, W. Hugh Woodin, a leading set

 theorist, has not only taken it upon himself to engage in this question, he has also

 changed his mind about the answer. This paper illustrates Woodin's solutions to the

 problem, starting in Sect. 3 with his 1999-2004 argument that Cantor's hypothesis

 about the continuum was incorrect. From 2010 onwards, Woodin presents a very dif

 ferent argument, an argument that Cantor's hypothesis is in fact true. This argument is

 still incomplete, but according to Woodin, some of the philosophical issues surround

 ing the Continuum Problem have been reduced to precise mathematical questions,

 questions that are, unlike Cantor's hypothesis, solvable from our current theory of
 sets.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 126

 2 Large cardinal axioms 127
 3 The case against CH 129
 3.1 Exploring the universe from below 130
 3.2 A brief introduction to Ω-logic 133
 3.2.1 Ideas and concepts 133
 3.2.2 Technicalities 134
 3.3 Ω-Logic and the (*)-axiom 136

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 C. J. Rittberg (IS)
 Hatfield, UK

 e-mail: jakob.rittberg@gmail.com

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 126

 3.4 Summary
 4 The case for C H

 4.1 The fate of the Ω-conjecture
 4.2 Inner model theory ....
 4.3 Mathematical traction . . .

 5 Appendix A: Large cardinal axioms

 6 Appendix B: Definitions and results

 6.1 Results

 6.1.1 Universally baire sets .

 6.1.2 Projective determinacy

 6.2 Definitions

 1 Introduction

 C. J. Rittberg

 139

 139

 139

 140

 145

 146

 147

 147

 147

 148

 149

 The Continuum Problem is the question of how many subsets there are of the natural

 numbers. This problem arose from the original works of Cantor. His proposed solution

 has become known as the Continuum Hypothesis, CH: every infinite subset of the

 natural numbers is either countable or can be brought into a one-to-one correspondence

 with the whole powerset of the natural numbers. Cantor was unable to prove this

 hypothesis, and today we know that it is neither provable nor disprovable from our

 current theory of sets; it is an independent statement. The issue became a philosophical

 matter and has been discussed in that way ever since.1

 The CH is only one of the many known examples of mathematically interesting
 statements, which are independent from our current theory of sets. In the wake of

 the realisation of this, a new philosophical view on set theory arose. Assume, as so

 many set theorists do, some form of Platonism; that is, assume that there is a fact

 of the matter how the universe of sets looks like. Do the independence results show

 that there are in fact many different true universes, or is it the case that our theory is

 just not good enough yet to describe the one and only true universe fully? This is the

 pluralism/non-pluralism debate, explored further in Koellner (2014). This debate has

 obvious implications for a discussion of C H : if pluralism is true, then there are simply

 (true) universes where the CH is true and (true) universes where the C H fails. On a

 non-pluralist account, CH is either true or false in the one and only true universe of

 sets. As such, this debate sets a philosophical stage for what follows.2

 W. Hugh Woodin introduces his readers to the discussion on the CH by stating

 The generally accepted axioms for set theory- but I would call these the

 twentieth-century choice- are the Zermelo-Fraenkel Axioms together with the
 Axiom of Choice, ZFC. (Woodin 2001a, p. 567).

 1 See for example Ferreirôs (2007, pp. 190,21 Off, 333,382ff), or Koellner (2013) for more on the Continuum
 Hypothesis.

 2 Non-platonist conceptions of the metaphysics of set theory are dismissed by Woodin as basically untenable

 and are not discussed in this paper. See Woodin (2009a) for Woodin's argument against non-platonism.

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 127

 Here the thought that the ZFC axioms are merely our current choice and that new

 and better choices are possible is already visible. New axioms are necessary to resolve
 the Continuum Problem, but how would one find these new axioms? Woodin refers to

 the Axiom of Projective Determinacy, Ρ D, (see Sect. 6) which has been, according

 to him, largely accepted as true.

 But the truth of [PD] became only evident after a great deal of work. For

 me, the remarkable aspect of this is that it demonstrates that the discovery of

 mathematical truth is not a purely formal endeavour. (Woodin 2001a, p. 569).

 Hence, Woodin has reason to hope that the Continuum Problem can be solved. More

 strongly, Woodin has reasons to believe that it can be solved on the basis of a non

 pluralist account, and

 arguefs] that modulo the Ω-Conjecture [...], the generic-multiverse position [i.e.

 a form of pluralism] outlined above is not plausible. (Woodin 2009b, p. 17).

 Woodin has recently changed his opinion on the answer to the Continuum Problem.

 Ten years ago, he argued for it to be false, now he believes that it will turn out to be

 true. This paper explores his changing positions by presenting both the old argument

 against CH as well as the new argument for the truth of CH. Especially for the

 second argument, large cardinal axioms will be of importance, so I briefly introduce
 them here.

 2 Large cardinal axioms

 A large cardinal axiom is a statement that a very big set with certain properties exists.

 There are many different large cardinal axioms (also referred to as axioms of strong

 infinity), all proclaiming the existence of sets with certain properties. All such sets
 would be cardinals (hence the name), but the existence of such cardinals cannot be

 proved by our theory of sets, ZFC. One of the most illuminating examples of this is
 the large cardinal axiom, which states that there is an inaccessible cardinal (for the

 definitions of any large cardinal axiom mentioned in this paper, see Sect. 5). If there
 is an inaccessible cardinal, then we have a model for ZFC. But having a model for
 ZFC is equivalent to knowing that there are no contradictions following from ZFC,
 i.e. knowing that ZFC is consistent. By Godel's Second Incompleteness Theorem,

 we know that a theory can prove its own consistency if and only if it is inconsistent.

 Hence, if ZFC could prove that there is an inaccessible cardinal, then it could prove

 its own consistency and would hence be inconsistent.3 Note that this does not mean

 that there are no inaccessible cardinals. It only means that ZFC cannot prove that
 such cardinals exist.

 3 Remark: it is unknown, in fact unprovable from the ZFC axioms, if ZFC is consistent. The same holds

 true for number theory, for example. However, experience with these axiom systems makes it reasonable to

 expect that these systems are in fact consistent. It is common practice in set theory to assume the consistency
 of ZFC, and Woodin does so as well: "There will be no discovery ever of an inconsistency in Ζ F + AD"
 (Woodin 2009b, p. 10) (note that the consistency of ZF implies the consistency of ZFC by Gôdel's
 construction of L). I shall follow Woodin in this throughout this paper.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 128

 C. J. Rittberg

 Not only can the existence of such large cardinals not be proven from ZFC, it is
 not even known whether the existence of such sets is even consistent with ΖFC.4 But

 we do know that the large cardinal axioms can be well ordered by their consistency

 strength.5 Here is an (incomplete) list of large cardinal axioms, with the strongest at

 the top and the weakest at the bottom:

 There is a Reinhardt cardinal

 There is a η-huge cardinal

 There is a Huge cardinal
 There is an Extendible cardinal

 There is a Supercompact cardinal

 There is a Superstrong cardinal
 There is a Woodin cardinal

 There is a Measurable cardinal

 There is an Inaccessible cardinal

 Large cardinal axioms have an interesting feature: they can decide some of the

 problems, which are unsolvable from ZFC alone. An example of this to which I will
 come back in Sect. 4 is that the existence of a measurable cardinal implies that the

 universe of sets is larger than Gôdel's constructible universe. Another one we saw
 above: ZFC+'There is an inaccessible cardinal' implies the consistency of ZFC.

 This feature of large cardinal axioms plus the fact that they can be well-ordered results

 in something very interesting. Let φ and ψ be two set theoretic statements which

 ZFC neither proves nor disproves. It is then often the case that there are two large
 cardinal axioms LCA\ and LCAi such that ZFC + LCA\ proves (or disproves) φ
 and ZFC 4- LCA2 proves (or disproves) ψ. But LCA\ and LCA2 are well ordered
 by the large cardinal hierarchy, say, for example, LCA\ is stronger than LCA2■ We
 can hence say that φ has a higher degree of unsolvability than ψ because it needs

 a stronger large cardinal assumption to be proven (or disproven). That is: the large
 cardinal axioms give us a hierarchy of degrees of unsolvability. See Koellner (2011)
 for further details.

 Despite their usefulness, large cardinal axioms cannot decide CH. To explain this,

 I need to briefly discuss forcing.

 A model of the language of set theory consists of a collection of sets and a relation
 defined on them, which models the e-relation. Such a model is a model for ZFC if all

 the axioms of ZFC are true in the model. Cohen introduced the method of forcing,

 which allows the set theorist to very carefully add a specific set to a model of ZFC

 whilst simultaneously making sure that the resulting structure is still a model of Ζ FC.

 The latter part of that statement is highly non-trivial. Forcing has become one of the

 major tools of the set theorist. See Kunen (2006) for a good introduction to forcing,

 see Jech (2006) for deeper results.

 4 There is one exception to this. Kunen has proved that the existence of a Reinhardt cardinal is inconsistent

 with ZFC. The proof relies on the Axiom of Choice, and it is unknown if the existence of a Reinhardt is
 inconsistent with Ζ F (i.e. ZFC minus the Axiom of Choice). See Jech (2006) for details.

 5 Consistency strength: theory Γ has a higher consistency strength than theory 5 if the consistency of Τ

 implies the consistency of 5.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 129

 In particular, the CH can be made true or false by forcings, which are small in

 the sense that they act only on the lower (infinite) levels of the cumulative hierarchy.6

 In (1967), Lévy and Solovay proved that these kinds of small forcings do not act on

 the level of a measurable cardinal. That is, such small forcings only affect the lower

 levels, whilst the higher levels, the levels of a measurable cardinal and above, are not

 affected by the forcing. Hence, the existence of a measurable cardinal (or any stronger

 large cardinal) simply has no bearing on the truth value of the CH. This is the famous

 Lévy-Solovay Theorem.

 But even if large cardinals are not an instant-decision tool, the hierarchy of degrees

 of unsolvability has proven to be useful. This is at least one of the reasons why set

 theorists try to account for large cardinals. They are looking for arguments for the
 consistency of large cardinals with ZFC and frequently use large cardinals in their

 everyday work. This issue will be further touched upon in Sect. 4.

 I now come back to the main topic of this paper: Woodin's arguments for and against

 CH. Since his argument against the CH was prior to his argument in favour of the
 statement, I shall start there.

 3 The case against CH

 Woodin gave three very similar yet different arguments against CH. The first one

 was a technical tour-de-force, presented in Woodin (1999). Woodin was then able

 to capture the insights of this argument in his notion of Ω-logic. The study of this

 strengthening of classical first-order logic has become a centre piece of Woodin's
 research and is explained below. Using Ω-logic, Woodin could restate the case
 against CH more easily. Whilst this case was already made in Woodin (1999),
 it was expanded upon in the papers (Woodin 2001a, b). In these papers, Woodin
 considered even stronger logics, £2*-logics, to make his point. These logics, so he

 realised in Woodin (2004), can be dropped by introducing a satisfiability notion for
 Ω-logic. The case against CH, however, always stays essentially the same. By a
 rational reconstruction of already existing arguments for new axioms (which have
 been largely accepted according to Woodin), Woodin identifies certain desirable
 properties of these axioms. Statements that satisfy these properties (for a certain
 structure) are called good. Woodin showed that there are good statements which
 could hence function as new axioms for an extension of ZFC. He did so by pro
 ducing an example: the (*)-axiom (Star-axiom). The (boiled down) case against
 CH is that all good axioms imply ->CH, and the (*)-axiom shows that there are
 axioms, which are good. According to Woodin, we should be looking to extend

 ZFC by good axioms, and all those extensions imply -<CH. This is the case against
 CH.

 6 The cumulative hierarchy incorporates the idea that the universe of sets is build-up from below by taking

 the powerset and the union operation. This results in 'levels' within the hierarchy. See also the definition
 of the von Neumann universe V in Sect. 6.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 130

 C. J. Rittberg

 3.1 Exploring the universe from below

 In his two 2001 papers on the Continuum Hypothesis, Woodin was encouraged by the

 success that the Axiom of Projective Determinacy, PD, had enjoyed.7

 Projective Determinacy is the correct axiom for the projective sets; the ZFC

 axioms are obviously incomplete and, moreover, incomplete in a fundamental

 way. (Woodin 2001a, p. 575).

 This axiom had emerged from the study of a certain part of the universe of sets and had,

 according to Woodin, led to a canonical set theoretical theory of this sub-structure,

 which was previously missing. An idea of the 2001 papers was that it should therefore

 be possible to find a canonical theory for a larger part of the transfinite universe, and

 Woodin presented a candidate for such a theory.

 Formal arithmetic is defined via the axioms of Peano Arithmetic, PA. As Woodin

 stated:

 It seems that most mathematicians do believe that arithmetic statements are either

 true or false. (Woodin 2001a, p. 568).

 That is, PA is empirically complete: we do not know of any natural arithmetical

 statement, which is independent (i.e. neither provable nor disprovable) from PA. Of

 course, due to Godel's incompleteness theorems, there are statements in the language

 of arithmetic that are independent from PA, and this is why Woodin talked about
 natural statements here. Statements are natural if mathematicians come across them

 in their endeavours. Gôdel sentences and the like are artificial in that they serve to

 prove certain theorems, but are otherwise of no particular interest. These definitions

 are vague, but nonetheless it seems largely clear to the mathematical community what
 a natural and what an artificial statement is.

 The empirical completeness of PA is supported even further by the forcing com

 pleteness of PA. It is an elementary fact about Cohen's method of forcing that inde

 pendence from PA cannot be shown by going to a forcing extension.8

 I need to make one small detour here. There are two major ways in which the

 universe of sets can be given. By far the most common and well known is the von

 Neumann Hierarchy, i.e. the universe of sets is given in terms of the Va where a is an
 ordinal.9

 Another way of stratifying the universe of sets is in terms of the Η (κ) for cardinals

 κ, where Η {κ) contains all sets whose transitive closure is less than κ.10 It then holds

 7 The Axiom of Projective Determinacy will play only a minor part in this paper, and I shall neither give a

 formal definition nor an explanation of it here. The reader is referred to Jech (2006) and Kanamori (2009)
 for details.

 8 Woodin remarked that it is theoretically possible that a generalisation of forcing could be found, which
 could be used to prove independence results about PA. But not even an idea of how to come by such a

 generalisation, let alone the generalisation itself, is currently present.

 9 For a formal definition, see Sect. 6.

 10 A set a is transitive if from b e a and c e b follows that c e a. Transitive sets turn out to be of particular
 interest to the set theorist. The transitive closure of a set χ is the smallest transitive set, which contains x.

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 131

 that νω = Η (ω). Similarly, if CH holds, then Vœ+2 = Η (ω 2), and if the Generalised

 Continuum Hypothesis (2**· = Κί+ι for all i) holds, then these similarities are carried

 upwards. However, if CH fails, then Η {ω 2) is less rich than Va+2- On the other hand,

 the union of all the Va for all ordinals a is just the same as the union of all the Η (κ )

 for all cardinals κ, namely the whole universe. Hence, the Η (κ) stratification is more

 fine grained than the von Neumann's Va stratification. As Woodin put it:

 If CH fails, then these two structures can be very different, with the former struc

 ture [{H(u)\), e)] possibly being fundamentally simpler than the latter structure.
 (Woodin 2001a, p. 570).

 This is why Woodin worked with the Η (κ) s rather than the von Neumann universe.

 In terms of completeness, it is well known that one can transform any model of

 arithmetic into a model of set theory. Woodin did this and obtained (Η (ω), e). The

 theory that holds in this structure, i.e. the structure theory of (Η (ω), e), is ZFC with

 the Axiom of Infinity replaced by its negation. Just as with PA, this theory is then

 empirically and forcing complete for the structure. In fact, PA and this theory are

 logically equivalent.

 Woodin then turned his attention to the structure {H(a> 1), e), whose structure the

 ory is second-order number theory.11 For this structure, the theory ZFC + ΡD is

 empirically complete, where Ρ D stands for the Axiom of Projective Determinacy.

 Projective Determinacy settles (in the context of ZFC) the classical questions

 concerning the projective sets and moreover Cohen's method of forcing cannot

 be used to establish that questions of second order number theory are formally

 unsolvable from this axiom. (Woodin 2004, p. 3).

 However, unlike PA, PD is not forcing stable, i.e. PD can be destroyed by forcing.

 This can be circumvented by assuming class many Woodin cardinals,12 as will be seen

 in the next section. ZFC + PD is hence effectively forcing complete.

 Ρ A and ZFC + PD sue hence, for their respective structures, both empirically and

 (effectively) forcing complete. Woodin called such theories canonical. But canoni

 calness alone did not suffice for Woodin. Recall that he is a non-pluralist platonist.

 If canonicalness were everything, there is to a good set theoretic theory, and then, it

 would be unclear why there should be only one such theory for every structure. In fact,

 as we will see below, in general, there are many of them. It is hence important that

 the axioms of the canonical theory are also true. The truth of PA and ZFC is usually
 unquestioned, and Woodin did not even mention his agreement here. The problem

 lies with ΡD. Why should PD be seen as true? Set theorists have studied this axiom

 extensively, and their results are seen by many to support the truth of Ρ D. A discussion

 of these results would lead too far astray. The reader is referred to Woodin (2001a) for

 11 Second-order languages allow quantifications not only over variables, but also over sets of variables.

 12 A proper class is a collection, which is too big to be a set. Classical examples of a proper classes are

 the universe of all sets and the collection of all the ordinal numbers. Classes are too big to be measured by
 standard measurements via cardinalities. A collection is said to contain class many elements if it contains
 as many elements as there are ordinals.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 132

 C. J. Rittberg

 a brief discussion of some of these results or to Sect. 6 for a short example. Woodin

 answered the question about the truth of ΡD as follows:

 Finally the intricate connections between this axiom [PD] and large cardinal

 axioms provide compelling evidence that this axiom is true. For me, granting

 the truth of the axioms for Set Theory, the only conceivable argument against

 the truth of this axiom, would be its inconsistency. I also claim that, at present,

 the only credible basis for the belief that the axiom is consistent is the belief

 that the axiom is true. This state of affairs could change as the number theoretic

 consequences of the axiom become more fully understood. (Woodin 2004, p. 3).

 Woodin hence argued that the mathematical results proven by the set theoretic

 community can support the truth of this axiom. Recall here also the citation given
 above

 the truth of [PD] became evident only after a great deal of work. For me, a

 remarkable aspect of this is that it demonstrates that the discovery of mathemat

 ical truth is not a purely formal endeavour. (Woodin 2001a)

 That is, for Woodin, it was possible to discover true axioms via mathematical results.

 It was hence possible to find true canonical theories for structures for which previously

 no such theory was known. Woodin found this encouraging. He was now in a situation

 where there is a true canonical theory for (Η {ω), e) and a true canonical theory for
 (Η{ωι), e). He then took the next step: (Η(0)2), e).

 In the structure {Η(ω2), e), the Continuum Hypothesis is decided. This is because

 the CH can be expressed as a statement about Η(ω2). Therefore, if a true canonical

 theory for (H(co2), e) would be found, the CH would have found an answer. This was

 Woodin's goal. The problem was how to come up with a canonical theory for this
 structure.

 What Woodin was looking for was a theory for H{002), which is forcing invari

 ant, i.e. for which independence results cannot be proven via forcing. A major prob
 lem was that such a theory cannot be generated by large cardinal extensions of
 ZFC; see the Lévy-Solovay Theorem discussed in Sect. 2. So how to find suitable

 axioms that, when added to ZFC, form a theory that satisfies the request for forcing
 invariance?

 Woodin (1999) explored the non-stationary ideal13 on ω\ and managed, in a tech

 nical tour de force and with the help of additional assumptions, to derive a statement

 (*) that, when added to ZFC, resulted in a forcing invariant theory. In the same

 book, Woodin realised that the needed technicalities can be captured by a strengthen

 ing of classical logic to Ω-logic. This paper will be concerned only with the Ω-logic

 approach.

 <£) Springer

 13 A treatment of the non-stationary ideal on ω\ is beyond the scope of this paper; see Jech (2006) for
 details; see Sect. 6 for a formal definition.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 133

 3.2 A brief introduction to Ω-logic

 Ω-logic was first introduced by Woodin in the first edition of Woodin (1999).14 Since

 then it has received further refinement by Woodin. The brief introduction to the topic
 that follows is based on these refinements and is meant as a short overview for the

 reader rather than as a description of a historical development. In the first part of this

 section, the ideas and concepts of Ω-logic are informally introduced. The second part

 then revisits these concepts and explains them in more technical detail.

 3.2.1 Ideas and concepts

 In formal endeavours, there are two classical ways to decide whether a certain con

 clusion C follows from some premisses Pq Pn. The first is to follow certain rules

 to construct a proof of the conclusion from those premisses. These rules of proof are

 captured in the provability notion, a syntactic notion, and we write Pq Pn\- C.

 The second way to decide whether the conclusion follows from the premisses is to

 construct a counter-example, i.e. a situation in which all the premisses are true, but
 the conclusion is false. Such a situation amounts to the construction of a model where

 all the premisses are true, but the conclusion is false. Of course, this disproves the

 conclusion. Turning this around, one obtains that the conclusion follows from the

 premisses if for all models in which the premisses hold, the conclusion holds as well.

 This is the validity notion, a semantic notion, and we write Pq Pn I= C. For the

 construction of Ω-logic, both the provability and the validity notion will be changed.

 The method of forcing can change the truth values of some statements in the lan

 guage of set theory (e.g. CH) but not of all of them (e.g. ZFC holds in every forcing
 extension of a ZFC model). The main idea of Ω-logic is to define a new validity

 notion such that all statements which are true in the ground model and whose truth

 value cannot be altered by forcing are considered to be valid. This makes Ω-logic a
 strong logic in the sense that every statement which is valid in classical (first order)

 logic is also valid in Ω-logic but not vice versa. For example, the consistency of ZFC,
 Con(ZFC), is Ω-valid from ΖFC (->Con(ZFC) is not forceable from a Ζ FC model)

 but famously not classically valid from ZFC; cf. (Bagaria et al. 2006, p. 4).

 With the semantic notion of Ω-validity in place, the search for an Ω-provability

 notion begins. In classical logic, proofs are finite. However, Ω-logic is a strong logic,

 and so it is reasonable to expect (or demand) that proofs are no longer finite but may

 be infinite. This is not unprecedented. Via Gôdel numbering we are already used to

 regard formulae as natural numbers. Proofs are then finite sets of natural numbers. It is

 then a small step to allow for infinite sets of natural numbers as proofs. An infinite set

 of natural numbers is a real (i.e. an element of R), and a collection of such infinitary

 proofs is hence a set of reals. In Ω-logic, a proof is such a set of reals, i.e. an Ω-proof is a

 subset of the reals. This makes a proof in Ω-logic big in the sense that it is uncountable,

 but it is also not too big in the sense that its cardinality is at most the cardinality of the

 continuum. Woodin then demanded of his Ω-validity notion that the proof survives

 14 Note that Woodin's Ω-logic is different from ω-logic.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 134

 C. J. Rittberg

 the transition into forcing extensions. This is made precise by the notion of A closed

 models (see below), where A is the Ω-proof. The Ω-provability notion is hence, in

 a well-defined sense, invariant under forcings. This links to the considerations about

 Ω-validity above.

 provable.

 A question is if the semantic (=n and the syntactic notions in Ω-logic match

 in the sense of Gôdel's completeness theorem for first-order logic.15 Soundness is

 Theorem 3.1 (Ω-soundness) Suppose that Τ is a set of sentences, that φ is a sentence,
 and that Τ φ. Then Τ |=ω Φ- (Woodin 2004, p. 7).

 For completeness on the other hand, a proof is still missing and Woodin has formulated

 this completeness as the Ω-conjecture (see below).

 3.2.2 Technicalities

 As mentioned above, the idea behind the definition of Ω-logic is to define a logic

 whose validity notion is forcing invariant. The new validity notion |=ω is defined as

 For all statements φ in the language of set theory: ZFC [=ω φ if, for all ordinals

 a, in all forcing extensions in which ZFC holds at the at h level, φ holds at the
 ath level as well.

 This definition can be generalised by replacing ZFC by any recursively enumerable

 extension Τ of ZFC.

 ZFC |=ω φ is an (at most Π2) formula, which can be expressed in the language of

 set theory. It hence makes sense to ask if Ζ FC (=q φ holds in some forcing extension
 of the universe of sets V. Using this, one can now make the question for the forcing

 invariance of \=q more precise:

 Is it the case that ZFC |=ω φ holds in V if and only if ZFC |=ω Φ holds in
 every forcing extension of VI

 Woodin (1999) had shown that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, then

 the above holds.

 The assumption that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals is often made

 by Woodin. In fact, many results of Ω-logic rely on it. Here is an argument for this

 assumption. It is a very subtle one and one that was not explicitly made by Woodin in

 his papers. Recall that for him ΡD is a true axiom. PD is equivalent to the statement

 'for every η there is a Mn such that Mn is a specific model in which η Woodin cardinals

 exist'. The truth of ΡD is hence a good argument for the truth of this statement. The

 problem is, however, that the statement is not a large cardinal axiom in the strict sense

 as it posits the existence of models and not sets. The weakest large cardinal assumption

 that implies Ρ D is that there are infinitely many Woodin cardinals, but then there is

 wiggle-room in consistency strength (i.e. the reverse direction of the implication does

 15 Α-logic is sound if from the fact that there is an A-proof of the statement φ from some premisses T, i.e.

 Τ hA φ, it follows that φ is also Λ-valid from T, i.e. Τ [=/\ φ. Λ-logic is complete if Γ \=α φ implies that

 Τ hA φ. From Godel's Completeness Theorem, it follows that for classical logic, Τ 1= φ iff Τ l· φ.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 135

 not hold). Nonetheless, the existence of infinitely many Woodin cardinals can be seen

 as an argument for the truth of Ρ D. But Woodin wanted PD to hold through forcing

 extensions (it is a true axiom; hence, it should be true in all forcing extensions). By

 moving to a forcing extension, we can 'kill' Woodin cardinals, i.e. the Woodin cardinal

 looses its property of being a Woodin cardinal in a forcing extension. Hence, if there

 are only infinitely many Woodin cardinals, then we could 'kill enough of them' to

 reach a forcing extension where there are no longer enough of them to ensure ΡD.

 To remedy this, we need unboundedly many Woodin cardinals in the ground model.

 In this scenario, no matter how many Woodin cardinals we kill, there will always

 remain enough to ensure ΡD. This means that we need class many Woodin cardinals

 to start with.16 Hence, we have an argument for 'there is a proper class of Woodin
 cardinals'.17

 With a definition of the semantic notion |=& in place, we now look for a correspond

 ing syntactic notion l·^. As mentioned above, classically proofs are finite sequences

 of statements, i.e. via Gôdel numbering, finite sequences of natural numbers. Infinite

 proofs are hence infinite sets of natural numbers, i.e. reals. The provability notion

 of Ω-logic relies on multiple infinite proofs, i.e. sets of reals A ç R. For technical

 reasons beyond the scope of this paper, it is assumed that A is universally Baire; see

 Sect. 6 for a definition. Such a set of proofs then proves many different formulae.

 However, (thanks to A being universally Baire), we can use the Wadge hierarchy (see

 Sect. 6) to define the length of an Ω-logic proof. It makes therefore sense to talk about

 the shortest Ω-proof A for φ. An Ω-proof hence has similarities to an ordinary proof.

 The forcing invariance of F-q translates into this picture as 'carrying over' A into

 the forcing extension. We are in a position where we have an Ω-proof A (which is

 just a subset of the reals) in some model M and we wish that A survives the transition

 into a forcing extension of M. This can be made precise by demanding that M is

 Α-closed. Woodin has introduced many different ways to formalise this, all of which

 are equivalent; cf. (Bagaria et al. 2006, Prop. 2.9).18

 With this in mind recall Gôdel's Completeness Theorem:

 A theory proves φ if and only if all models of said theory also model φ.

 That is, as test-structures, all models are allowed. By restricting the class of test
 structures, one obtains a stronger logic. A maximal case of this is allowing only a

 single test-structure, in which case the strong logic would decide every statement. The

 16 For connoisseurs: To demand unboundedly, many Woodins is to demand a process. That this process

 can be regarded as an object in its own right is due to a principle already present in Cantor: 'for every rule
 or process by means of which a collection of elements is obtained there is a set which contains exactly

 the elements which conform to the rule, or are obtained in the process, respectively' (Fraenkel et al. 1984,
 pp. 30-31). Of course today we know that the above formulation leads to inconsistencies (it allows for

 the Russell set) and have hence changed the word 'set' to 'class' in the above. The process of having

 unboundedly many Woodin cardinals is hence simply the same as having a class of Woodin cardinals.

 17 I am indebted to José Ferreirôs and especially Dominik Adolf for drawing my attention to this subtlety.

 18 For connoisseurs: Given a universally Baire set A, an e-model M of (a fragment of) ZFC. Then, M is
 Α-closed if for all posets Ρ e M and all V generic filters GÇP;
 V[G] μ M[G] Π e M[G].

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 136

 C. J. Rittberg

 above considerations present us with a different class of test-structures: the Λ-closed
 models.19

 Woodin defined the Ω-provability relation as

 ZFC φ if there exists a universally Baire set A such that for all A-closed,
 countable, transitive models M and for all ordinals a in M\ if Μ Π Va \= ZFC
 then Μ Π Va |= φ.

 Notice that the relation is defined only in case there is a model of ZFC, i.e.

 the consistency of ZFC is a necessary assumption for Ω-logic. Notice also that the

 above definition is given under the assumption that there is a proper class of Woodin

 cardinals. As mentioned elsewhere, this assumption is frequently made when dealing

 with Ω-logic. However, it is possible to define without this assumption, see Bagaria

 et al. (2006). Where the assumption is needed is for the forcing invariance of the

 relation. That is, if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, then ZFC φ holds

 in V if and only if it holds in every forcing extension of V.

 We now have a semantic and a syntactic notion. A natural question to ask is if
 these two coincide. Woodin (1999) showed soundness, i.e. that 'ZFC φ implies
 ZFC (=Ω Φ'· Completeness, i.e. the other direction of the implication, is still an open

 problem. Woodin has formulated this as the

 Ω-Conjecture: If there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, then ZFC φ
 if and only if ZFC )=ω Φ·

 3.3 Ω-Logic and the (*)-axiom

 I now return to Woodin's search for a canonical (i.e. empirically complete and effec

 tively forcing complete) axiomatisation of (Η(ω2), e). Canonical axiomatisation was,

 from Woodin's point of view, left as an imprecise notion. Given the above consider
 ations about Ω-logic, Woodin saw himself in a position to make this notion more

 precise, namely by formalising it using the new notion of Ω-provability. His point

 can be put thus: an empirically complete theory is empirically complete because we

 cannot prove the independence of (natural) mathematical statements from this theory.

 Independence proofs are (mostly) done via forcing; hence, these empirically complete

 theories are effectively forcing complete (i.e. they are canonical). To model this sit

 uation by a proof relation in a strong logic therefore requires the new proof relation

 to be invariant under forcing. As seen above, is invariant under forcing (assuming

 a proper class of Woodin cardinals). Therefore, according to Woodin, Ω-provability

 can model canonicalness of theories. The following theorem is an intuition pump for
 this:

 19 For connoisseurs: There are only countably many sentences in the language of set theory, and the

 universally Baire sets are closed under preimages by Borel functions and countable unions. Therefore,
 there exists a single Λβ such that the class of models under consideration here are the -4 q-closed models.

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 137

 Theorem 3.2 Suppose there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then for each

 sentence φ,

 if and only if

 Woodin (2001b).

 ZFC Ηω"<Η(ωχ),ϊ)\=φ"

 (Η(ωi),e> \=φ.

 We have already seen that there is a canonical theory for (Η(ω\), e).20 Woodin's

 idea was that the above theorem expresses this canonicalness.

 The search for a canonical theory for (Η{ωι), e) could hence be expressed thus:

 Can there exist a sentence ψ such that for all sentences φ either

 ZFC + irhn

 or

 ZFC + "(H(ft)2), e) μ -0"

 and such that ZFC + ψ is Ω-consistent? (Woodin 2001b, p. 686).

 Call such ψ good. A good ψ is hence such a ψ that, when added to ZFC, completely

 determines, in Ω-logic, the structure theory of {Η(ω2), e). Such a ψ would, granting

 Ω-logic, generate a canonical theory for (H(c02), e). It would hence decide the CH

 (recall that CH becomes decided in this structure). But is there such a good ψΐ

 Woodin came close to constructing a good ψ. The additional assumption he needed
 was that there is an inaccessible cardinal, which is a limit of Woodin cardinals. Given

 this assumption, his (*)-axiom (Star-axiom) is good.21 The definition of this axiom
 is technical. I shall give it here and refer the reader to Sect. 6 for a discussion of the

 relevant concepts.

 Axiom (*): There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, and for each projective set
 X ç R, for each Π2 sentence φ, if the theory

 ZFC + "(H{a)j),INs,X,e) \=φ"

 is Ω-consistent, then

 Woodin (2001b, p. 687).

 {H((02),Iat5.X,c) h Φ

 20 Keep in mind that the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals guarantees PD.

 21 For connoisseurs: The assumption is needed for Ω-consistency.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 138

 C. J. Rittberg

 This axiom is provably good in the above sense. Furthermore, the following important

 result can be proven:

 Theorem 3.3 The (*)-axiom implies 2K° = K2,

 i.e. the (*)-axiom implies that the CH is false. This amounts to a case against CH.
 Recall that (*) is good. By the representation of canonicalness via the relation,
 this means that Ζ FC + (*) is a canonical theory, i.e. ZFC + (*) is effectively forcing

 complete and empirically complete. But this is what Woodin had individuated as
 criteria that the theories PA (or its set theoretic representation) and ZFC + PD
 satisfy. ZFC + (*) satisfies these criteria also and hence could be seen as suitable or
 even as true.

 The above argument is weak. There might be other axioms that, when added to

 ZFC, also satisfy these criteria. Whilst true, this is not troublesome. Here is the

 argument. Consider, for any good axiom ψ, the theory Τψ which contains all those φ
 such that H(a>2) f= φ is Ω-valid from ZFC + ψ. That is: Τψ = {φ | ZFC + ψ (=ω
 "Η(ω2) \= φ"}. Woodin had shown that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals

 and the Ω-conjecture holds, then -<CΗ is an element of Τψ for all good ψ. This means
 that as long as we add a good axiom to ZFC we will get a structure theory for Η (ω 2)

 which includes the negation of the CH, i.e. which says that CH is false. In short: all

 good extensions of ZFC imply that CH is false.

 There is, however, another problem. By a result of 2009 by Koellner and Woodin,

 the good extensions of ZFC are manifold. They managed to construct out of a good

 extension of ZFC, Τψ0, another good extension of ZFC, Τψι, such that Τψ0 φ Τψί.
 So even though the theories all agree that the CH is false, they disagree elsewhere.
 But then: which theory should we accept? This question is important, especially in

 the light of a non-pluralist understanding of the metaphysics of set theory.

 Woodin has given no clear answer to this question. In Woodin (2001b), he presented

 7(*) as the most promising candidate. Nonetheless, he concluded his paper with

 So, is the Continuum Hypothesis solvable? Perhaps I am not completely con

 fident the 'solution' I have sketched is the solution, but it is for me convincing

 evidence that there is a solution. (Woodin 2001b, p. 690).

 A possible reading of this quote is that Woodin made a case against CH, not a

 case for the (*)-axiom. The (*)-axiom was only used to show that there are good
 axioms. This conflicts with his focus on the (*)-axiom in the paper. Throughout the

 paper, it seems that the (*)-axiom is presented as the axiom candidate we should

 accept. Accepting this axiom would not only show that the C Η is false (as every good

 axiom would) but it would settle the question of the power of the continuum: under
 the (*)-axiom 2**° = K2.

 Woodin (2004) only discussed the (*)-axiom. The whole confusion that there are
 other good axioms were left out. This pushed the (*)-axiom again as the good axiom

 we should accept.

 Koellner (2013) showed that 7(*) is in a well-defined sense maximal amongst the

 Τψ (for good ψ). Therefore, we should accept the (*)-axiom. This seems reasonable,

 but an argument why we should accept maximal theories is not given. In fact, Γ(*) is

 £1 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 139

 maximal for an enrichment of Η (ω2) by the non-stationary ideal (on ω\) and a subset

 of the reals of L(R).22 Why is maximality for this structure desirable? This question

 is not answered in Koellner's paper.

 3.4 Summary

 Woodin had considered fragments of the universe of sets V. The first fragment, Η (ω),

 is (equivalent to) the structure of (first order) number theory. ZFC with the Axiom of

 Infinity replaced by its negation is a canonical (i.e. good) theory for this structure.

 The second fragment is Η (ω \). The canonical theory for this structure is ZFC +

 ΡD. This theory was found only by much work, work which has not been discussed

 in this paper.

 The third fragment of V is Η (ω2). It is in this fragment that the CH becomes
 decided. Via Ω-logic (plus the assumption that there is a proper class of Woodin
 cardinals; that there is an inaccessible cardinal which is a limit of Woodin cardinals;

 and that the Ω-conjecture holds), Woodin could show that there is a canonical theory
 for this structure: ZFC + (*). This theory implies 2K° = K2 (i.e. ->CH). What is
 more, every canonical theory for this structure implies -<CΗ.

 Is this process of gradually working ourselves upwards the infinite ladder of the

 fragments of V satisfying? Could it not be that the process stops at some point? And

 is it not off-putting that we have analysed only such a minuscule part of the transfinite

 universe? Woodin disagrees:

 I see no reason why this [process] should stop here and I am not unduly dis

 couraged by the fact that these structures are negligible initial segments of the

 universe of sets. (Woodin 2004, closing words).

 4 The case for CH

 In 2010, Woodin's tone changes. Where he was earlier ready to analyse the set theoretic

 universe fragment by fragment, he now presents an argument for a form of extension

 of ZFC based on the whole universe. He moved from a local to a global argument.
 This change came about, according to Woodin, because of new mathematical results

 that he was able to prove.

 4.1 The fate of the Ω-conjecture

 The results in Sect. 3 rely on the Ω-conjecture. Without it, Ω-logic would be far less

 compelling, which would in turn weaken Woodin's results. So the question becomes:

 How to prove the Ω-conjecture?

 As a first observation it has to be noted that if the Ω-conjecture holds in V, then

 it holds in every forcing extension of V. This is a very strong result, which indicates

 22 See Sect. 6 for a discussion of L(R).

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 140

 C. J. Rittberg

 that the Ω-conjecture might be disprovable. After all, we would only have to find a

 forcing extension of V where the conjecture does not hold in order to disprove it.

 Thus it is not unreasonable to expect both that the Ω-Conjecture has an answer

 and further if that answer is that it is false, then the Ω-Conjecture be refuted

 from some large cardinal hypothesis. (Woodin 2010b, p. 4).23

 But it turns out that the level of such a large cardinal in the large cardinal hierarchy

 would have to be rather big; it would have to be beyond the level accounted for by a

 certain type of inner model. This will be explained in more detail below. But if the

 Ω-conjecture would be true, then there would be no such critical level. This question,

 is there a critical level or not, is Woodin's motivation to start his project in inner model

 theory, the results of which can be found in large parts in Woodin (2010b) and Woodin
 (2011).

 As it turns out there is evidence (but no formal proof) that there is no such critical

 level and that the Ω-conjecture is in fact true. But in the course of collecting the

 evidence for this, something else happened. Woodin was able to show that if an inner

 model could be found which accommodates supercompact cardinals, then, contrary to

 what holds for smaller large cardinals, this inner model would accommodate all other

 large cardinals (consistent with ZFC). This remarkable result (or more precisely:

 the work surrounding it) then gives rise to a new kind of axiom, the axiom that V is

 Ultimate-!. In turn, this axiom would decide the independent statements, statements
 such as the CH. The aim of this section is to make what has been said thus far more

 precise.

 4.2 Inner model theory

 Gôdel had shown the consistency of the Axiom of Choice, AC, with Ζ F (the axioms

 of ZFC without AC) by a construction of a model for ZF. Gôdel assumed that the
 Ζ F axioms are consistent and constructed the so-called constructible universe, which

 is classically denoted by L; (Gôdel 1938, 1939, 1940). In this model, AC holds.
 Hence, assuming the consistency of ZF, there is no inconsistency in ZF + AC (i.e.

 ZFC). This model, L, gives a very well understood structure, and its structure theory

 is effectively complete in a sense similar to the effective completeness of ZFC + Ρ D

 for Η(ωι). So why not accept V — L, i.e. the axiom which states that the universe of
 sets is in fact the constructible universe, as correct? ZFC+V = L is a well understood

 theory which resolves most set theoretical questions. For example, it proves the CH.

 However, L does not accommodate large cardinals. This was shown by Scott:

 Theorem 4.1 Suppose there is a measurable cardinal. Then V φ L; Scott (1961).

 Woodin is known to add in his presentations after Scott's theorem the following "(meta)
 corollary" [e.g. in Woodin (2010c)].

 Corollary 4.2 V Φ L

 23 This argument can be strengthened by regarding the corresponding claim for the non-trivial Ω
 satisfiability of the Ω-conjecture, see (Woodin 2010b, p. 4).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 141

 Woodin expresses here his convictions that there are measurable cardinals. Measurable

 cardinals are relatively small large cardinals (i.e. they are low in the hierarchy). And

 if L cannot accommodate these small large cardinals, it cannot accommodate any

 larger large cardinals. So, if V = L, then there are no large cardinals at the level of a
 measurable cardinal or above. This is Woodin's case against V = L, and it is a case

 which he shares with a majority of the set theoretical community.

 The inner model programme seeks L-like structures, i.e. models which are as well

 understood as L, and which can accommodate large cardinals. This programme is

 based on work of Lévy (1957,1960) and Hajnal (1956,1960). These mathematicians

 presented independently from each other the generalisations L[E] and L(E) of L,

 respectively.24 Scott's theorem cited above can be said to have started the inner model

 programme; (Mitchell 2012, p. 5). Solovay, working on measurable cardinals at the

 time, then initiated work on L[E] as analogous to L. One of the main results of this

 direction of study is that L[E] can be constructed in such a fashion that it contains

 a measurable cardinal. However, Solovay also showed that this L[E] only contains a

 single measurable cardinal and cannot contain any large cardinal, which is higher in

 the large cardinal hierarchy than a measurable cardinal; in L[E], a version of Scott's

 theorem holds. L[E] is an inner model, a concept introduced by Shepherdson who

 had largely proof-theoretic aims in mind; (Shepherdson 1951). Today the term 'inner

 model' is reserved for a special case: A proper class M is an inner model if and only

 if M is a transitive é-model of Ζ F (Kanamori 2009, p. 33).

 Powell (1974) introduced the concept of extenders in a general context. Extenders

 are functions derived from elementary embeddings, where elementary embeddings are

 functions between models, which preserve truth. Mitchell (1979) then used extenders

 in large cardinal theory and his work was further extended by Dodd (1982). The idea

 was that large cardinals can be defined in terms of elementary embeddings from which

 extenders can be derived. These can then be used in the construction of Solovay's
 L[E] for example. By allowing extender sequences, Mitchell, Jensen and Dodd were
 able to construct L-like models for strong and superstrong cardinals. There is not

 enough room here to fully develop the history of the inner model programme. It was

 influenced by work on determinacy and by its brother-programme, the core model

 programme. See Kanamori (2009) for the early stages of this history, see Mitchell

 (2012) for more recent developments. Today the best results, according to Woodin,

 are the Mitchell-Steel extender models, presented in Mitchell and Steel (1994), which
 can accommodate Woodin cardinals.

 To understand the heuristic of the inner model programme, it will be helpful to

 sketch the construction of Solovay's L[E] in the modern extender-terminology.

 Assume we are looking for a model which accommodates a measurable cardinal.

 Just as Gôdel assumed the consistency of Ζ F for the construction of L, we now

 24 In the ordinary construction of L, we use the definable powerset operation Voef for successor steps:
 La+1 = ~PDef(La), where La+\ contains all those subsets of La that are definable from a finite number
 of elements of La by a formula relativised to La. For the construction of L[E], not only the elements of

 La are used as defining parameters, but also elements of E. The construction of L(E) proceeds just like

 the construction of L but rather than starting form the empty set 0 the construction is started from the set
 E. See Sect. 6 for formal definitions. The differences between L.\E] and L(E) are most clearly seen by
 observing that, in general, Ε e L(E) but not Ε e L[E\.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 142

 C. J. Rittberg

 assume the consistency of ZFC+'There is a measurable cardinal'.25 The idea is to use

 Lévy's model L[E], Let Ε be the extender given to us by the elementary embedding,
 which defines the measurable cardinal. Then, L[E] is the model one obtains when

 constructing L whilst using the information coded in E. In this model, ZFC+'There

 is a measurable cardinal' holds. This was the first goal. But furthermore this model is,

 similar to L, 'simple' and can be very well analysed; it is L-like.

 As stated above, this L-likeness even goes so far that there is a corresponding result

 to Scott's theorem in L[E]\ L[E] cannot accommodate any large cardinals above the

 level of a measurable cardinal. That is why there has never been a proposal for a new
 axiom of the form V = L[E]. So it is up to the inner model programme again to
 find L-like structures, which could accommodate even stronger axioms. However, it

 turns out that this is not possible with a single extender. That is, the example given

 above is the only case in which an L-like structure can be obtained by one extender.

 The problem lies in the derivation of the extender Ε from the elementary embedding.

 Recall that the elementary embedding is closely linked to the large cardinal under

 consideration. An extender then codes some of the information about this embedding,

 but not all of it. The problem is that for stronger large cardinals, a single extender does

 not code enough information about the embedding, too much gets lost.

 There is an obvious remedy to this—allow for sequences of extenders—but it comes

 with a problem. The more information is fed into the construction of the new L-like

 structure, the less L-like it is going to be. The new structure will be more and more

 complicated and less and less well analysable. It is this trade-off between reaching

 larger large cardinals and the loss of L-likeness that the inner model programme has
 to balance.

 Mitchell, Jensen and Dodd allowed for sequences of extenders, which changed the
 heuristic as follows: target the large cardinal axiom φ and assume ZFC + φ to be
 consistent. Hence, there is an elementary embedding. From this embedding, one can

 generate a sequence of extenders. Add the information coded in this sequence to the
 construction of L to obtain a model for ZFC + φ. This method has proven to be
 very fruitful in the sense that models which can accommodate large cardinals which
 are stronger than measurable cardinals have been constructed. However, a version

 of Scott's theorem holds again in all these models. Hence, every model constructed

 in this way is limiting, it can only accommodate large cardinals up to the targeted

 large cardinal axiom, but no larger one. So it is up to the inner model programme to

 find yet another model to reach higher and higher levels of large cardinal axioms. As
 mentioned above, Mitchell-Steel extender models can accommodate Woodin cardinals

 and, assuming an iteration hypothesis, they extend it to a level just below that of a

 supercompact.26

 25 Notice one key difference in the assumptions between Godel's construction of a model and how the inner
 model programme resolves the issue. Gôdel did not assume anything about AC or CH, yet his resulting
 model believed both statements. Hence, he had proven consistency of AC and CH with ZF. The inner

 model programme on the other hand assumes the consistency of ZFC plus whatever large cardinal axiom

 is under scrutiny and then tries to find a model for it. That is, the inner model programme does not prove

 consistency of ZFC plus the large cardinal axiom because consistency is already set as a premiss.

 26 The reader might find it helpful to refer back to Sect. 2 and the (incomplete) list of large cardinal axioms

 given there to 'see the picture'.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 143

 Recent work of Woodin has led to a remarkable result (Woodin 2010b). Woodin

 starts by assuming that there is an inner model, which can accommodate a supercom

 pact cardinal. It has to be noted that this is a strong assumption. No such model has
 been found thus far (in the sense in which a model which can accommodate a mea

 surable cardinal has been found). The surprising result is that if such an inner model

 could be found, then it would accommodate all large cardinals (that are consistent
 with ZFC).

 [T]his is a paradigm shift in the whole conception of inner models. (Woodin
 2009a, p. 21).

 Where the structures thus far produced by the inner model programme stop somewhere

 near the middle of the large cardinal hierarchy (due to versions of Scott's theorem),

 this new model would go all the way up to the top. Furthermore, this inner model
 would be 'close to V' in a well-defined sense. This makes this model the, as Woodin

 calls it, Ultimate L. It is L-like, can accommodate all large cardinal axioms (consistent
 with ZFC) and is 'close to V\ Furthermore, the axiom V = Ultimate L could resolve

 the undecidability problems. This is discussed in more detail below.

 To recapitulate. The Inner Model Programme seeks L-like structures that can

 accommodate large cardinal axioms. Each such structure comes with a version of

 Scott's theorem, resulting in the fact that the targeted large cardinal can be accom

 modated, but no stronger one. This changes at the level of a supercompact cardinal.

 However, this level has not been reached yet.

 In fact, the level of a supercompact cannot be reached by the current methods of the

 Inner Model Programme. The point is that up until now extender models have been
 used by the Inner Model Programme. However, no (Mitchell-Steel) extender model

 can accommodate supercompact cardinals, as Woodin has shown (Woodin 2010b). But

 this does not mean that supercompact cardinals cannot be accommodated in any inner

 model, it only means that the methods currently used are insufficient for Woodin's aim.

 Woodin changes the methods and presents strategic extender models. A definition and

 explanation of these kinds of models lie beyond the scope of this paper. Instead I shall
 discuss how Woodin came to individualise them.

 HOD stands for Hereditary Ordinal Definable and the class it refers to contains

 all those sets which are definable from ordinal parameters.27 It was Gôdel who first
 proposed the concept of ordinal definability in a talk in 1946, cf. Gôdel (1965). The

 theory of this class was developed independently by Vopënka et al. (1968) and Myhill
 and Scott (1967). HOD is a model for ZFC, but, unlike L, HOD is not absolute.

 That means that depending on in which model HOD is calculated, HOD changes.

 For example, if calculated in L, then HOD = L, but if calculated in V (and assuming
 a technical assumption), then HOD φ L. This makes HOD very difficult to study
 and we know very little about this structure (compared to our knowledge about L).

 But it also makes it a very interesting structure to study since (in general) there are no

 versions of Scott's theorem in HOD. That means that HOD can accommodate very
 strong large cardinal axioms, depending on where HOD is calculated.

 27 See Sect. 6 for a formal definition.

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 144

 C. J. Rittberg

 In the late 1950s, there was a renewed interest in infinite games amongst Polish

 mathematicians. Mycielski and Steinhaus proposed in their paper Ά mathematical

 axiom contradicting the axiom of choice' of 1962 the Axiom of Determinacy, AD,

 which states that every game is determined, i.e. has a winning strategy. This axiom,

 though powerful, contradicts the Axiom of Choice, as Mycielski's and Steinhaus' title

 shows. The authors accepted AC but noted that there might be subuniverses of the
 universe of sets

 which reflect some physical intuitions which are not fulfilled by the classical
 sets (e.g. paradoxical decompositions of the sphere are eliminated by [AD])

 (Mycielski and Steinhaus 1962)

 The natural possibility for such a universe is L(R), as Solovay pointed out (see also

 L{E)), and in the late 1960s, he conjectured that AD holds in L(M) relative to the

 existence ofa supercompact cardinal (Solovay 1969). L(M) became the focus of serious

 study and is today a very well understood structure. This makes it natural to look at
 HOD calculated in L(R), written as HODl^\ What happens is summed up in the
 following theorem.

 Theorem 4.3 (Woodin) Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then
 HODl( ) is not a Mitchell-Steel extender model. Woodin (2010a, p. 16), emphasis
 in original.

 Woodin asks the relevant question:

 But then what is Η Ο ? It belongs to a different, previously unknown, class
 of extender models, these are the strategic extender models. (Woodin 2010a, p.

 16), emphasis in original.28

 In what way do these strategic extender models help us? Can they accommodate

 supercompact cardinals? We do not know yet. But they have a different feature which

 is of major importance:

 The structure and theory of strategic extender models will be fully revealed by

 the inner models Η Ο DL(-A'^\ where A is universally Baire. (Woodin 2010a, p.
 16).

 This means that by studying these structures HODL^A ^ we might reveal that

 there is an inner model which can accommodate supercompact and hence all large
 cardinals that are consistent with ZFC. The

 understanding (and even discovering) [of] large cardinal axioms would have to

 depend on structural considerations of "Ultimate-L". (Woodin 2009b, p. 32).

 Hence the philosophical debate on large cardinals is given mathematical traction by
 Woodin's results.29

 28 For connoisseurs: the concept of a strategic extender model is an evolution of Jensen's and Dodd's

 concept of a mouse. I am indebted to Dominik Adolf for pointing this out to me.

 29 This term was coined in Koellner (2013).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 4.3 Mathematical traction

 145

 There is more to the mathematical traction than mentioned above. But before dis

 cussing this, it will be useful to retrace the steps that have led us to where we are.

 It all started with the Ω-conjecture. A way to disprove it would be via large cardi

 nals. This led to a study of large cardinals and in particular to structures, which can

 accommodate these large cardinals. As it turns out, the classical approaches by the

 Inner Model Programme do not suffice for our purposes. Hence, Woodin introduces

 a new approach via strategic extender models. If these models can accommodate a

 supercompact cardinal, then they can accommodate all large cardinals (whose exis

 tence is consistent with Ζ FC). This is a remarkable and completely surprising result.

 If such a model could be found, it would reflect back to the Ω-conjecture and serve

 as an argument for (but not a proof of) the correctness of the conjecture. Let us, with

 Woodin, call such a strategic extender model . Whether such an L® exists will,
 according to Woodin, be revealed by studying the strategic extender models of the

 form HODL(-a'^\ where A is universally Baire.

 Recall that Woodin has rejected V = L on the basis that this axiom is too limiting,

 it does not allow for all large cardinals that are consistent with ZFC. But what about

 V = L^? This axiom would not be limiting in this way because, as mentioned
 above, a model which can accommodate a supercompact cardinal can accommodate

 all large cardinals consistent with ZFC. Interestingly, this axiom can, in the light of

 the existence of a supercompact cardinal, be formulated thus:

 Definition 4.4 (The axiom V = Lf) There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals.
 Then for each Π2 sentence φ which holds in V there is a universally Baire set A such
 that

 H0DL(AM n μ φ

 where Θ = with ©ΜΑ,Μ) being the supremum of all the ordinals a such that
 there is a surjection π : Ε -* a such that π e L(A, R).

 This axiom states that V is Ultimate-L. With this axiom, the questions about truths

 in V reduce to questions about models of the form ΗΟΰι<·Α·^\ But these structures

 are accessible to study by our current means: L(A, R) is L-like, which makes HOD

 calculated in this structure L-like as well (keeping in mind that L-likeness is left as a

 vague notion).

 Here is the main result of this section:

 Theorem 4.5 The axiom V — implies the CH (Woodin 2010a).

 But this result fades into the background when considering the full fruitfulness of the

 axiom: V = L^ is generalisable. One could allow for more or different φ and instead
 of a single universally Baire set A a whole sequence Γ of them might be considered,

 i.e. L(T, R) instead of L(A, R). Together with these generalisations, V = Lf would,
 so Woodin believes (but there is no formal proof), reduce all undecidable statements

 of set theory to questions about large cardinals. As Woodin expresses it, it would

 banish the spectre of undecidability as demonstrated by Cohen's method of
 forcing. (Woodin 2010a), closing words.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 146

 C. J. Rittberg

 This is mathematical traction. The philosophical pluralism/non-pluralism debate

 mentioned in Sect. 1 could be settled on the basis of answers to precise mathematical

 questions. These are questions about structures that we already know and which we
 can define, questions about the HOD^.R) These questions about Η00ΙΑΑ^) are
 not independent from ZFC; independence would cease to be an issue.

 And if V = Lf should turn out to be true, then the CH would be true as well.

 But here a problem slips in. V = L^ is not the only axiom for 'V is Ultimate-L'.

 If there is one such Ultimate-L, then there are many. And another one, such as L®y
 for example, would imply that the CH is false. But this no longer matters too much.

 All axioms that state that V is Ultimate-L resolve all independence questions (at least
 so Woodin hopes). And all of them involve the study of already known structures,

 i.e. they all reduce independence questions to precise mathematical questions, which
 have solutions. This is what makes V = Ultimate-L interesting; the question about

 C Η has become secondary.

 At a conference in Bristol in 2013, Woodin implied that he believes that L^ will
 be the correct Ultimate-L. This would mean that CH is true, and this also means that

 Woodin has changed his believe about the truth of CH.

 Many questions remain; precise mathematical questions. They are mathematically

 difficult questions to be sure, but we have no reason to believe that they do not have

 an answer. And Woodin has started to try and solve them.

 Acknowledgments I would like to thank Brendan Larvor, Dominik Adolf, Jeremy Grey and José Ferreiôs

 for their helpful comments.

 5 Appendix A: Large cardinal axioms

 This appendix gives definitions of all the large cardinal axioms mentioned in Sect. 2.

 All of the definitions are minor reformulations of the definitions given in Jech (2006)
 and Kanamori (2009). The latter is considered to be a classical text on the historical

 development of large cardinal axioms. A good and short introduction to the topic is
 Honzik (2013).

 An elementary embedding, j, is a truth-preserving function between two models.

 The critical point of j, crit(j), is the smallest ordinal a such that α φ j(a). A simple

 proof by transfinite induction shows that crit(j) < j{crit{j)), and it can be shown

 that crit(j) is always a cardinal. The identity-embedding is the trivial elementary

 embedding and in all the definitions that follow j is non-trivial.

 Definition 5.1 AReinhardtcardinalisaic = cri t ( j ) for some elementary embedding

 j : V -*■ V.

 Definition 5.2 An η-huge cardinal is a cardinal κ such that there exists an elementary
 embedding j : V -> M with critical point κ such that M' ^ c M.

 Definition 5.3 A huge cardinal is a cardinal κ such that there is an elementary embed

 ding j : V -» M with critical point κ such that M^<K> c M.

 Definition 5.4 An extendible cardinal κ is such that for every a > κ there is an

 ordinal β and an elementary embedding j : Va -*■ Vp with critical point κ.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 147

 Definition 5.5 A supercompact cardinal is an uncountable cardinal κ such that for

 every A with cardinality greater or equal to κ there exists a normal measure on PK(A) =
 {X C A I \X\ < κ}.

 Definition 5.6 A superstrong cardinal is a cardinal κ such that there exists a elemen

 tary embedding j : V ->· M with critical point κ such that y m c M.

 Definition 5.7 A Woodin cardinal is a cardinal S such that for all A c Vj there are

 arbitrarily large κ < S such that for all λ < 8 there exist an elementary embedding

 / : V -* M with critical point λ: such that j(jc) > λ, V\ C M and Λ Π V/ = j(A)C\V\.

 Definition 5.8 A measurable cardinal is an uncountable cardinal κ such that there

 exists a κ-complete non-principal ultra-filter on κ.

 Definition 5.9 A (strongly) inaccessible cardinal κ is such that κ is uncountable,

 regular and for every λ < κ, 2λ < κ.

 6 Appendix Β: Definitions and results

 This appendix collects technical definitions and results left out in the main body of
 this article.

 6.1 Results

 The von Neumann hierarchy is formally defined as follows, where V is the universe
 of sets and the Va are levels within this universe.

 Definition 6.1 V = Uaeo/v Va, where

 Vo = 0
 Va+i = V(Va)

 Va = U{^/3 I β < <*} where α is a limit ordinal

 The non-stationary ideal on ω\, Ins, is defined as follows:

 Definition 6.2 Ins is the σ-ideal of all sets A ç a>\ such that ω\ \ A contains a closed

 unbounded set. A set 5 ç ω\ is stationary if for each closed unbounded set C c ω\,

 S Π C Φ 0. A set S ç ω\ is co-stationary if the complement of S is stationary (Woodin
 2001b).

 6.1.1 Universally baire sets

 Definition 6.3 A set A in a compact Hausdorff space Ω has the property of Baire if

 there is an open set Ο ç Ω such that the symmetric difference OAA is meager. A

 meager set is a union of countably many nowhere dense sets. A nowhere dense set is

 a set whose closure has empty interior.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 148

 C. J. Rittberg

 Definition 6.4 A set A ç W is called universally Baire if for every continuous
 function

 F : Ω -*■ M",

 where Ω is a compact Hausdorff space, the preimage of A by F has the property of
 Baire.

 Lemma 6.5 · Every Borel set is universally Baire.

 • The universally Baire sets form α σ-algebra, which is closed under preimages of

 Borel functions.

 • The universally Baire sets are Lebesgue measurable.

 Definition 6.6 (Wadge Hierarchy) A <w β iff A = f~l(B) for some continuous
 / :ω ω->ω ω (Kanamori 2009).

 In the presents of the Axiom of Determinacy, the Wadge hierarchy is a well order of

 the universally Baire sets, as Martin has shown in an unpublished article in 1973 called

 'The Wadge Degrees are well ordered'. In the absence of this axiom, the following

 theorem holds. Hereby is IK the Cantor set and a set A ç Κ is said to be strongly
 reducible to Β ç Κ if there is a continuous function g : Κ —► Κ such that A = f~l(B)

 and for all x, y € Κ, | f{x) - f(y)\ < (1/2) |x - y\.

 Theorem 6.7 Suppose that (A* : k 6 N) is a sequence of subsets of Κ such that for
 all k e Ν both Ak+ι and Κ \ A*+i are strongly reducible to A*. Then there exists

 a continuous function g : Κ -> Κ such that g_1(Ai) does not have the property of
 Baire (Woodin 2001b).

 Because the universally Baire sets are closed under preimages of Borel functions,

 the above theorem shows well-foundedness of <w on the universally Baire sets.

 6.1.2 Projective determinacy

 As mentioned in the article, too much would have to be said to give an argument as

 to why the Axiom of Projective Determinacy, Ρ D, should be accepted. I will here

 only give a very brief sample case as presented in Woodin (2001a): the Banach-Tarski
 Paradox.

 Given the unit sphere in a three-dimensional space, there is a finite partition of the

 sphere into pieces which, after moving them around without changing their size, can

 be put together again to obtain two copies of the unit sphere. This is the Banach-Tarski

 Paradox. As is well known, it is an implication of the Axiom of Choice, AC. Hence, if

 one wants to keep AC, one may only hope to put constrains on the type of partitions in

 which the sphere may be divided. Ρ D implies that these pieces may not be projective
 sets.

 The projective sets are generalisations of the Borel sets.

 Definition 6.8 (Luzin) A set X ç Μ" is a projective set if for some integer k it can

 be generated from a closed subset of Rn+k in finitely many steps, applying the basic

 operations of taking projections and complements (Woodin 2001a).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 How Woodin changed his mind

 149

 The sets encountered in everyday mathematics are all projective sets. This may instil
 the idea that the projective sets are somehow 'reasonable'. Hence, with PD, any

 partition of the unit sphere into reasonable pieces will not allow for the paradox. This

 is seen by some as argument for the truth of PD. See Woodin (2001a) for further
 details on PD and the Banach-Tarski-Paradox.

 As mentioned in the above, ZFC + PD is not a forcing complete theory:

 Theorem 6.9 Ρ D is not forcing stable, i.e. there is a forcing which destroys Ρ D.

 Proof (sketch) Let A be a set of ordinals, which codes all of R. If A# would exist in
 L[A], then there would be a Reinhardt cardinal in L[A]. This contradicts AC. Hence,

 A" does not exist in L[A]. Now force with Col {ω, A) to collapse A onto ω. Since A# is

 effectively a definable subset of A and Co/-forcing is homogeneous, A# does not exist

 in the forcing extension either. Since A is countable in the extension, A is effectively

 a real in the extension. By "Π|(*) determinacy iff jcd exists" (proven by Harrington

 1978) it follows that Π} (at) determinacy, and hence PD, fails in the extension.30 □

 6.2 Definitions

 The following two definitions formally define what I have called 'defining L by using

 the information coded in £" and 'adding A to L\respectively.

 Definition 6.10 Let £ be a set. Then,

 1. L0[E] = 0
 2. La+1 = ^Def(Z), where

 Ζ = La[E] U {£ Π La[E]}

 and i^Def(Z) refers to the definable powerset of Z.

 3. La = \J{LP I β, α} for a limit ordinal.

 and L[E] is the class of all sets a such that a e La[E] for some a.

 Definition 6.11 Suppose that A is a transitive set. Then,

 1. L0(A) = A
 2. (Successor Case) Ζ,α+ι(Α) = <^oe/(£a(A))
 3. (Limit Case) La{A) = 1J{L^(A) | < a}

 and L(A) is the class of all sets a such that a 6 La(A) for some a.

 References

 Bagaria, Joan, Neus Castells, and Paul Larson. 2006. An Ω-logic primer. In Set theory, ed. Joan Bagaria,

 and Stevo Todorcevic, 1-28. Basel: Birkhâuser.

 30 I am indebted to Dominik Adolf for this proof.

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Dodd, Anthony. 1982. The core model; London Mathematical Society, lecture note series no. 61. Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press.

 Ferreiros, José. 2007. Labyrinth of thought, 2nd ed. Basel: Birkhâuser.

 Fraenkel, Abraham, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and Azriel Levy. 1984. Foundations of set theory, 2nd ed. Ams

 150 C. J. Rittberg

 terdam: North-Holland.

 Gôdel, Kurt. 1938. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum hypothesis.

 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 24: 556-557.

 Gôdel, Kurt. 1939. Consistency-proof for the generalized Continuum-Hypothesis. Proceedings of the

 Gôdel, Kurt. 1940. The consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis, annals of mathematics studies no. 3.

 National Academy of Sciences 25: 220-224.

 Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Gôdel, Kurt. 1965. Remarks before the Princeton bicentennial conference on problems in mathematics. In
 The undecidable. Basic papers on undecidable propositions, unsolvable problems and computable
 functions, ed. Davis Martin, 84-88. New York: Raven Press.

 Hajnal, Andrâs. 1956. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum problem.

 Zeitschriftfiir mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 2: 131-136.

 Hajnal, Andrâs. 1960. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum problem. Acta

 mathematicae Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 12: 321-376.

 Harrington, Leo. 1978. Analytic determinacy and 0#. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 43(04): 685-693.

 Honzik, Rader. 2013. Large cardinals and the Continuum Hypothesis, http://logika.ff.cuni.cz/radek/papers/

 failureCHandLargecardinals. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 Jech, Thomas. 2006. Set theory. Heidelberg: Springer.

 Kanamori, Akihiro. 2009. The higher infinite, large cardinals in set theory from their beginnings. Heidelberg:

 Springer.

 Koellner, Peter. 2011. Independence and large cardinals. In The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy,
 (Summer 2011 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/
 independence-large-cardinals/. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 Koellner, Peter. 2013. The Continuum Hypothesis. In The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, ed. Edward

 N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/continuum-hypothesis/. Accessed 13
 Aug 2014.

 Koellner, Peter. 2014. Large cardinals and determinacy. In The Stanford encyclopedia of philoso
 phy (Spring 2014 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/
 large-cardinals-determinacy/. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 Kunen, Kenneth. 2006. Set theory, an introduction to independence proofs, 10th impression. Amsterdam:

 Lévy, Azriel. 1957. Indépendance conditionnelle de V=L et d'axiomes qui se rattachent au système de M.

 Gôdel. Comptes rendus des séances de l'Académie des Sciences 245:1582-1583.

 Lévy, Azriel. 1960. A generalization of Gôdel's notion of constructibility. The Journal of Symbolic Logic

 Elsevier.

 25: 147-155.

 234-248.

 Lévy, Azriel, and Robert M. Solovay. 1967. Measurable cardinals and the Continuum Hypothesis. IJM 5:

 Mitchell, William. 1979. Hypermeasurable Cardinals. In Logic Colloquium '78, vol. 97 of Studies in Logic

 and the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 303-316. Elsevier: North-Holland, Amsterdam.

 Mitchell, William J. 2012. Inner models for large cardinals. In Set's and extensions in the twentieth century,

 volume 6 of the handbook for the history of logic, ed. Dov M. Gabbay, Akihiro Kanamori, and John
 Woods, 415-456. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Mitchell, William J., and John Steel. 1994. Fine structure and iteration trees. Lecture notes in logic, vol. 3.

 Mycielski, Jan, and Hugo Steinhaus. 1962. A mathematical axiom contradicting the axiom of choice.
 Bulletin de l'Académie Polonaise des Sciences, Série des Sciences Mathématiques, Astronomiques et

 Heidelberg: Springer.

 Physiques, Vol. X.

 Myhill, John R., and Dana S. Scott. 1967. Ordinal definability. In Axiomatic set theory, proceedings of

 the symposium of pure mathematics, vol. XIII, Part I, ed. Dana S. Scott. Los Angeles: University of
 California.

 Powell, William C. 1974. Variations of Keisler's theorem for complete embeddings. Fundamenta Mathe

 maticae 81: 121-132.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Scott, Dana. 1961. Measurable cardinals and constructible sets. Bulletin de l' Académie Polonaise des

 Sciences, Série des sciences mathématiques, astronomiques et physiques 9: 521-524.

 Shepherdson, John C. 1951-1953. Inner models for set theory? Part I-III. Journal of Symbolic Logic 16-18:

 How Woodin changed his mind 151

 161-190; 225-237; 145-167.

 Solovay, Robert. 1969. The cardinality of sets of reals. In Foundations of mathematics, symposium
 papers commemorating the sixtieth birthday of Kurt Godel, ed. Jack J. Bulloff, Thomas C. Holyoke,

 and Samuel W. Hahn. Berlin: Springer.

 Vopënka, Petr, Bohuslav Balcar, and Petr Hâjek. 1968. The notion of effective sets and a new proof of the

 consistency of the axiom of choice. Journal of Symbolic Logic 33: 495-496.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 1999. The axiom of determinacy, forcing axioms, and the nonstationary ideal, Vol. 1 of

 de Gruyter series in logic and its applications. Berlin: de Gruyter.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2001a. The Continuum Hypothesis Part I. Notices of the AMS 48(6): 567-576.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2001b. The Continuum Hypothesis Part II. Notices of the AMS 48(7): 681-690.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2004. Set theory after Russell. In One hundred years of Russell's paradox, ed. G. Link.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2009a. The transfinite universe. Exploring the frontiers of incompleteness. http://logic.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2009b. The realm of the infinite, exploring the frontiers of incompleteness. http://logic.

 New York: de Gruyter.

 harvard.edu/efi. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 harvard.edu/efi. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2010a. Strong axioms of infinity and the search for V. In Proceedings of the international

 congress of mathematicians, Hyderabad, India.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2010b. Suitable extender models I. Journal of Mathematical Logic 10: 101-339.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2010c. Ultimate L. Talk given at the University of Pennsylvania 15th October, http://

 philosophy.sas.upenn.edu/WSTPM/Woodin. Accessed 13 Aug 2014.

 Woodin, W. Hugh. 2011. Suitable extender models II. Journal of Mathematical Logic 11(2): 115-436.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:20:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

