 

 

 

 

In defence of geometrical algebra
Author(s): Viktor Blåsjö
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 3 (May 2016), pp. 325-359
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913463
Accessed: 17-05-2020 10:00 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913463?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:325-359 /β\ CrossMartc
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-015-0169-5 VC'

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 Viktor Bläsjö1

 Received: 26 August 2015 / Published online: 9 December 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract The geometrical algebra hypothesis was once the received interpretation of
 Greek mathematics. In recent decades, however, it has become anathema to many.

 I give a critical review of all arguments against it and offer a consistent rebuttal

 case against the modern consensus. Consequently, I find that the geometrical algebra

 interpretation should be reinstated as a viable historical hypothesis.

 Certain parts of classical Greek mathematics have traditionally been interpreted as

 "geometrical algebra"—meaning that although the surface form of expression is geo

 metric, nevertheless the underlying ideas are essentially algebraic. This was for a long

 time a commonplace view among mathematically inclined historians such as Zeuthen,

 Tannery, Neugebauer, van der Waerden, etc. In the last generation or two, however, the

 tide has turned very drastically. The geometrical algebra hypothesis is now forcefully

 rejected and indeed seen as a symbol of the historiographical naivete of these earlier

 generations of mathematician-historians. Unguru (1975) was an early focal point of

 this crusade, and although his critique initially drew replies from the old guard (Van
 der Waerden 1975; Freudenthal 1977; Weil 1978), such opposition has since silenced.

 In fact, "Unguru's position could now be regarded as the accepted orthodoxy", as

 (Rowe 2012, p. 37) accurately reports. A recent survey of research on the history of

 Greek mathematics reaches the same conclusion: "It is clear that the old historiography

 has been overcome.... There are very few who still believe in such historiographical

 artefacts as ... geometric algebra" (Sidoli 2013, pp. 43, 25).

 Communicated by: Len Berggren.

 Κ Viktor Bläsjö

 V.N.E.Blasjo@uu.nl

 1 Mathematisch Instituut, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 326

 V. Bläsjö

 This overwhelming consensus means that most of the arguments against geomet

 rical algebra have never been challenged. From this state of affairs one could easily

 get the impression that the modern view simply had the stronger case and won by

 the weight of the evidence. However, there is reason to be cautious before jumping

 to such conclusions. Since geometrical algebra was always a symbol for a now anti

 quated mode of historical scholarship, we must be careful not to judge it by association

 only. Modern advances in historiographical standards have much to commend them,

 but specific historical hypotheses should be evaluated on the basis of the specific evi

 dence pertaining thereto, not on the basis of degree of congeniality with one's general
 ideology.

 In this paper, therefore, I shall attempt to defend the traditional geometrical algebra

 hypothesis against its modern attacks. My goal is to discuss, and attempt to refute, all

 arguments against geometrical algebra that I have been able to find in the literature,

 from general historiographical ones to specific internalist ones. My contention is that

 none of these arguments are convincing, and that hence the modern consensus against

 geometrical algebra is ill-founded.

 1 Definition of geometrical algebra

 I shall refer to the geometrical algebra hypothesis as GA for short, and I shall take it

 to consist in the following two claims, both of which have constituted the essence of

 the "geometrical algebra" hypothesis since at least as early as when Zeuthen (1885,

 p. 7), coined the phrase in his study of Apollonius's Conies.

 GA1. The Greeks possessed a mode of reasoning analogous to our algebra, in the

 sense of a standardised and abstract way of dealing with the kinds of relations

 we would express using high school algebra. By and large, whenever we find

 it natural to interpret Greek mathematics in algebraic terms, the Greeks were

 capable of a functionally equivalent line of reasoning. If an algebraic inter

 pretation of a Greek mathematical work suggests to us certain connections,

 strategies of proof, etc., then the Greeks could reach the same insights into a

 similarly routine fashion. This was an abstract, quantitative-relational mode

 of thought that was not confined to concrete geometrical configurations and

 not dependent on geometrical visualisation or formulation; in particular, it was

 obvious to the Greeks that the exact same kind of reasoning could just as well

 be applied to numerical relations as geometrical ones.

 GA2. The Greeks were well aware of methods for solving quadratic problems (such

 as those exhibited in the Babylonian tradition). Books II and VI of the Elements

 contain propositions intended as a formalisation of the theoretical foundations
 of such methods.

 Note that I have taken care to define GA as a historical hypothesis whose content is

 independent of whether you want to call it algebra or not. The GA debate is not (or
 should not be) a matter of semantics. The appellation "geometrical algebra" could be

 regarded as a shorthand only. GA, as defined above, is a concrete, factual hypothesis
 and should be evaluated as such.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 327

 2 The case for geometrical algebra

 It is not my aim in the present paper to argue/or geometrical algebra, but rather to argue

 against the arguments against it. It will be useful to indicate for reference, however,

 the main basic arguments for GA.

 One argument for GA1 is that the most advanced Greek treatises are so intricate

 that it is very hard to imagine that they were conceived in this form. As Wallis (1685)

 puts it:

 It is to me a thing unquestionable, That the Ancients had somewhat of like nature

 with our Algebra; from whence many of their prolix and intricate Demonstrations

 were derived, (p. 3)

 "And I find other modern Writers of the same opinion therein", Wallis adds, and indeed

 this position was more or less taken for granted as a matter of common sense among

 mathematicians from the seventeenth century into the twentieth century. Zeuthen

 (1885, ch. 1, esp. p. 7), may be considered the culmination and mature expression

 of this point of view.

 Another basic argument is that GA1 and GA2 give purpose and sense to numerous

 propositions in Euclid that are otherwise very difficult to imagine any motivation for.

 As Van der Waerden (1975) puts it:

 We were not able to find any interesting geometrical problem that would give

 rise to theorems like II1-4. On the other hand, we found that the explanation of

 these theorems as arising from algebra worked well. Therefore we adopted the
 latter explanation, (pp. 203-204)

 This interpretation too is found in Zeuthen (1885), ch. 1. An accessible explication of

 it is given by Heath (1908) in the commentary to his translation of Euclid's Elements

 (esp. Book II and Propositions 27-29 of Book VI). The case was further strengthened

 when Neugebauer (1936), following great advances in the understanding of Baby
 lonian mathematics in the early twentieth century, noted that this view harmonises

 well with the Babylonian tradition. An accessible overview taking this perspective
 into account is found in Van der Waerden (1950, pp. 118-126).

 3 The critiques

 3.1 Szabo (1969)

 Szabo (1969) was an early opponent of GA. He offers no arguments against it, however.

 He does offer assertions of the following type:

 Although [Π.5] is equivalent to 'the solution of an algebraic equation', it should

 not be interpreted in this way. Such an interpretation is misleading because it

 obscures the true geometric meaning of the proposition and suggests the false

 historical idea that the Greeks actually operated with algebraic equations in pre
 Euclidean times, (p. 352)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 328

 V. Bläsjö

 But this is a statement of an opinion, not an argument. And so are statements of the

 following type, I would say:

 No traces of genuine algebraic ideas have yet been discovered in the mathe
 matical tradition which culminated in Euclid's Elements. ... The claim that the

 'geometrical algebra ..resulted from the Greeks either taking over or devel

 oping further an idea of the Babylonians has no basis in fact. No connection

 has ever been established between this branch of mathematics and 'Babylonian
 science', (p. 353)

 Statements like these are very common among GA opponents. I find them unreason

 able. The fact that a large number of propositions in the Elements can be interpreted

 in a coherent way as an algebraic theory surely constitutes at least some sort of evi

 dence that they were conceived in this way, and its many striking parallels with the

 Babylonian tradition surely constitute at least some sort of evidence for a connection.

 The evidence is far from conclusive, to be sure, but it is something. It needs to be

 countered as such, not simply flatly denied.

 Besides these kinds of assertions, the main point of Szabo's discussion is proving

 that "propositions which are usually regarded as part of'... geometrical algebra' can

 also be given a purely geometrical explanation" (p. 353). This, however, does nothing

 to disprove GA. The fact that that some of these propositions serve a perfectly credible

 geometrical purpose as well is perfectly compatible with GA, and indeed quite what

 one would expect on this hypothesis. After all, the theorems are stated in geometrical

 form and occur in a work written in a geometrical paradigm. Furthermore algebra and

 geometry are closely related, so many algebraically important theorems are bound to

 have geometrical relevance as well. The remarkable thing is not that some of them can

 be motivated geometrically, but that not all of them can, at least not straightforwardly.
 As we saw in Sect. 2, Van der Waerden (1975) cited Π.1-4 as prototypical examples

 of theorems from Euclid that are hard to motivate from a purely geometric point

 of view. Szabo, meanwhile, bases his analysis on II.5 and also claims briefly that a

 similar point holds for Π.6 and 11.10. This would be an argument against the claim
 that all the propositions which GA proponents claim are algebraic lack any kind of

 geometric motivation. But no GA proponents ever claimed this, nor is it what one

 would expect if the GA hypothesis were true. The GA hypothesis is strengthened by

 the fact that some of the algebraic propositions lack clear geometric motivation. To

 refute this, therefore, one would need to prove that all the algebraic propositions have

 a geometric motivation. Proving merely that some of the algebraic propositions have
 such a motivation, which is what Szabo does, therefore does not impact the case for

 GA, especially since no one had claimed that these particular propositions completely

 lacked geometric motivation in the first place.

 The paper that set off the modern firestorm against GA is Unguru (1975). Unguru's

 claim s that it is "impossible" to think in one way and write in another, which would

 indeed mean that the GA hypothesis was misguided:

 3.2 Unguru (1975)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 329

 Different ways of thinking imply different ways of expression. It is, therefore,

 impossible for a system of mathematical thought (like Greek mathematics) to
 display such a discrepancy between its alleged underlying algebraic character

 and its purely geometric mode of expression (p. 80).

 However, such a discrepancy is obviously not "impossible"—if anything it is
 commonplace. For example in calculus we often use infinitesimal reasoning as a

 behind-the-scenes heuristic and then write up our findings in the completely different

 language of epsilon-delta formalism.

 But even if this is admitted, Unguru argues, GA proponents still need to explain why

 Greek mathematicians, if they really could think algebraically, nevertheless restricted

 themselves to their rather awkward geometrical mode of expression:

 [The geometrical algebra hypothesis] fails to answer the most stringent and
 manifest question, viz., why did Greek mathematics stick throughout its
 development to the 'cumbersome', 'awkward', 'highly difficult' method of

 'geometric algebra' with its application of areas, transformation of propor

 tions by means of geometrical figures, etc.? This question gains even more

 in acuity when one keeps in mind that the perpetrators of the view embod

 ied in the concept of 'geometric algebra' presume without any qualms (and
 rest assured) that there has been an underlying algebraic edifice to Greek

 geometry throughout its development. Why, then, did this algebraic frame

 work remain all the time in the background, hidden, camouflaged, concealed?

 ... So the question remains unanswered: If thinking algebraically simplifies

 things, as everybody would agree, and if the great Greek mathematical geniuses

 were algebraists at heart, then why did they put their relatively simple alge
 braic reasonings in the clumsy and unwieldy molds of geometrical form?
 (p. 75)

 If [the Greeks] thought algebraically, ... then why did they systematically
 fail to use any algebraic symbolism whatever in their writings? How can one

 reasonably explain such a failure? Is the unwarranted assumption of such mathe

 matical schizophrenia accountable in any convincing historico-rational manner?
 (pp. 75-76)

 One reply to this is that ancient mathematicians did indeed purposefully obscure
 their published arguments. Reasons for this seem to have included a desire to claim

 the title of master of the field for oneself rather than giving away one's tricks for

 free. See Sect. 3.11 for further discussion of this point. In addition, there were also

 compelling philosophical reasons for insisting on expressing everything geometrically,

 as this gave all of mathematics a uniform ontology grounded in reality. Indeed, the

 rise of the analytic-algebraic conception of mathematics in the seventeenth century

 was vigorously resisted along precisely these lines, and the need was felt, still in the

 late seventeenth century, to validate algebra from within a geometrical paradigm (see,
 e.g. Bos 2001).

 But even these points aside Unguru's argument is misguided in that it equates, it

 seems, algebraic thought with algebraic symbolism. In reality neither GA1 nor GA2

 £ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 330

 V. Bläsjö

 requires algebraic symbolism as such, nor was the existence of a secret algebraic
 symbolism ever a contention of any GA advocate. As GA advocates have always
 maintained, algebra is algebra whether the variable is called x, "the width", "the

 thing", "the root" or whatever. Consequently GA does not imply any "assumption of

 schizophrenia".

 Unguru's emphasis on mode of expression also leads him to stress emphatically

 that Greek and Babylonian mathematics are "two alien cultures" (p. 73), since, he

 maintains, "the reasoning [in Babylonian mathematics] is largely that of elemen

 tary arithmetic or based on empirically paradigmatic rules derived from successful
 trials taken as a prototype" (p. 78), which is supposedly worlds apart from the

 geometry of the Greeks. In addition to our points above that one should not attach

 too much importance to surface form, one could argue that this characterisation of

 Babylonian mathematics doesn't even get the surface form right. Recent scholar

 ship on Babylonian mathematics has shown that, far from being mere "empirical
 arithmetic", Babylonian techniques for solving quadratic problems had a strong

 geometrical component that was in many ways closely analogous to the type of geo
 metrical treatment of such relations found in Book II of the Elements. See H0yrup

 (2002).

 As another point of historical context Unguru also makes the following charge:

 The fact is that ... there has never been an algebra in the pre-Christian era.

 Consequently, there could not have been any 'geometric algebra' either, (p. 78)

 Insofar as this is meant as an argument against GA, it clearly assumes what is to be

 proved. To GA proponents, of course, there was a kind of algebra in the pre-Christian

 era. This hypothesis cannot be disproved simply by asserting its opposite to be a "fact".

 Unguru also mistakenly believes that certain algebraic insights are somehow built

 into the notation itself. Consider for example this proposition from the Elements:

 IX.8. If as many numbers as we please beginning from a unit are in contin

 ued proportion, then the third from the unit is square as are also those which
 successively leave out one ...

 That is to say, in the geometric sequence 1, a, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6,..., the terms a2, a4,

 a6, etc. are squares. According to Unguru, "if we use modern algebraic symbolism,

 this ceases altogether to be a proposition and its truthfulness is an immediate and

 trivial application of the definition of a geometric progression"; in other words the

 proposition "becomes a trivial commonplace, which is an immediate outgrowth, a

 trite after-effect of our symbolic notation" (p. 99). But this is not so. The fact that, for

 example, a4 is a square is not by any means implied by the symbolic notation itself.

 The fact that axy = (ax)y is a contingent fact, a result that needs proving. It is not at

 all obvious from the very notation itself, as anyone who has taught an algebra class

 knows. If axy = (ax)y is an "after-effect of our symbolic notation", then why isn't the

 a c a + c
 b^~ d b + d

 rule

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 331

 for adding fractions, or the rule (fg)' — fg' for differentiating a product? As (Weil

 1978, p. 92) observes, "one who thinks that the rules governing the use of the expo

 nential notation are trivial must be lacking, not only in mathematical understanding,
 but also in historical sense".

 Unguru commits the same fallacy again in dismissing the algebraic interpretation

 of a lemma to X.22:

 Compare the above proof with the algebraic content of the lemma, which says that

 a/b = a2/ab. In its algebraic form, the triviality of the entire enterprise becomes

 striking. The lemma becomes nothing but an inane, vapid, banal illustration of

 the simplification of fractions! (p. 102)

 Again, the correct rules for manipulating fractions are not "trivial, inane, vapid,

 banal"—they are serious insights that require proof. Anyone who doubts this just

 has to stick his head into any algebra classroom where he will find students constantly

 confused about what is and what is not allowed when working with fractions.

 Furthermore, if this shows that Euclid did not know algebra, then neither did, say,
 Viete. In Viete one may read such things as for example: "Theorem. The sum of

 two magnitudes plus their difference is equal to twice the greater magnitude". (Viete

 2006, p. 37) By Unguru's logic this would "show beyond any reasonable doubt that
 what [Viete] is doing is not algebra" (p. 105; I have replaced Euclid by Viete in
 this quotation but the logic remains the same), for in its algebraic form A + Β +
 (A - B) — 2A the theorem is "inane, vapid, banal" and "ceases altogether to be a
 proposition".

 Unguru also offers an argument based on the following propositions from the Ele

 ments.

 X. 112. The square on a rational straight line applied to the binomial straight line

 produces as breadth an apotome the terms of which are commensurable with the

 terms of the binomial straight line and moreover in the same ratio; and further

 the apotome so arising has the same order as the binomial straight line.

 X.l 13. The square on a rational straight line, if applied to an apotome, produces

 as breadth the binomial straight line the terms of which are commensurable with

 the terms of the apotome and in the same ratio; and further the binomial so

 arising has the same order as the apotome.

 In algebraic terms, these propositions say the following. A binomial means an expres

 sion of the form a + Vb (or Ja + yfb, but we can leave this aside for ease of writing),

 where a and b are rational and b non-square; an apotome is the same thing with a minus

 in place of the plus. X. 112 says, then, that the square R2 of a rational number divided by

 a+yfb gives a result of the form k(a- Jb)\X. 113 says that the square R2 of a rational
 number divided by a-Jb gives a result of the form k(a + -Jb), where k is rational.

 Unguru's argument is as follows:

 If Euclid's lines were general algebraic symbols (which they are not), which
 could be manipulated like such symbols, then the essence of X.l 12 could be
 expressed as follows:

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 332

 V. Bläsjö

 If R2 — Β ■ A, where R is a rational line and Β is a binomial, then Λ is a

 corresponding apotome.

 Under such circumstances, X.l 13 would follow immediately and trivially from

 X.l 12, as a consequence of the unicity of algebraic operations and the commu

 tativity of multiplication, since X.l 13 states only that

 If R = A ■ B, where R is rational and A an apotome, then Β is a corresponding

 r\

 binomial.

 In such a setting, all of Euclid's efforts to prove X.113 would have been in vain,

 and therefore incomprehensible. Indeed, under such circumstances, no proof at

 all of X.l 13 would have been necessary and X.113 would have become, at best,

 a Porism and not an independent proposition. But this is certainly not the case in
 the Elements, and this is, I believe, a beautiful substantiation and corroboration

 of my view: Greek geometry is geometry! (p. 108)

 The rhetoric ("incomprehensible") aside, insofar as these propositions are alge

 braically equivalent, they are so also geometrically. The first proposition puts the

 area R2 in the form of a rectangle where one side is a given binomial and find that the

 other side is k times the corresponding apotome. If this side is cut into k pieces, and the

 pieces of the area are stacked on top of each other, then we have rearranged the area

 R2 in the form of a rectangle with the given apotome as base. We also see that the other

 side will be k times the corresponding binomial. And this is precisely the statement

 of the second proposition. Clearly, then, the equivalence of these propositions is very

 evident already geometrically, not something that magically emerges only when one

 grasps "the commutativity of multiplication", as Unguru's argument assumes.

 3.3 Unguru (1979)

 When discussing number theory, Euclid states and proves various theorems which

 are, from a GA point of view, essentially just a reduction to the special case of whole

 number quantities of theorems already proved elsewhere for quantities in general.

 Unguru (1979) takes this to be a blow against GA:

 As Freudenthal would have it, Elements V is 'algebra and nothing else'; it is,

 moreover, 'a general theory of magnitude ... independent of dimension or any

 characteristic of specific magnitudes'. The problem with such a characterization

 is the existence of Elements VII, in which many of the things dealt with in Book

 V are repeated and applied specifically to numbers (integers). In the presence of

 a general theory of magnitude, such a procedure would not have been just rep
 etitious and superfluous but outright senseless. Numbers, after all, are specific

 instances of magnitude, and what is true of magnitudes in general is also true of

 numbers, (p. 559)

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 333

 We must keep in mind, however, that GA1 is a hypothesis about Greek thought, not its

 formal exposition. It is obviously true that Euclid wrote things up in a highly formalised

 fashion that does not support GA1 by its surface form. But the whole point is whether

 this was due to cognitive limitations or not. Euclid's reasons for his chosen mode of

 writing could easily have been due to expository and foundational considerations, and

 thus the formal exposition cannot be taken as indicative of cognitive limitations in the

 manner Unguru's argument assumes. Indeed, who honestly believes that Euclid did

 not see the analogies between the theorems of Books V and VII in question? Surely

 the most likely interpretation by far is that he understood perfectly well that some of

 the number theory propositions could be seen as parallel to those for magnitudes, but

 that he nevertheless preferred a separate exposition perhaps for the sake of following

 tradition or giving a self-contained exposition not assuming more advanced material

 than needed. The reason for the separate expositions being non-cognitive, then, it says

 nothing about GA1.

 3.4 Unguru and Rowe (1981)

 In his reply to Unguru, van der Waerden (1975, p. 201) gave an example of a Babylonian

 solution of a quadratic problem and pointed out that the solution given is "the same

 method of solution we learn at school" today. Unguru and Rowe (1981) deny that

 this is so. Instead, they say, "the mere knowledge of how 'to complete the square' is

 enough to understand fully, step by step, the scribe's procedure" (p. 6), whereas van der

 Waerden's account allegedly "assumes, against the textual evidence, the availability

 of the quadratic formula to the Babylonian scribe" (p. 7). This argument assumes that

 a meaningful distinction can be drawn between completing the square and using the

 quadratic formula. But this is a very dubious assumption. Completing the square is the

 method we learn at school today. And this is how the "quadratic formula" is always

 derived. The latter is nothing but a kind of recipe shorthand for the former. The two

 are computationally equivalent.

 Whether the Babylonians knew "the quadratic formula" or not is not a very mean
 ingful question. Certainly no one has ever claimed that the Babylonians ever had it

 written down in the form of a literal formula, with symbolic placeholders for the vari

 ous numbers needed, as in a modern algebra textbook. On the other hand it is beyond

 dispute that they understood the method of completing the square very well and were

 able to use it to solve quadratic problems in a systematic fashion which was so heavily

 standardised that it could be carried out mechanically even by someone who did not

 have any deep conceptual understanding of the method of completing the square. Thus

 the Babylonian method is identical to that of modern school algebra in its numerical

 steps, in its theoretical foundation in the method of completing the square and in its

 being useable as a mechanical recipe without much understanding. In all these senses

 van der Waerden's claim is obviously correct. He did not say, as Unguru and Rowe

 allege, that the Babylonians had "the quadratic formula" and even if he had said that,

 what would that even mean? The unequivocal points just enumerated amount to a

 functional knowledge of the quadratic formula for almost all intents and purposes;
 all that is lacking is a literal, typographical formula, and of course no one have ever

 claimed that the Babylonians had that.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 £) Springer

 334

 V. Bläsjö

 More generally Unguru and Rowe maintain that:

 Under any suitable, historically reasonable definition of algebra, ancient Baby

 lonian and classical Greek mathematical texts are not algebraic in character. In

 the Babylonian case they are arithmetical, while in the Greek they are geomet
 rical. (p. 4)

 We have already seen above that the claim that Babylonian mathematics was exclu

 sively "arithmetical" is untenable. But that aside, what is the "historically reasonable

 definition of algebra" that Unguru and Rowe have in mind? They do not give a defini

 tion in so many words, but they often speak of "symbolic manipulations" as "the very

 hallmark of an algebraic system" (p. 17). Thus:

 There are important distinctions between algebra and the concrete arithmetical

 relationships appearing in Babylonian and some Greek materials. For there is a

 vast mathematical gap involved between having a general knowledge of concrete

 number facts on the one hand, and being able to abstract that knowledge and

 manipulate it symbolically without any reference to the concrete, on the other,
 (pp. 11-12)

 It is precisely the inability of the Babylonian mathematician 'to describe relations

 and solving procedures, and the techniques involved in a general way' that

 warrants his disqualification as algebraist. What the Babylonian mathematician

 lacks is precisely the ability to dispense with specific, definite numbers, and it

 is this deficiency that dictates the particular form of his approach. What he can

 produce is recipes, not general formulas. (Unguru 1979, p. 561)

 In my opinion it is not all "historically reasonable" to define algebra along such lines.

 We may ask ourselves the question: What would an abstract, symbolic formulation

 have added to the Babylonian method of solving quadratic problems? Arguably noth

 ing. They already mastered the solutions of such problems using a general, systematic

 method. This method is very clearly expressed in their texts: they use numerical exam

 ples, it is true, but it is not difficult to see in them the general method, as was clearly the

 intention. What purpose would it serve, then, to express the matter in purely symbolic

 notation? Arguably it would accomplish nothing except making the matter more pre

 tentious and abstruse. We can still observe this phenomenon in modern classrooms,

 where students often stare blankly at abstract formulas but grasp their general meaning

 perfectly well from one or two worked numerical examples.

 I maintain, therefore, that Unguru's insistence on symbolic formulations is histor

 ically ««reasonable. The modes of thought and expression of the Babylonians were

 perfectly adequate for the goals they set themselves. Their mastery of quadratic prob

 lems is general and thorough and not in any way hampered by a lack of symbolism.

 The introduction of abstract symbolism would not have resolved any problem they

 were concerned with. Suppose they had made up arbitrary symbols and written down

 a formulation of their methods in terms of them. This would have been a huge con

 ceptual leap according to Unguru's standards, but it is unlikely to have led, in and of

 itself, to any changes in the remainder of their mathematical corpus, just as today many

 students gloss past the gibberish abstract formulas in their textbooks and instead infer

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 335

 their content from specific examples. It is unreasonable, therefore, to use the presence

 or absence of abstract symbolism as the sine qua non of algebraic thought, since it could

 easily have been included or excluded at various stages in history without altering the

 actual mathematical substance at hand. Of course the abstract, symbolic formulations

 serve a purpose in later stages of the development of mathematical thought, but it

 would be an anachronism of the kind Unguru castigates to insist that it is essential also

 for a complete "algebraic" understanding of the earlier stages such as the solutions of

 quadratic problems.

 Rowe (1981) maintain that:

 We proceed to the Greeks. Regarding Greek "geometrical arithmetic", Unguru and

 Although addition and subtraction are employed for general magnitudes in the

 Euclidean tradition, the dependence of these operations on a geometric formu

 lation imposes a limitation that makes these operations qualitatively different

 from their modern counterparts. The modern notion of real number transcends

 this limitation, making it possible to equate and compare figures of differing

 dimensions, equating these in turn with angles or anything whatsoever capable

 of being measured. When number reigns supreme, everything can be related

 numerically to everything else. This the Greeks could not do. (p. 17)

 Throughout classical Greek mathematics, there is a strict adherence to the princi

 ple that only magnitudes of like species can be added or subtracted. In particular,

 this means that there was no generalized concept of number underlying Greek
 magnitude, and, hence, no idea of combining magnitudes of different dimen
 sions. (p. 24)

 Unguru is here violating his own dictum not to infer anything that is not supported by

 the sources. The sources do not show that the Greeks could not add any magnitudes,

 but that they did not do so. Only the former, unsupported reading helps Unguru's

 thesis. But why should we believe this as opposed to the latter, supported reading?

 Unguru doesn't tell us; he simply asserts the former reading as if it were historical fact.

 In reality it makes perfect sense that the Greeks would not add any magnitudes

 simply because they had no reason to do so. Adding magnitudes of different types
 is very often nonsensical and useless. A person could know very well that 10 dollars

 plus 3 apples is in some sense 13, and yet choose never to carry out a calculation of

 this sort, not because of some conceptual obstacle but simply because it is pointless.

 Likewise I would suggest that the Greeks consciously decided that they had no interest

 in adding magnitudes of different kinds and that they therefore chose to set up their

 formal theory in this manner. In other words, I would suggest that the fact that the

 formal Greek theory of magnitudes does not allow for inhomogenous magnitudes to

 be added did not preclude them from doing so; rather it was the consequence of their
 conscious desire not to do so.

 Unguru and Rowe go on to give the following variant formulation of their dimen

 sionality thesis:

 The operations of rectangle formation and ordinary multiplication, as explicitly
 performed throughout the Elements, are in fact incompatible with one another,

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ö Springer

 336

 V. Bläsjö

 i.e., rectangle formation cannot be 'generalised multiplication' without produc

 ing inconsistency in the system of operations that we know the Greeks utilized,
 (p. 24)

 Their argument for this thesis is as follows:

 Addition, subtraction, and multiplication (viewed as repeated addition) all pre

 serve dimension, and it is absolutely essential that they do so. For, as we have

 seen, addition, subtraction and ratio formation all require that the dimensions

 of the magnitudes involved be equal. It follows that the introduction by Heath

 and others of the operation of rectangle formation as generalized multiplication

 represents a radical break with the intrinsic principles underlying the operations

 explicitly performed in the Elements. The representation of products via rectan

 gle formation, which is the very cornerstone of 'geometric arithmetic', overlooks

 precisely the fundamental tenet of homogeneity that governs the entire Greek

 treatment of magnitude, (p. 30)

 This argument assumes what it is trying to prove, namely that rectangle formation is

 not part of "the entire Greek treatment of magnitude". It is true that seeing rectangle

 formation as multiplication is inconsistent with some other ways of thinking about

 multiplication, but whether those other ways constitute "the entire Greek treatment of

 magnitude", as Unguru and Rowe assert, is precisely the issue at hand. A proponent

 of geometrical algebra would obviously dispute this assertion and point out that there

 is no problem in having several different theoretical representations of the concept of

 multiplication to answer to different purposes, just as in modern mathematics we may

 define real numbers by Dedekind cuts for foundational purposes while also assuming

 that real numbers correspond to physical lengths, time intervals, etc. when dealing with

 physical applications. This does not mean that our notion of real numbers is impossibly
 "inconsistent", but rather that it is flexible and that different representations of it are

 useful in different contexts.

 3.5 Unguru and Rowe (1982)

 Unguru and Rowe (1982) continue their argument by turning to "the real litmus test

 for the historical efficacy of the 'geometric algebra' concept", namely whether "the

 Greeks solved quadratic equations by utilizing geometry" (p. 1). Their contention here

 is that "the attempt to understand Greek mathematics as algebraically motivated leads

 to paradoxical conclusions that make nonsense out of what we find in the Greek texts

 themselves" (p. 2). To prove this, then, they assume the GA perspective and attempt
 to deduce a contradiction from it, as it were.

 Their attack begins with a peculiar argument regarding Elements II. 11. They argue

 that, assuming GA thinking, this proposition can be construed as a solution to the

 quadratic equation x2 + ax = c2. They then declare that the desired contradiction has
 been reached:

 Of course, this is pure fantasy, and neither Heath nor anyone else would blunder

 so badly as to mistake this for a Greek solution to a quadratic equation. The point,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 337

 however, is (and it is a point worth emphasis) that such a solution is perfectly

 plausible once we take the assumptions of 'geometrical algebra' seriously, (p. 20)

 Here Unguru and Rowe are mistaken about what GA advocates maintain. II. 11 is the

 equivalent of solving this quadratic equation. This is the standard GA view. Zeuthen

 (1885, pp. 15-18) explains this very clearly and explicitly. Unguru and Rowe have

 simply reproduced a standard GA argument and followed it with the completely unsub

 stantiated allegation that it is "of course" a "blunder". Clearly this does not amount to

 an argument against GA in any way.

 Unguru and Rowe also give various arguments as to how a general quadratic equa

 tion can be solved by simpler means than those employed by Euclid in VI.28-29. One

 such argument concludes triumphantly that

 We have thus "solved" the general quadratic by using nothing more than Book

 II-style techniques, i.e., bypassing altogether Greek proportion theory. Now that

 is geometric algebra! (p. 21)

 Another has it that

 it is absolutely child's play to produce a solution for the general quadratic, a

 solution which the Greeks could not have missed, had they been doing "3-D
 geometrical algebra" ...! (p. 40)

 On the basis of these alternative approaches to quadratic equations Unguru and Rowe
 conclude:

 These arguments, we believe, conclusively show that the claim that propositions

 like VI.28, 29 were motivated by the desire to obtain a solution to the general

 quadratic equation is a historically empty claim. ... Willingness to use just a

 few light assumptions drawn from "geometric arithmetic" suffices to produce

 relatively simple solutions to quadratics that allow one to bypass entirely the
 proportion theory of Book VI. (p. 42)

 The logic of this argument is confused. The point that it would have been easy for the

 Greeks to solve quadratic equations is precisely what GA says. After all, the Babylo

 nians did it 1500 years before Euclid, and of course they did so with "Book II-style

 techniques" and without Greek proportion theory. Far from being arguments against

 the GA hypothesis, this is precisely what GA proponents maintain. The only way these

 facts would constitute counter-evidence to GA would be if GA involved the premiss

 that solving quadratics was a very complicated business that required a sophisticated

 proportion theory. But no GA proponent has ever maintained such a thing. Zeuthen

 (1885, p. 22), for instance, is perfectly clear that Euclid postpones his full treatment

 of quadratics to Book VI only because he wants to employ certain generalisations and

 formal niceties, which, however, are not necessary for solving quadratic equations as

 such. Indeed, since solution methods for quadratics had long been known, it is perhaps

 not surprising that Euclid is eager to pursue a more sophisticated take on the theory.

 Thus, once again, Unguru and Rowe's argument that quadratics can be solved by

 simpler means is by no means an argument against GA, as they imagine it to be, but
 rather a simple fact that GA proponents have always agreed with.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 338

 Fig. 1 Simplified case of the
 Fig. 1 Simplified case of the
 figure for Elements VI.29 with
 figure for Elements VI.29 with

 algebraic significations added
 algebraic significations added

 V. Bläsjö

 F

 L M

 a!2
 a/2

 A E
 Ε

 a!2 B| x |p
 a/2 B|

 N
 Ν

 Q o

 Unguru and Rowe also present an argument regarding VI.29 itself. We must first

 give a short account of this proposition. The Euclidean formulation is very general

 and in terms of parallelograms, but all of the relevant aspects for our discussion are

 present already in the special case of the quadratic x2 + ax = c2 solved in II. 11 when

 all parallelograms are taken to be rectangles.

 Restricted to this case, Euclid's VI.29 construction goes as follows (see Fig. 1).

 Given are the line segment a = AB and the area c2. Sought is a line segment χ such
 that x2 + ax = c2. Find the midpoint Ε of the segment AB and erect the square
 2

 BE FL. This square will have area Now construct the square FM ON in such a

 way that its area is j- + c2. Such a construction is given in proposition VI.25. The

 side FM of this square is + c2. Let * be the amount by which this side length

 exceeds that of the small square, Then the L-shaped figure EBLMPOQNE has

 area x2 + ax. But by construction this area is also equal to c2. Thus the constructed

 segment BP — χ satisfies the desired property x2 + ax = c2 and we have constructed

 the (positive) solution to the equation.

 The solution corresponds to the modern algebraic one in terms of completing the

 square. With this method, to solve x2+ax = c2 we would first add to both sides, just

 as Euclid starts by constructing a square with this area. This makes the left-hand side a

 square and gives (x + § )2 = c2 + The right-hand side here corresponds to Euclid's

 big square FMON. Next we take the square root of both sides: χ + | = ^jc2 + j-.
 In terms of Euclid's construction this corresponds to finding the side FM. Finally, to

 isolate x, we subtract | from both sides, just as Euclid subtracts Ε Β from EP to get
 BP=x.

 Unguru and Rowe, however, deny such a correspondence:

 In algebra, the technique of completing the square has a definite object, namely

 to factor the equation in the form (jc + a)2 = b, whereupon taking square roots

 of both sides, a solution is obtained. Thus completing the square ... has as its

 only raison d'etre, the possibility of extracting square roots as the next step in

 the procedure. What we find in the proof of VI.29, needless to say, is nothing of

 the kind! ... The whole idea behind completing the square is totally foreign to

 the method of proof found in Euclid, (p. 27)

 Perhaps the best way to make our point is to give an illustration of what "complet

 ing the square" really looks like geometrically. In doing so, another interesting

 question arises, namely, why is there nothing comparable to the following simple

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 Fig. 2 "Completing the square"
 Fig. 2 "Completing the square"
 figure as in Unguru and Rowe
 figure as in Unguru and Rowe
 (1982, p. 28)
 (1982, p. 28)

 339

 b/2

 b/2

 □

 ~v

 solution of a quadratic equation in Greek mathematics, if, as claimed, the Greeks

 solved equations geometrically?

 To solve x2 + bx = C, first apply 11.14 to get d2 = C. Next "complete the square" as

 follows: x2 + bx = x2 + 2(|jc) = d2, hence, by II.4, adding (|)2 = γ to both sides

 produces a perfect square, i.e., x2 + 2(|x) + -■ — (x +1)2 = d2 + y. Geometrically
 this amounts to completing the diagram (of Fig. 2). Using 1.47, we can find s such

 that d2 + (|)2 = s2 simply by constructing a right triangle with d and bβ as sides.

 It follows that (x + |)2 = s2, hence χ + | = s, and χ = s - |. (p. 28)

 Completing the square in this sense is indeed "totally foreign to the method of proof

 found in Euclid", but not because it is algebraic but because it is analytic rather than

 synthetic. That is to say, it assumes that what is sought is already known, namely

 the line segment x. Completing the square in the sense of Fig. 2 starts with the line

 segment χ whereas Euclid's construction ends with it. Euclid is, here as ever, adhering

 to a strictly constructivist paradigm: he uses nothing he has not first constructed. That

 is why in his solution of the quadratic equation x2 + ax = c2 he starts with the given
 a and c2 and constructs χ from them.

 Thus the argument by Unguru and Rowe doesn't show, as they claim, that Euclid did

 not use the method of completing the square. It shows only that he used the constructive

 version of it rather than the analytic one. In every other way his method is the same.

 In terms of Fig. 1, if one used an analytic approach like Unguru and Rowe do, one
 would start with the rectangle AO = ax + x2, then break the ax part in half and
 place it on top of the square x2 to get the L-shaped figure EBLMPOQNE. Then

 2

 one would complete the square by adding the square FLBE = This is exactly
 what is shown in Fig. 2, which Unguru and Rowe claim is so fundamentally different

 from anything in Euclid. In reality it is simply Euclid's construction read backwards.

 Reading constructions both forwards and backwards in this fashion was of course par

 for the course in Greek times. Typically one works analytically—that is, one assumes

 what is sought and reasons towards what is known—in a discovery phase, and then one

 reverses the steps for the synthesis, i.e. the formal presentation from what is known to

 what is sought.

 So the answer to Unguru and Rowe's question—why is nothing like this found in

 Greek mathematics?—is that something exactly like that is found, except, of course,

 translated into a constructivist paradigm.

 3.6 Fried and Unguru (2001)

 Fried and Unguru (2001) continue Unguru's case against GA with the following accu
 sation that GA is "incoherent":

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 <0 Springer

 340

 V. Blasjö

 Why does algebra need the geometrical garb? This is not at all clear and the

 various attempts at an answer strike us as incoherent on various levels. They

 amount to the view that, of the discovery of the 'irrational' by the Pythagoreans,

 algebra could appear only in geometric apparel, for the sake of rigor. We are

 not told where Greek algebra was before that fateful discovery, nor is the secret

 divulged to the curious student under what attire, if any, it was hiding then. (p. 19)

 This is a puzzling argument. A key tenet of the geometrical algebra hypothesis is

 that the Babylonian tradition provides a model of where Greek algebra was before

 its Euclid-style geometrisation. So, far from being some far-fetched and insufficiently

 specified fantasy, this pre-geometrical state of algebra is thoroughly documented in

 ample historical sources, which "the curious student" is free to consult.

 The authors do not explain what the alleged "incoherence" is supposed to be exactly,

 but in any case their caricature of the opposing view is misleadingly simplistic. The

 matter of irrationality is just one of the many good reasons for Euclid to place all

 mathematics on a geometrical basis. Additional reasons include the fact that geometry

 provided a unified framework for virtually all known mathematics at the time and that

 geometry endows algebraic concepts with a concrete meaning and ontology.

 Furthermore, what the authors allege to be "incoherent" is unequivocally what hap

 pened soon thereafter. That is to say, geometrical propositions like those of Euclid were

 used with the explicit purpose of providing the theoretical foundations for algebraic

 algorithms like those of the Babylonians.

 The authors themselves admit that Khwarizmi's treatment of quadratics does con

 stitute "geometrical algebra", since one finds there

 a metrical geometrical argument ... advanced specifically for the sake of jus

 tifying the mechanical, recipe-like solution of an algebraic equation. ... It is

 not geometry for its own sake that we face, but rather geometry for the sake of

 algebra. And it is impure geometry at that, since, unlike Greek geometry, met

 rical considerations have crept in, for ulterior motives, so to speak, namely, to

 vindicate a purely algebraic procedure for solving quadratics of a certain type.

 ... This can, then, rightly be seen as a certain brand of geometrical algebra and

 be designated as such, unlike those parts of Greek geometry ... wrongly bap

 tized with the same name, which they carry illegitimately, since they embody

 geometrical truths for their own sake. (p. 24)

 This conception, legitimizing, perhaps, talk of an Islamic geometrical algebra,

 is, needless to say, foreign to the Greek mathematician, (p. 26)

 Again, this is not argument but assertion. The claim that Euclid's propositions "embody

 geometrical truths for their own sake" is precisely what is at issue; it is something one

 needs to provide evidence for, not merely assert as the authors do.

 And why would it be "incoherent" to think that Euclid intended the propositions

 in question for the same purpose as Khwarizmi, rather than that he had completely

 different motivations but nevertheless happened to supply exactly the theorems needed

 for Khwarizmi's purpose? The main difference between them is that Euclid omitted the

 trifling numerical applications of these techniques, which are perfectly understandable

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 341

 since those had already been known for a long time and the Elements is a theoretical,

 foundational work, not a handbook of practical calculation.

 3.7 Mueller (1981)

 Mueller (1981) is opposed to GA: "the geometric interpretation is, at least prima facie,

 sufficiently plausible to render the interpretation of algebra unnecessary" (p. 44),
 he writes. Of course this is not an argument against GA as such since no one ever

 claimed that a geometrical interpretation is impossible or claimed that the algebraic

 interpretation was strictly "necessary", but let us put that aside and consider Mueller's

 arguments for his interpretation.

 principles. Thus he writes:

 Mueller sometimes speaks as if the GA question hinges on abstract methodological

 The point of view adopted here is that, if there are no independent grounds for

 choosing between an algebraic and a geometric interpretation in connection with

 the Elements, the latter is preferable because it does not use concepts which are

 not explicitly in the work. (p. 168)

 This may sound like a principled and reasonable stance, but in reality it amounts

 to nothing as far as the GA debate is concerned. No GA proponent would disagree

 with this principle, I'm sure. It cannot be used as a deciding principle in any of these

 debates since both sides would happily accept it. The crux of the matter is whether

 there are "independent grounds" or not for deciding between the two interpretations.

 GA proponents do not take their view because they think it is unproblematic to go

 beyond what is explicitly in the work, but precisely because they find that there are

 sufficient "independent grounds" for doing so.

 It is necessary, therefore, to turn to the internalist arguments. In terms of Euclid's

 Book II, Mueller argues that the proofs of the first few propositions suggest Euclid's

 ignorance of algebra. The first two propositions may be expressed thus in algebraic
 terms, as Mueller notes:

 II. 1. If there are two straight lines, and one of them is cut into any number of

 segments whatever, then the rectangle contained by the two straight lines equals

 the sum of the rectangles contained by the uncut straight line and each of the
 segments.

 xyi + xyi -l V xyn = *(yi + yi + · · · + yn) (D,la)

 II.2. If a straight line is cut at random, then the sum of the rectangles contained

 by the whole and each of the segments equals the square on the whole.

 (* + y)* + (jc + y)y = (* + y)2 (n,2a)

 Mueller notes that n,2a can easily be derived from II,la:

 (.X + yΫ = (x + y)(x + y) = [by II,la] (x + y)x + (x + y)y

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 342

 V. Bläsjö

 But Euclid does not prove II.2 in this manner (he instead proves it from scratch, without

 reference to II. 1). According to Mueller:

 The fact that he does not do so is an indication that he does not perceive the

 relation between these propositions in the way in which a modern algebraist
 would. For Euclid each of 11,1-3 states an independent geometric fact. (p. 46)

 On the basis of this and similar examples Mueller generalises thus:

 However one wishes to describe the results proved in book II, the proofs them

 selves show no sense of the connection between the propositions involved. This

 fact suggests strongly that Euclid is approaching his subject by looking at the

 geometrical properties of particular spatial configurations and not by considering

 abstract relations between quantities or formal relations between expressions,

 (p. 52)

 In my opinion there is no basis for such a conclusion. Mueller's argument rests on
 the implicit assumption that an algebraic treatment would invoke "the connection

 between the propositions involved", whereas a geometric treatment would not. But

 this assumption is not a reasonable one. The fact that the proofs are independent is

 just as conspicuous on either interpretation. II.2 is obviously the special case of II. 1
 where the "any number of segments whatever" is taken to be two segments, and "the

 uncut straight line" is taken to be equal to "the whole" line segment that we started
 with. This is obvious already geometrically. There is surely no way Euclid could have

 failed to see this and thus been aware of the possibility of proving II.2 from II. 1, no

 matter whether he thought algebraically or not.

 Thus whereas Mueller's argument seems to be:

 Algebraically the propositions are connected; Euclid's proofs show no sign of

 being cognisant of this; therefore he did not think algebraically.

 One could just as well argue, with equal justification, that:

 Geometrically the propositions are connected; Euclid's proofs show no sign of

 being cognisant of this; therefore he did not think geometrically.

 Because of this symmetry I am of the opinion that the independence of these proofs

 provides no evidence one way or the other regarding GA.

 Another of Mueller's arguments concerns the fact that a number of "geometrical

 algebra" propositions in the Elements are stated in terms of parallelograms even though

 only rectangles are of interest from the algebraic point of view. Mueller discusses for
 example:

 1.45. To construct a parallelogram equal to a given rectilinear figure in a given

 rectilinear angle.

 As Mueller notes, this proposition "is on the algebraic interpretation the solution of

 ax = b, or the division of a by b" (p. 45). But for this purpose only the special case

 of a rectangle in place of a parallelogram is needed. Thus Mueller argues:

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 343

 On the algebraic interpretation the use of the parallelogram must be read as

 a pointless geometric generalization, and the failure to prove the algebraically

 most interesting form of 1,45 as the leaving out of a trivial consequence despite

 its fundamental importance, (p. 45)

 Euclid has indeed generalised beyond the case of primary interest, as mathematicians
 often do. Mueller tries to construe this as a blow to GA:

 Since Euclid often bothers to prove trivial consequences whether or not they are

 fundamental, the more reasonable conclusion would seem to be that his primary,

 if not exclusive, motivation is geometric ... (p. 45)

 Mueller does not provide any further indication of what other special cases he is

 thinking of, or why they would be comparable to the one at hand. In particular the

 latter seems far from obvious: surely mathematicians typically point out special cases

 not because they have a generic blanket policy to always note special cases, but rather

 for reasons specific to the matter at hand and its intended use. Without supporting

 evidence and explication, therefore, I do not see how the claim that Euclid would have

 noted the special case if he had intended the theorem algebraically can be considered

 anything more than an unsubstantiated assertion.

 Another of Mueller's arguments against GA concerns the compounding of ratios,

 which algebraically speaking corresponds to the multiplication of fractions. In the

 Elements this notion occurs only in two propositions: VI.23 and its arithmetical coun

 terpart VIII.5, the former of which reads:

 VI.23. Equiangular parallelograms have to one another the ratio compounded of
 the ratios of their sides.

 The notion of a compounded ratio is not used elsewhere in the Elements, and in fact

 is not even defined. Consequently the interpretation of the compounding of ratios

 as multiplication of fractions has never been central to any GA reading of Euclid.
 Nevertheless it is quite reasonable to infer that if Euclid was a skilled algebraist as

 GA advocates maintain then he ought also to have seen the algebraic aspects of the

 compounding of ratios.

 But Mueller maintains that Euclid shows no awareness of its algebraic aspects and

 uses this to argue against GA as follows:

 In general, the geometric books confirm the impression gained from the arith

 metic ones that Euclid does not construe compounding as multiplication. VI,23

 itself is, in a sense, evidence of this fact, since the product of the lengths of two

 sides of a parallelogram does not produce a value of any mathematical signifi
 cance. (p. 154)

 I disagree. The proposition shows that this value does indeed have a clear mathematical

 significance, namely that it is proportional to the area of the parallelogram. As far as

 proportionality of areas of similar or closely related figures is concerned, which is

 all Euclid discusses, it is just as good as the absolute area itself. So it makes perfect

 sense for Euclid to use it in place of the absolute area, since this alleviates the need

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 <£) Springer

 344

 V. Bläsjö

 to introduce an auxiliary quantity (the height) and thereby enables the presentation to
 be cleaner and more streamlined.

 Mueller also notes that this proposition could have been used to prove:

 VI. 14. In equal and equiangular parallelograms the sides about the equal angles

 are reciprocally proportional; and equiangular parallelograms in which the sides

 about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional are equal.

 Thus Mueller argues:

 [VI.] 14 itself is a direct consequence of VI,23 and VJ [a proposition discussed

 by Mueller which does not occur in the Elements', algebraically: if ^ = 1

 then ^ = j], which, as I pointed out, is obvious on the fractional interpretation
 of ratios. Euclid seems totally unaware of the connection between 23 and 14.
 (p. 161)

 Euclid's failure to reduce VI, 14 to 23 is one piece of evidence that he does not

 view compounding of ratios as a kind of multiplication, (p. 162)

 I disagree that such a conclusion follows. As we have noted, the notion of the com

 pounding of ratios clearly plays a very marginal role in the Elements to say the least.

 It can certainly be considered inessential for following the work. It would clearly be

 a radical change of course, therefore, for Euclid to start basing other propositions on

 this notion, as Mueller suggests he would have done had he realised the connection.

 So Euclid's motivation for not proving VI. 14 from VI.23 could simply be that he

 did not want to introduce another abstract notion needlessly when VI. 14 can be proved

 straightforwardly already without it. Teachers of mathematics are often faced with the

 choice of explaining something, on the one hand, in a concrete way that uses only
 what the student already knows, or, on the other hand, with the aid of more abstract

 concepts which may make the connections clearer and reduce the need for brute-force

 work while also demanding a greater conceptual penetration on the part of the student.

 Faced with such a choice, many teachers will chose the former option, even though

 they understand the latter perfectly well. Euclid's reasons for not deriving VI. 14 from

 VI.23 could very well be of this kind.

 On this interpretation, it is still reasonable that Euclid would want to include VI.23

 as a nod to those in the know. The use of compounding here is in any case a rather

 harmless matter of formulating the theorem and thus not as conceptually demanding

 as the rewriting of the Elements envisioned by Mueller. In particular, Mueller's VJ
 mentioned above would be far from "obvious" to a reader who did not have a good

 conceptual understanding of such manipulations already. By avoiding relying on such

 concepts, Euclid frees himself from the burden of having to explicate it from scratch—

 this, however, would no longer be the case if he followed the path suggested by Mueller.

 In the quotation above we saw Mueller claiming that his interpretations in these

 instances "confirm the impression gained from the arithmetic ones". However, this is
 not an indication that I have omitted one of the Mueller's key arguments against GA.

 On the contrary, in his discussion of the arithmetic books Mueller explicitly postpones

 all discussion of this point:

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 345

 The serious question for interpretation is whether compounding should be

 viewed as a representation of multiplying, i.e., as a device for representing the

 multiplication of fractions in the language of proportionality. I shall be argu

 ing that compounding should not be viewed in this way, but shall postpone this

 argument until later chapters covering propositions in which Euclid employs the
 notion of compounding, (p. 88)

 The arithmetical side of the matter is instead discussed in connection with Book VIII,

 where Euclid proves the arithmetical analog of the above proposition:

 VIII.5. Plane numbers have to one another the ratio compounded of the ratios of
 their sides.

 The relevant definition is:

 VII. Definition 16. And, when two numbers having multiplied one another make

 some number, the number so produced be called plane, and its sides are the

 numbers which have multiplied one another.

 The following proposition is obviously a special case, even though Euclid proves it

 separately:

 Vni.l 1. Between two square numbers ... the square has to the square the dupli
 cate ratio of that which the side has to the side.

 VII. Definition 18. A square number is equal multiplied by equal, or a number

 which is contained by two equal numbers.

 Mueller sees the fact that Euclid makes no connection between VIII.5 and VIII. 11 as

 evidence against GA:

 [Euclid's] failure to exploit VIII,5 [in his proof of VIII. 11] is a good indication

 that he does not construe compounding as a representation of multiplying, (p. 92)

 It is not clear to me what the argument is supposed to be here exactly. Are we to

 believe that Euclid did not realise that VIII. 11 is a special case of VIII.5? Surely it is

 utterly inconceivable that Euclid would have failed to see this. The fact that VIII. 11 is

 a special case of VIII.5 is blatantly obvious on any interpretation of these propositions,

 not just the algebraic one. And if we agree to this, then how could Euclid's decision to

 prove VIII. 11 from scratch possibly serve as an indicator of whether he adopted one

 point of view rather than the other?

 We have now discussed the only uses of compounded ratios in the Elements. But

 Mueller also counts its absence in the later books as further evidence against GA:

 Euclid ... does not even use the notion of compounding in the solid books.
 His failure to do so is perhaps the strongest evidence that he does not construe

 compounding ratios as multiplication, (p. 221)

 The reason why this constitutes such "strong evidence", according to Mueller, is that

 the theory could have been greatly simplified if the method of compounding ratios had

 been used in a full-fledged fashion. But this argument works only if we assume that

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ζ} Springer

 346

 V. Bläsjö

 Euclid must have preferred such a presentation if he had realised that it was possible.

 Only then does his choice not to do so say anything about his understanding of the

 algebraic aspect of compounding ratios. But this seems to me to be a very dubious

 assumption. As we all know, it is a common-place state of affairs in mathematics that a

 certain theory can be presented in two ways: either very concretely, which often means

 relying on long computations and brute-force methods, or very abstractly, which often

 means much more sleek proofs but much greater conceptual sophistication. It would

 be much too simplistic to say that the latter is obviously superior. Each method has

 its advantages. The former is often more accessible in principle to a less sophisticated

 reader; it has a certain methodological purity by staying close to the source and not

 introducing concepts far removed from the immediate matter at hand; it raises fewer

 ontological questions by working on a more tangible level of concreteness; etc. It is

 perfectly plausible that Euclid avoided the method of compounding ratios for reasons

 such as these. Therefore his choice not to use this method says nothing about whether

 or not he understood this method algebraically.

 This point of view seems to agree with Mueller's own conclusion:

 The general situation might perhaps be summarized by saying that Euclid will

 use the theory of proportion in an elementary way to avoid a complex solid

 geometrical argument, but he will not use it in an abstract computational way to

 substitute for geometrical argument, (p. 226)

 This is just what one would expect on the hypothesis that Euclid desires to use the most

 concrete methods in his proofs. Though Euclid uses the language of compounded ratios

 on a few isolated occasions, he does so only in the most elementary way; it is a basic

 shorthand expression rather than a method of reasoning. This is perfectly consistent

 with the hypothesis that he is fully aware of the algebraic power of compounding

 ratios but has decided to keep his presentation as concrete as possible, just as many

 mathematicians today write books for a certain audience in a concrete form even when

 they know a more abstract and streamlined theory.

 It would have been different if Euclid had used the method of compounded ratios

 in his proofs, but used it in a clumsy way. Then his presentation could be faulted on

 its own terms—not on the basis that it could favourably be replaced by a different

 approach altogether but on the basis that the very method he choses could have been

 carried out far more perfectly by someone who had greater understanding of those

 very methods. That would have been evidence that he did not fully understand the

 method of compounded ratios in an algebraic manner. But that is not what we find in
 the Elements.

 Zeuthen formulated the GA1 hypothesis in his work on Apollonius's Conies. The

 theory of conics is of course replete with quadratic relations at every turn and therefore
 relies on the kind of relations found it Book II of the Elements. Zeuthen found that

 something like GA1 was the best way to characterise the role these propositions played
 in the Conics. But Saito (1985) argues that, on the contrary, "Apollonius's thought

 3.8 Saito (1985)

 ■Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 347

 can be better understood if we assume that crucial steps of his argument depend on

 geometric intuitions" (p. 32) rather than algebraic reasoning. This leads him to view

 the role played by the results of Book II of the Elements in a different light. The

 basis for Saito's new interpretation is that "the process of visualization is a necessary

 element in the reliance on geometric intuition", and that "the propositions in Elem. II

 play an important role in this process [of visualization]" (p. 42). Thus those results

 are not methods of treating the lines and areas as general quantities in a way

 similar to modern algebra, but they are the means for transformation between

 'visible' and 'invisible' forms of areas. The former is indispensable because it

 makes geometric intuition available, while the latter is adapted to the formal

 statement of results as propositions ... (p. 43)

 The main feature of this formal expression is the 'invisibility' of the figures

 involved, such as 'the square of the ordinate' and 'the rectangle contained by

 two line segments which lie in a line', (p. 46)

 Thus, in Saito's view, propositions are most efficiently stated in terms of "invisible"

 areas, as this allows for certain abstraction and generality. At the beginning of each

 proof, however, these abstractions must be "unpacked", as it were, into visible areas.

 This is done using results from Book Π of the Elements, which express "invisible"

 squares and rectangles as a combination of other figures, which may be visually rep
 resented.

 However, it would be easy to construct the square on the ordinate or to raise one of

 the two sides of a "flat" rectangle in a direction perpendicular to the other. In this way

 one could easily make Saito's "invisible" areas visible with only the simplest of tools.

 Book II of the Elements would not at all be needed to do this, which speaks heavily
 against Saito's interpretation of the purpose of Book II. In fact, it seems much more

 natural to interpret the "invisibility" of these figures as an indication that they express

 relations thought of abstractly, just as GA1 says.

 Saito also goes on to interpret Euclid's Elements in terms of the notion of "invisible"

 areas. Consider

 II. 1. If there be two straight lines, and one of them be cut into any number of

 segments whatever, the rectangle contained by the two straight lines is equal to

 the rectangles contained by the uncut straight line and each of the segments.

 which is the geometrical equivalent of

 x(a + b + c-1 ) ■= ax + bx + cx -\

 This proposition at first "appears quite strange" and "seems to be a tautology" (p. 54),

 since the proof simply points out the very evident fact that a rectangle cut into so

 many pieces has the same area as the sum of the pieces. This seems too trivial to even

 admit of a "proof' in any meaningful sense, and in fact, as Saito notes (p. 55), Euclid

 himself seems to have used this theorem implicitly already earlier in his proof of the

 Pythagorean theorem 1.47 (where the square on the hypothenuse is decomposed into

 two rectangles corresponding to the squares on the legs). To resolve this puzzling state

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 348

 V. Bläsjö

 of affairs "the notion of 'visible' and 'invisible' figures seems to be useful", according

 to Saito. II. 1, from this point of view, is in itself is a statement about "invisible" fig

 ures, since it speaks in abstract terms without any reference to a specific geometrical

 configurations. The proof, then, which does little more than merely restate the propo

 sition in terms of a specific, lettered figure, does from this point of view accomplish
 something:

 What Euclid has done is to reduce the equality between 'invisible' figures to

 that of 'visible' ones. The latter equality is evident by geometric intuition and

 it can be safely conjectured that Euclid thought it a sound basis for the proof of

 the former. As a result, I claim that II 1 is by no means trivial, for it extends the

 'visible' equality to the 'invisible', (p. 55)

 This also explains why Euclid has committed no fallacy in his proof of 1.47: there

 he uses only the "visible" form of the theorem, which is self-evident. An example

 of a converse type occurs in XIII. 10, "the sole explicit example of the use of II 1-3

 in the Elements" (p. 55). There Euclid applies II.2 in the abstract, without having

 the geometrical configuration of that theorem visually represented in the figure, thus

 suggesting once again that the essence of the propositions of Book II is their abstract
 formulation.

 But again none of this is an argument against the geometrical algebra hypothesis.

 On the contrary, the GA hypothesis seems to account for the above in a natural way

 without the need for a recourse to the rather contrived notion of "invisible figures". The

 essence of abstraction in the formulations of the propositions in Book II, their saying

 something more abstract than the obvious geometrical facts on which their proofs are

 based, their being applied in abstract rather than visual form—all these things are in

 perfect accord with the geometrical algebra hypothesis. Saito replies to this as follows:

 A criticism might be raised that the invisible figures and their sides are sub

 stantially the same as quantities in general, and thus that my interpretation is at

 bottom algebraic. But it is a mistake to interpret invisible figures in this way.

 They retain their geometric properties, since depending on the arrangement of

 the figures, one of the pair of twin-propositions is necessary. Elem. II contains

 the propositions concerning the 'invisible' figures for the solution of geometric

 problems, and these propositions are usually stated in pairs, the two propositions

 being used in mutually complementary way [sic] to solve a problem. And this

 mutually complementary use of a pair of propositions is evidence that Euclid

 did not regard geometric magnitudes (areas and lengths of lines) as general

 quantities, (p. 56)

 For example, both II5 and II6 can be expressed by the equality (a+b)(a~b) =

 a2 - b2 and some other pairs of propositions can likewise be represented by a

 single algebraic equality, (p. 47)

 Saito's argument here assumes that such double forms would not occur if the treatment

 was intended algebraically. I do not find this a reasonable assumption. For example,
 a modern algebra book may include both (a + b)2 = a2 + lab + b2 and (a - b)2 =

 a2—2ab+b2 when a single formula would have been enough if a and b were intended

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 349

 as general magnitudes, which in fact they are. Of course modern algebra books include

 both of these formulas because it is convenient in practice to have both forms for easy

 reference, even though of course they are ultimately equivalent.

 Furthermore, Saito's algebraic formulation of II.5-6 is extremely liberal, van der

 Waerden (1950, p. 120) also uses this liberal formulation, though he has his own

 hypothesis as to how the two theorems differ. Using a more literal interpretation one
 would obtain (as Zeuthen 1885, p. 12 does) the following algebraic meanings:

 11.5. If a straight line [a] is cut into equal [\a + \a\ and unequal [(a - b) + b]
 segments, then the rectangle contained by the unequal segments of the whole

 [(a - b)b] together with the square on the straight line between the points of

 section [{\a - b)2] equals the square on the half [(\a)2].

 (ta - b)b + (\a - bf = (\a)2

 11.6. If a straight line [a] is bisected and a straight line [b] is added to it in a

 straight line, then the rectangle contained by the whole with the added straight

 line and the added straight line [(a + b)b] together with the square on the half

 t(\a)2] equals the square on the straight line made up of the half and the added

 straight line [(ja + b)2].

 (ιa + b)b + (2°) = {\a + b)

 Thus it is highly misleading to claim that these propositions are algebraically the same.

 They are no more the same algebraically than they are geometrically, so it makes no

 sense to use the existence of both as evidence that Euclid did not think algebraically.

 According to Saito:

 The double form i.e. the existence of twin-propositions, can be explained in the

 context of their application to the geometric arguments. They are used in mutually

 complementary ways according to the arrangements of points and lines in the

 problems and theorems to which they are applied, (p. 59)

 This is of course true, but it proves nothing unless one makes the tacit assumption that

 this cannot be explained equally well algebraically. And Saito has given no argument

 for this assumption, except the mere assertion that the propositions are algebraically

 identical. But to Zeuthen they are far from identical, and to van der Waerden, who

 does see them as in a way corresponding to the same formula, there is nevertheless

 an algebraic distinction between them in terms of the problems they are designed to

 solve. Altogether, then, Saito's argument about the "twin" propositions Π.5-6 con

 sists in showing that they are geometrically difFerentiable and assuming that they

 are algebraically indistinguishable. But since there is no reason to believe the latter

 assumption, the former proves absolutely nothing one way or the other as far as GA
 is concerned.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 though it is self-evident to us that [(F)], it was not so to Euclid, nor for Apollonius.

 Later Pappus took the trouble to prove it. We will find other examples of their

 ignorance of or indifference to the multiplicational implication of compounding,
 (p. 31)

 350

 3.9 Saito (1986)

 V. Bläsjö

 Like Mueller, Saito (1986) argues against GA1 on the basis of the ways in which the
 Greeks handled compounded ratios. According to Saito, Greek works betray a lack

 of understanding of the basic algebraic structure of such operations. If the Greeks

 had truly understood these things in an abstract, algebraic fashion, he argues, they

 could, and presumably would, have streamlined their works considerably. This argu
 ment concerns the "behind the scenes" reasoning, as it were: obviously the Greeks

 insisted, for one reason or another, that their finished treatises must proceed in a strictly

 synthetic-geometric fashion; the question is whether they mastered algebraic thought

 and only wrote up their results in this form for the sake of formal presentation, or

 whether their thought itself was limited along with their mode of expression. Saito
 maintains the latter. His evidence for this is the manner in which the Greeks dealt with

 rules such as (the equivalent in the language of compounded ratios of)

 i = i.l => i = i.L (F)
 b d f d b e

 According to Saito,

 There are several things to object to here. First of all (F) is not "self-evident" to us
 either. It is a well-known fact, to be sure, and one that we have used so often that it
 has become second nature to us. But that doesn't make it "self-evident".

 But even this caveat aside, the fact that Pappus proved (F) does not mean that it was

 not considered self-evident. Saito apparently thinks so since he goes on to promise

 "other" evidence, apparently implying that this is one piece of evidence. But in reality,

 of course, mathematics is full of proofs of self-evident theorems. To take but one

 example, the triangle inequality, proved by Euclid (1.20), is "evident even to an ass",

 as a famous phrase reported by Proclus has it.

 What, then, is Saito's further evidence for his claim? First he considers the role of

 compounded ratios in Euclid. As noted above, this notion occurs in only proposition
 VI.23 and its arithmetical counterpart VIII.5. If we write Ρ for the area and /, k for

 the sides of a parallelogram then VI.23 says, algebraically speaking, that

 Λ_/ι h
 Pi h h

 to the remaining side.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In Euclid's Data a very similar result occurs as proposition 68:

 If two equiangular parallelograms have a given ratio to each other, and if one

 side also has a given ratio to one side, the remaining side will have a given ratio

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 351

 Algebraically, this amounts to the variant

 h = A h
 h Pi k\

 obtained from Elements VI.23 by applying (F). Indeed Euclid could easily have proved

 the theorem in this way, and as Saito notes: "this proof would not only simplify the

 proof in the text of the Data, but would also bring about a radical change in the style

 and object of the argument" (p. 38). Thus this might seem to suggest that Euclid did

 not grasp the underlying algebraic nature of these results and methods.

 In my opinion this is an unconvincing argument. Saito interprets the fact that Euclid

 didn't prove Data 68 from Elements VI.23 as an indication that he didn't see the

 algebraic bridge between these results, which would have made the proof very easy.

 That is to say, Euclid did not have enough algebraic knowledge to take this step.

 It seems to me more likely that precisely to opposite is true: Euclid had too much

 algebraic knowledge to take this step, for he saw that the results are really one and

 the same. From this point of view, it would not make sense to "prove" Data 68 from

 Elements VI.23 since it is not really a separate theorem but simply a reformulation of

 the latter in a form more appropriate to the Data. Indeed, as Saito himself reports, the

 extant text of the Data also comes with an alternative proof of proposition 68, which

 has more in common with the algebraic proof although "the algebraic character is not

 so conspicuous in this alternative because it repeats the procedure in VI, 23, rather

 than use its conclusion" (p. 39). This, of course, is exactly what one would expect

 if Data 68 was thought of as a reformulation of Elements VI.23 to be proved in a

 self-contained manner, as I proposed.

 Saito next turns to Apollonius's Conies. Apollonius makes extensive use of com

 pounded ratios throughout. Saito decides to focus on propositions 41 and 43 from the

 first book, though, as he admits (esp. p. 54), this is a rather arbitrary sample. These

 propositions involve compounded ratios, but, according to Saito, "only superficially,

 as a means of compact enunciation of the propositions and shorter representation of the

 argument, not as a method of analysis" (p. 41). "This fact seems to suggest that [Apol

 lonius] was not even aware of the possibility of the use of compounding [in the manner

 of algebraic analysis], which would have greatly simplified the argument" (p. 53).

 This sounds compelling enough until one pursues the details. It then transpires that

 this alleged "great simplification" is not all that great; in fact, arguably, it is hardly

 even a simplification. Saito himself gives a reconstruction of the combined analysis

 behind the two propositions in question on pp. 47-48. This analysis consists of 24

 steps. He then proceeds to give "a simpler analysis" (pp. 49-50), which utilises (F).

 This "simpler" analysis picks up at step 11 of the original analysis, adds four steps

 and one application of (F), and then coincides again with the original analysis in its

 last four steps. Let us, for the sake of argument, be charitable and say that the use of

 (F) is a single step, even though it is arguably the outsourcing of multiple steps to a

 lemma. With this concession, then, the "simpler" analysis consists of 20 steps, 15 of

 which are identical to the original 24-step analysis. Saito gives no further argument

 as to why the second analysis is "simpler", and yet he considers this grounds enough
 for a very ambitious conclusion:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 352

 V. Bläsjö

 This analysis would have greatly simplified the synthesis of the propositions I,

 41, 43. The complexity of the extant text testifies that this line of thought never

 occurred to Apollonius, though he has made use of the compounding of ratios
 in the same propositions. How can we explain this apparent contradiction? ...

 It must have been the case that the compounding of ratios had not yet been
 sufficiently developed ... (p. 50)

 Such is the extent of Saito's argument that Apollonius did not master the algebra of the

 compounding of ratios. To me it seems dubious to draw such wide-ranging conclusions

 on the basis of the possibility of making very slight simplifications in the proofs of

 two cherry-picked propositions.

 3.10 Grattan-Guinness (1996)

 Grattan-Guinness (1996) purports to "examine the credentials and verisimilitude of

 geometric algebra as an interpretation of the Elements" and "find[s] in favor of the

 critics" (p. 357). To this end he gives a summary of "the principal criticisms" of GA

 (pp. 359-360), which I shall now quote and reply to in order.

 2.1. The algebra is simply the wrong style: there are no equations, or letters used

 in an algebraic way, in the Elements.

 The Elements contains many propositions about things being equal to other things. To

 say that these are not "equations" is to say that they are not written in the form of a

 symbolic equation in the modern sense. But that does not mean it is not algebra. If you

 take a modern algebra textbook and translate all equations into words, and all x's into

 "the root", then it does not cease to be algebra. This change in surface form does not

 alter the underlying content and line of thought of the work. Therefore the absence of

 typographical equations does not prove that GA is "wrong".

 2.2. Had Euclid been thinking algebraically, he would have presented construc

 tions corresponding to easy manipulations of [(a + b)2 — a2 + 2ab + b2] (for

 example) which, in fact, are absent from the Elements.

 I find it dubious to argue this way, as if there is only one way to write a book if you

 know algebra. Authors' choices whether to include or exclude particular materials

 in their works are complex decisions that take into account a myriad factors and

 considerations. Merely knowing algebra is not sufficient to dictate these choices in a

 deterministic manner, as this argument assumes.

 Furthermore, I would argue (as would many GA advocates, I believe) that Euclid's

 purpose is to incorporate a certain body of algebraic knowledge within a geometrical

 paradigm, not give a self-contained introduction to algebra for its own sake. And

 his account is sufficient for this purpose. So why would he include more algebraic

 material? No detailed account of why exactly Euclid would have been obligated to do

 this has ever been given.

 2.3. Information is lost when the algebra is introduced, in particular concerning

 shapes of regions. Thus, using "p+q" to denote adding, say, two rectangles does

 not distinguish between their being adjoined at the top, bottom, left, or right...

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 353

 What is the problem with this exactly? Why would the algebraic interpretation need

 to be 100% information-preserving? Indeed, this geometrical information is often

 incidental. For instance, in the proof of the Pythagorean Theorem (1.47) the "arms"

 of the "windmill" could just as well be flipped inwards. The figure would be messier

 but the proof would be the same. Thus it is far from clear that discarding information

 about these kinds of incidental aspects of the concrete representation does any real

 harm to a faithful representation of the underlying ideas of the work.

 Again, theorems about parallelograms are often (mis-)written in terms of corre

 sponding theorems about rectangles...

 Indeed, some theorems in the Elements are expressed in terms of parallelograms where

 the rectangular cases are the interesting ones from an algebraic point of view. Con

 sequently GA proponents generally focus their discussions on the latter special case.

 But focussing on the most interesting case is not the same thing as "miswriting" the

 theorem, so what's the problem?

 2.4. Common algebra is associated with analysis in the sense of reasoning from

 a given result to principles already accepted. Euclidean geometry goes in the

 reverse, synthetic, direction. Hence, proofs may well be warped.

 Like the preceding arguments, this is not an argument against GA. It seems to be

 an argument against the claim that algebra constitutes a perfect translation of all the

 contents of the Elements, preserving every conceivable aspect of the original. Of course

 no GA proponent has ever been committed to anything near such a stance, so these

 kinds of arguments are red herrings that have nothing to do with the serious historical

 question at hand.

 2.5. Euclid never measures a geometrical magnitude of any kind. For example,

 there is nothing in the Elements directly pertaining to π, in any of its four roles for

 circles and spheres; apparently such mathematics was not Element-ary for him.

 Hence the association with algebra leads to an emphasis on arithmetic which

 cannot be justified.

 Whether Euclid measures anything is a matter of interpretation. Theorems about the

 equalities of various areas can be certainly construed as having to do with measuring

 those areas, or even with measuring underlying lengths, as in, say, 1.47, ΧΙΠ.10 or

 XIII. 12. But be that as it may, Grattan-Guinness's argument still has no bearing on

 GA. Again it is not an argument that has to do with historical hypotheses and the

 evidence for them, but rather an argument that an emphasis of algebra could lead to

 misunderstandings, such as the notion that Euclid was concerned with the number π.

 The credibility of GA as a historical hypothesis cannot be faulted on the grounds that

 it allegedly "leads" by "association" to various misunderstandings of Euclid that it
 neither entails nor endorses.

 2.6. If the Greeks really possessed this algebraic root, why did they not bring

 it to light in the later phases of their civilization? Why, one might add, did that

 philosophically sophisticated culture not introduce a word to denote, even if

 informally, this important notion?

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 354

 V. Bläsjö

 The Greeks may have done all this for all we know. Our sources are very limited. And
 insofar as they didn't it could have been because it was too basic. After all, the old

 Babylonians knew how to do this kind of algebra already 1500 years before Euclid,
 which suggests that the "sophisticated culture" of the Greeks would have found it

 quite trivial (whether they learned it from the Babylonians or not). Also, the Greek

 mathematical tradition is not notable for revealing its motivations in other cases either.

 Why, for example, did they care about conic sections? Did they draw inspiration from

 sundial astronomy or maybe the problem of the duplication of the cube? Apollonius

 wrote a big treatise on conics without saying a word about it. The Greek mathematical

 tradition is one of the refined formal treatises, not one prone to chitchatting about its

 motivations and goals.

 This point is strengthened by Klein's real history of algebra from later Greek
 figures (especially Diophantos) through the Arabs to the Renaissance and
 early modern Europeans, for a gradual process in three stages is revealed:
 (1) using and maybe abbreviating words to denote operations and known and

 unknown quantities, (2) replacing these words by symbols or single letters,
 and (3) allowing letters also to denote variables as well as unknowns and

 extending notational systems for powers. The interpretation of Euclid as a geo

 metrical algebraist requires him to have passed all three stages; and while he

 might have skated through them with greater ease than did his successors, the

 total silence over his achievement among his compatriots is indeed surpris

 ing.

 It is nonsense that the GA interpretation "requires" this of Euclid. These three steps

 are not the notion of algebra that GA is based on. In any case, (1) is of course trivial

 and obviously found in the Babylonian tradition, and (2) and the second part of (3) is

 not more than notational conventions. The first part of (3) is unclear until the meaning

 of "variable" has been specified, but one thing that is clear is that it has nothing to do
 with either GA1 or GA2.

 Grattan-Guinness also raises the following objection to GA:

 3.1. Euclid never multiplies a magnitude by a magnitude ... [For example,] in

 Euclid's geometry the square on the side is not the square of the side, or the side

 squared; it is a planar region which has this size. (pp. 360-361)

 In a later publication, Grattan-Guinness (2004) again reaffirms this view:

 Common algebra is the wrong algebra anyway [for interpreting Euclid], for

 Euclid never multiplied geometrical magnitudes together, (p. 300)

 This question-begging argument is not really an argument at all for Grattan-Guinness's

 point of view but rather a mere assertion of it. According to the GA interpretation, of

 course, the forming of rectangles in Book II is a kind of multiplication of magnitudes.

 One cannot argue against it by asserting that Euclid did not multiply magnitudes, since

 this amounts to nothing but assuming what is to be proved.

 Of course it is true that Euclid speaks of squares, for example, as geometrical objects

 and not their areas as the result of a numerical multiplication. But how is this supposed

 to prove that GA is "wrong"? One might as well insist that von Neumann's set-theoretic

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 355

 construction of the natural numbers actually has nothing to do with numbers at all since

 it is really only about sets. This may be technically true in a very narrow, dogmatic

 sense, but of course few would insist that common arithmetic is the "wrong" way of

 conceiving what von Neumann's construction is about—far from being "wrong", that
 is precisely the sense in which it was always intended to be understood.

 3.11 Netz (2004)

 Netz (2004) studies the history of one particular problem first occurring in the work

 of Archimedes. The problem amounts to a cubic equation, and Archimedes's solution

 in terms of a parabola and a hyperbola is readily interpreted in algebraic terms. For

 example, where we would speak of the square or square root of a quantity, the Greeks

 would instead speak in terms of the ordinates or abscissas of a parabola such as, in

 modern terms, py = x2, which comes to the same thing. The question is whether

 or to what extent Archimedes and other ancients thought of the problem in algebraic

 or proto-algebraic terms, or whether their mode of thought was limited to the strict

 geometrical concreteness they used to express their results.

 Netz's answer is ostensibly to "side with Unguru and Klein: there was a basic divide

 separating ancient, from later mathematics, typically seen in the transformation from

 a more geometrical approach to a more algebraic approach" (p. 190), but in reality he

 explicitly comes down on the opposite side of the crucial question. For example, he
 writes:

 Quite naturally, we now find that the two approaches [i.e., geometrical and alge

 braic] could mix in the very same proposition. This in itself is meaningful: there
 are no deep conceptual taboos involved (as authors such as Klein sometimes tend

 to suggest). The Greeks could think of objects in terms of their configuration, or

 in terms of their quantitative relations—and they could mix the two approaches.

 In all probability, they never even stopped to distinguish between the two. (p.
 53)

 There does not seem to be a big conceptual divide, separating ancients from

 moderns, so that a certain type of mathematical understanding was inaccessible

 to the ancients. Greeks were perfectly capable of a quasi-algebraic treatment—

 but, in practice, they happened to minimize it. (pp. 54-55)

 So, on this view, the Greeks were very proficient in proto-algebraic ways of thinking
 but chose to downplay this in their published works. The reasons for this were not

 cognitive but stylistic and sociological. As Netz explains:

 We should not think of the correspondence of Archimedes as a series of
 publications—Archimedes communicating to the world his newest ideas.

 Instead, a published work, of the kind we have extant today, is merely a stage in

 an ongoing intellectual tournament, (p. 62)

 For this reason Netz argues:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 356

 V. Bläsjö

 The Greek authors do not aim to allow their solutions to fit some structure of

 classification within which their work can be recognized. On the contrary: they

 attempt to blur the outline of the problem, to hide their dependence upon differ

 ent approaches. Archimedes' generalized statement [of the problem mentioned

 above] is conjured out of nowhere, to surprise the reader (this is so that the reader

 would not see the general form as a mere technical tool, forced upon Archimedes

 to simplify the terms of the problem). Dionysodorus hides the dependence of his

 analysis on that of Archimedes—and precisely for this reason foregrounds the

 geometrical setting of his problem, (p. 57)

 These preferences for geometrical obfuscation ceased making sense when the "ongo
 ing intellectual tournament" was no longer ongoing. Medieval mathematicians

 grappling with the Greek mathematical heritage faced a very different task, namely

 that of absorbing and synthesising a vast body of mathematics. Thus they focussed on

 systematisation and abstract classification, and this, rather than any cognitive break

 through, explains their more algebraic style, Netz argues:

 Hellenistic Greek mathematical practice focused on the features of the individual

 proof, trying to isolate it and endow it with a special aura. Thus the characteristic

 object of Hellenistic Greek mathematics is the particular geometrical configu
 ration. Medieval mathematical practice focused on the features of systems of

 results, trying to bring them into some kind of order and completion. Thus the

 characteristic object of medieval mathematics is the second-order expression. In

 a particular geometrical configuration, the mathematician foregrounds the local,

 qualitative features of spatial figures. In a second-order expression, the mathe

 matician foregrounds the global, quantitative features of mathematical relations.
 Thus, Hellenistic Greek mathematics—the mathematics of the aura—gave rise to

 the problem; medieval mathematics—the mathematics of deuteronomy—gave

 rise to the equation, (p. 187)

 As Netz notes, the fact that no great cognitive leap was needed for this transition is

 especially clear in the case of Eutocius:

 No one can ascribe to Eutocius any deep originality as a thinker. To find in him,

 already, the characteristic features of medieval mathematics, is therefore remark

 able. But once we see that those features arise not from conceptual developments,

 but from changes in mathematical practice, Eutocius' originality becomes clear.

 Eutocius' mathematics was already different, in terms of its practice, from that of

 Hellenistic Greek mathematics. Archimedes looked for striking results standing

 on their own; Eutocius looked for systematization. (p. 188)

 This point about the implausibility of a second-rate mathematician like Eutocius mak

 ing great conceptual advances generalises well beyond this specific case. As Mueller
 (1981) admits:

 Scholia which interpret propositions in book II numerically ... and other evi
 dence make it certain that the possibility of applying geometric algebra to

 arithmetic problems was an established fact by the first century A.D. (p. 50)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra

 357

 There are two basic ways of interpreting this fact: either this generation made profound

 conceptual advances beyond what Euclid had conceived, or else they merely spelled out

 what Euclid thought was too trivial to mention. Proponents of GA advocate the latter

 and its opponents the former, i.e. that Euclid somehow failed to see what Babylonian
 mathematicians had seen 1500 years before him, and what commentators, who on

 all other counts were inferior and unoriginal as mathematicians, would see 300 years
 after him.

 Altogether Netz has provided, in my view, an excellent case against Unguru and

 Klein, notwithstanding the fact that he claims to argue for them, in that he has shown

 clearly that the Greeks were very much capable of thinking in an essentially algebraic

 fashion. It happens that they chose to hide it, but they did so for reasons that have next

 to nothing to do with the development of mathematical thought and everything to do

 with rather pedestrian and extra-mathematical considerations regarding publication
 conventions and tactics.

 In order to maintain his opposition to GA despite the above, Netz also raises a few

 specific arguments against an algebraic reading of Archimedes. These arguments are
 defensive in nature, since on the face of it it seems clear that Archimedes is indeed

 operating essentially algebraically, as Netz admits:

 Archimedes' text, very surprisingly, makes a deliberate choice to deal with

 objects as if they were quantitative in nature. This choice, more than any other

 feature of Archimedes' text, points forwards towards a more algebraic under

 standing of the problem, (p. 98)

 This concerns Archimedes's "multiplication" of a figure by a line: Archimedes's
 expression is of the form "figure epi line", which is quite clearly conceived as an

 abstract quantity rather than anything like a concrete area or volume in the figure. As
 Netz notes, "epi does not refer to the construction of a solid from an area and a line";

 "In fact we have a clear sense of what it might mean, and this is because it is often

 used in calculations, in expressions of the form: number epi number" (p. 100), where
 it means "multiplied by".

 To argue against the prima facie algebraic interpretation Netz maintains that the
 operation in question is not truly algebraic after all since it lacks certain essential

 algebraic properties. For example, it is not commutative: we never hear of "line epi

 figure" (p. 104). I find this argument thoroughly unconvincing. The fact that we always

 say "base times height" and never "height times base" when describing the area of a

 rectangle does not prove that we fail to comprehend the commutative nature of the

 operation. It is simply a stylistic choice to always used the preferred and standardised

 version, though we understand perfectly well that they are equivalent.

 4 Conclusion

 The geometrical algebra hypothesis has, for the past few decades, been a kind of

 scapegoat in a war of historiography. As the hallmark of a currently unpopular mode

 of scholarship, this hypothesis has been condemned with zeal by a new generation of

 historians. Because of its unfashionable association, the geometrical algebra hypoth

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 358

 V. Bläsjö

 esis has seen objections of all sorts hurled its way. And with no one to defend it,

 bystanders are likely to assume that it is justified. But the geometrical algebra hypoth

 esis deserves a fair trial. In this paper I have attempted to address every substantial

 argument ever raised against the geometrical algebra hypothesis. I have argued that

 none of them are at all compelling. I urge, therefore, that it is time to take a step back

 from perfunctory opposition to geometrical algebra and to look at its case afresh with

 an open mind.

 References

 Bos, Henk J.M. 2001. Redefining Geometrical Exactness: Descartes' Transformation of the Early Modern

 Concept of Construction. Berlin: Springer.

 Freudenthal, Hans. 1977. What is algebra and what has it been in history? Archive for the History of Exact

 Fried, Michael N., and Sabetai Unguru. 2001. Apollonias of Pergas conica: Text, context, subtext. Leiden:

 Sciences 16(3): 189-200.

 Brill.

 Grattan-Guinness, Ivor. 1996. Numbers, magnitudes, ratios, and proportions in Euclid's elements: How did

 he handle them? Historia Mathematica 23: 355-375.

 Grattan-Guinness, Ivor. 2004. Decline, then recovery: An overview of activity in the history of mathematics

 during the twentieth century. History of Science 42(3): 279-312.

 Heath, T.L. 1908. The thirteen books of Euclid's elements. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 H0yrup, Jens. 2002. Lengths, widths, surfaces: A portrait of old Babylonian algebra and its kin. Sources

 and studies in the history of mathematics and physical sciences. Berlin: Springer.

 Mueller, Ian. 1981. Philosophy of mathematics and deductive structure in Euclid's elements. Cambridge:

 MIT Press.

 Netz, Reviel. 2004. The transformation of mathematics in the early Mediterranean world: From problems

 to equations. Cambridge Classical Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Neugebauer, Otto. 1936. Zur geometrischen Algebra (Studien zur Geschichte der antiken Algebra III).

 Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik, Β 3: 245-259.

 Rowe, David. 2012. Otto Neugebauer and Richard Courant: On exporting the Göttingen approach to the

 history of mathematics. Mathematical Intelligencer 34(2): 29-37.

 Saito, Ken. 1985. Book II of Euclid's elements in the light of the theory of conic sections. Historia Scien

 tiarum 28: 31-60.

 Saito, Ken. 1986. Compounded ratio in Euclid and Apollonius. Historia Scientiarum 31: 25-59.
 Sidoli, Nathan. 2013. Research on ancient greek mathematical sciences, 1998-2012. In From Alexandria,

 through Baghdad: Surveys and studies in the ancient Greek and medieval Islamic mathematical sci

 ences in honor of J.L. Berggren, ed. Nathan Sidoli, and Glen Van Brummelen, 25-50. Berlin: Springer.

 Szabo, Ärpäd. 1969. The beginnings of Greek mathematics, Synthese historical library 17, Reidel, 1978.

 Originally published as Anfinge griechischen Mathematik. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag.

 Unguru, Sabetai. 1975. On the need to rewrite the history of Greek mathematics. Archive for the History of

 Unguru, Sabetai. 1979. History of ancient mathematics: Some reflections of the state of the art. Isis 70(4):

 Exact Sciences 15(1): 67-114.

 555-565.

 Unguru, Sabetai, and David E. Rowe. 1981. Does the quadratic equation have Greek roots? A study of

 "geometrical algebra", "application of areas", and related problems. Liberias Mathematica 1:1-49.

 Unguru, Sabetai, and David E. Rowe. 1982. Does the quadratic equation have Greek roots? A study of
 "geometrical algebra", "application of areas", and related problems (cont.). Liberias Mathematica 2:
 1-62.

 Van der Waerden, B.L. 1950. Science awakening, Noordhoff, Groningen, 1954. Originally published as

 Ontwakende wetenschap. Noordhoff, Groningen

 Van der Waerden, B.L. 1975. Defence of a "shocking" point of view. Archive for the History of Exact

 Sciences 15(3): 199-210.

 Vi&te, Frangois. 2006. The analytic art. New York: Dover Publications.

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In defence of geometrical algebra 359

 Wallis, John. 1685. A treatise of algebra, both historical and practical: shewing the original, progress, and

 advancement thereof, from time to time, and by what steps it hath attained to the height at which now
 it is, London.

 Weil, Andr6. 1978. Who betrayed Euclid? Extract from a letter to the editor. Archive for History of Exact

 Sciences 19(2): 91-93.

 Zeuthen, H.G. 1885. Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Altertum, A.F. Höst & Sohn, 1886. Originally

 published as "Kegelsnitlaeren in Oltiden," Kongelig Danske videnskaberens Selskabs Skrifter, 6th ser.,
 1(3): 1-319

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 10:00:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

