 

 

 

 

Instrumentation and the Rise of Modern Physiology
Author(s): Merriley Borell
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 5, No. 2, Annual Meeting Issue (Summer, 1987),
pp. 53-62
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690422
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:47 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/690422?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Instrumentation and the Rise of Modern Physiology

 The rise of experimental physiology has received
 much attention in the last thirty years from both histori-

 ans and sociologists of science. Close analysis of the rapid
 institutionalization and professionalization of this field,
 as it occurred especially in Germany, has provided an im-
 portant case study of the social, economic and political
 factors that enhance the development of autonomous sci-
 entific fields.1 The spread of experimental physiology
 and its supporting institutions from Continental Europe
 to Great Britain and North America has also been dis-

 cussed recently in much detail by historians.2 However,
 despite intensive scholarly activity, few have been able
 to link persuasively the social and intellectual features of
 this rising discipline.3

 This paper suggests that laboratory instrumentation
 can provide important insights into the changing intel-
 lectual and social structure of science in the late nine-

 teenth and early twentieth centuries. Instruments have
 afforded not only new conceptual foci for investigators
 but also the material culture which has shaped experi-
 mental design and laboratory practice as professionaliza -
 tion and institutionalization have occurred. Recording
 instruments, particularly, have shaped the way scientific
 data are presented, discussed and accepted. The role of
 this instrumentation in the intellectual and social

 changes associated with the rise of experimental physiol-
 ogy and other autonomous sciences has yet to be ex-
 plored systematically. This paper suggests that close
 study of research instruments introduced by physiolo-
 gists in the 1840s and 1850s can provide valuable data
 with which to discuss social and intellectual linkages in
 all their richness and depth.

 Specifically, the incorporation of the recording drum or
 "kymograph" into physiology in the late 1840s led imme-

 diately to the study and analysis of a wide range of physi-

 Author address: Department of the History of Science, Harvard Univer-
 sity, Science Center 235, Cambridge, MA 02138.

 My appreciation of these issues has been especially enhanced by the
 comments, criticisms and suggestions of Adele Clarke, Deborah Coon,
 H. Hughes Evans, Gail Hornstein, Peggy Kidwell, Robert R. Pool, Jr. and
 John Harley Warner. This research was supported by a grant from the
 National Science Foundation (RII-8503650) through its Visiting Profes-
 sorships for Women program.

 Science & Technology Studies 5(2):53-62, 1987

 Merriley Borell
 Harvard University

 ological events that had previously been inaccessible to
 researchers.4 Emulating the experimental approach of
 physical scientists, physiologists after 1850 increasingly
 sought to measure as well as describe physiological pro-
 cesses. This approach was readily assimilated and popu-
 larized through the use of recording apparatus, relatively

 simple instrumentation that made rapid and thus invisi-
 ble physiological processes visible. Following the path set
 by the "1847 group" in Germany, experimental physiolo-
 gists endeavored to formulate general laws and to predict
 physiological phenomena.5 In this manner, they
 achieved a vast extension of the range of events capable
 of being studied within physiology. Registration instru-
 ments effectively opened new physiological events and
 processes to analysis, particularly those which occurred
 very rapidly or very slowly. Such instruments both ex-
 tended the senses of observers allowing them to analyze
 previously undetected phenomena, and at the same time
 ostensibly removed the observer from intervening in the
 measurement of physiological events.6 As a conse-
 quence, researchers could and did claim a new level of
 objectivity for their science-an important goal in the life
 sciences at this historic time.

 The first physiological events to be recorded were re-
 lated to blood pressure. Self-registration of changing
 blood pressure by translation of motion from a mercury
 manometer to a recording stylus resulted in the auto-
 graphing of transient events that previously could not be

 seen or measured. The obvious utility of such analysis led
 to the rapid incorporation of recording apparatus into re-
 search protocols. Investigators modified the recording
 drum and its accessory apparatus to measure a wide vari-
 ety of events. They and their successors also adopted this
 new method of physiological analysis, self-registration,
 to meet the practical needs of the clinic. The measure-
 ment of each heretofore little understood physiological
 event was explicitly linked to the expectation that such
 data would prove to be of diagnostic value in detecting
 and monitoring disease.7

 Physiology subsequently gained new social authority
 both in science and in medicine through the application
 of recording instrumentation. Physiologists could claim
 objective, quantitative analysis of a given event. They
 also argued that the data generated by registration in-
 struments could lead to the diagnosis, monitoring and
 more effective treatment of disease. While such claims

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 * 53

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 were certainly premature in the 1850s and 1860s, the
 new methodology of physiologists seemed at that time to

 indicated maximum pressure. The curves produced in
 this manner could be measured and compared with other

 be applicable both at the laboratory bench and at the bed-
 side. The historian can follow the adaptation of these in-
 struments from their invasive laboratory forms to their
 non-invasive clinical counterparts and watch in the proc-
 ess the transformation of experimental physiology from
 a specialized research activity conducted in small ill-
 equipped rooms to an important teaching and research
 activity supported by a vast array of apparatus and in-
 struments in medical schools. The claims of both objec-
 tivity and utility were fully exploited by advocates of the
 experimental approach although both of these claims
 were challenged throughout this period.

 By the turn of the twentieth century, kymographic re-
 cording apparatus had become the central tool of physio-
 logical analysis and the symbol of a new style of
 pedagogy especially in American medical schools.8 This
 style, which can be observed in texts and handbooks pro-
 duced between 1890 and 1910, was marked by an ever-
 increasing emphasis on hands-on laboratory experience
 for introductory students. Students were explicitly
 trained in an analytical method, as well as in a subject.
 Registration apparatus thus transformed physiology
 both intellectually and socially, helping physiologists to
 secure their place within medical academia. It is the pur-
 poseof this paper to explore this transformation, suggest-
 ing points of interaction and intersection between
 cognitive and institutional factors that might in the future
 be fruitfully studied by sociologists and historians inter-
 ested in the growth of science.

 Introduction of New Instruments

 Physiologists traditionally mark the birth of modern
 physiology with the work of Carl Ludwig (1816-1895),
 especially his introduction in the winter of 1846-47 of the

 "kymographion" or revolving drum recorder into physi-
 ology.9 Ludwig's technical innovations in the measure-
 ment of blood pressure were to have far-reaching
 consequences both for the content of physiological data
 and how physiologists viewed that data. Important con-
 ceptual and cognitive changes appeared as a result of the
 widespread use of registration apparatus in the period
 1850-1870, that is, in the period historians usually asso-
 ciate with the rise and institutionalization of Continental

 physiology.

 Ludwig initially wanted to examine the relationship
 between blood pressure and respiratory movements.10
 This was difficult to do because blood pressure, as read
 from a manometer attached by catheter to a blood vessel
 of an experimental animal, was not stable. The level of
 mercury in the manometer oscillated and could not be
 read easily; it could only be approximated.1 By placing
 a float on top of the mercury and attaching a stylus to the
 float, Ludwig could use a pen to register on the surface
 of a revolving drum the changing level of the mercury.
 The height of the excursion of the stylus bearing the pen

 54 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 2

 curves, even those made by other investigators, minimiz-
 ing individual differences. They could also be preserved
 indefinitely and correlated with other records produced
 under different experimental conditions. In other words,
 the experimental set-up could readily be manipulated to
 study changes in blood pressure under different physio-
 logical conditions. Ludwig was specifically interested in
 determining the effects of respiratory rates and pressures
 on arterial blood pressure.

 Ludwig sought to obtain precise readings from his
 graphs, yet he recognized the scientific value of the
 curves themselves, especially when more than one event
 was recorded. Tubingen physiologist Karl Vierordt
 (1818-1884) exploited this pictorial presentation further.
 In order to provide physicians with a visual record of clin-
 ical signs that up until then could only be read by touch
 or palpation, he adapted the kymograph to monitor the
 external pulse rather than the blood pressure.12 His in-
 strument, which he called the "sphygmograph" or "pulse
 writer" was bulky, cumbersome, and poorly adapted for
 clinical needs. However, this difficulty was overcome by
 modifications made by a Parisian medical student who
 took up the problem in the late 1850s; Etienne Jules
 Marey (1830-1904) adapted Vierordt's device to make it
 more convenient, reliable and clinically useful.13 Marey
 subsequently embarked upon a scientific career devoted
 to the extension of related research techniques.14 He re-
 ferred to these collectively as the "graphic method." In the
 1860s and 1870s, he designed numerous registration in-
 struments that produced graphic records of other physio-
 logical and pathological processes. These included: the
 cardiograph for registering movements of the heart
 (Marey created both internal and external probes for this
 purpose), the polygraph (to record various physiological
 processes), the pneumograph (for respiratory move-
 ments), the myograph (for neuromuscular events), the
 thermograph (to measure temperature changes), the
 electrometer (to monitor electrical changes), and the ple-
 thysmograph (to record volume change in limbs or or-
 gans). During his career of nearly fifty years, he
 popularized the use of mechanical, electrical, and photo-
 graphic recording instruments in physiology, medicine,
 and biology.15

 Marey's utilization of registration apparatus coincided
 with the extension of recording techniques into other
 physiological problem areas. In 1850, Ludwig's colleague
 and friend Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-1894)
 adapted graphic recording apparatus to measure the

 speed of nervous conduction. Helmholtz. used the
 graphic record produced by contraction of an isolated
 muscle as an indication of response to a nervous stimulus,
 the time on the graph between stimulus and response
 being the period of time required for conduction.16 Other
 physiologists and psychologists rapidly adapted
 Helmholtz's myograph to study nervous conduction,

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 MII

 til, Ilit M1 tI WtIuml'IU

 -I ll HIP 11;10 1 1, i t:I J ~ ':! ! t011 ll f II IIIIlll l III

 Figure 1. Continuous blood-pressure tracing on a long-paper kymograph [From Stirling, Outlines of Practical Physiology, 1902; reproduced courtesy
 of Charles Griffin & Co., Ltd.]

 muscle contraction, muscular work, and reaction time.

 Marey, too, made many modifications of this apparatus
 in the 1860s and 1870s.

 Thus, the simple act of recording rapidly transformed
 physiology from a primarily descriptive, vivisectional
 and anatomically-oriented activity to a quantitative ex-
 perimental science. Concurring with the goals of physi-
 cal scientists, physiologists increasingly and explicitly
 concerned themselves with the determination of biologi-
 cal laws and with the analysis of cause and effect in phys-
 iology. Yet, their initial preoccupation with quantification

 and precise measurement was gradually transformed. By
 the continued use of these instruments, an expressed de-
 sire to understand process and change within complex
 physiological systems emerged. As investigators re-
 corded and correlated blood pressure, heart rate, nervous
 and muscular responses, they adapted the instrumenta-
 tion to monitor these processes simultaneously. An intri-
 cate web of discrete events began to be studied using not
 only one or two but a whole series of levers and styluses.
 Long papers, held taut between two drums or a drum and
 roller, allowed for recording multiple phenomena over
 extended periods of time [Figure 1].'7

 Initially, use of the kymograph or "wave writer" opened
 up tiny periods of time and fleeting, transient events to
 measurement and analysis. However, by adjusting the
 speed of revolution of the drums, instruments could also

 be adapted to study very slight change over relatively
 long periods of time, as, for example, that evident in the
 process of plant growth [Figure 2].18 This extended the
 perceptions and senses of observers even further into
 previously unobservable phenomena. The study of each
 new process required only slight modification of the
 transmitting and recording apparatus. The kymograph
 drum remained unchanged in principle, although
 Ludwig's drive by a falling weight was gradually replaced
 by clockwork and then by motor.19 In the late nineteenth

 and early twentieth centuries, the possibility for electrical
 and electronic recording and eventually electronic trans-
 lation of mechanical events was also realized. Twentikth

 century recording devices are but electronic transducers
 playing the same functional roles as their nineteenth-
 century mechanical ancestors.20

 This registration technology derived from eighteenth-
 and nineteenth-century physics and meteorology. In
 1878 in La meithode graphique dans les sciences

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 * 55

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 . iparato registrador para movimientos geotr6picos, con accesorios.
 r. '2375. Registrierapparat nadi Pfeffer, speziell konstruiert zur Aufzeidi
 bewegungen der Blattorgane und Registrierung der Zuwachsbewegungen.

 ,1 d e' Rd'

 k

 1

 reaI

 experimentales, Marey described earlier instruments, in-
 cluding Morin and Poncelet's apparatus for inscribing the
 positions of a falling body and numerous meteorological
 instruments used in thermometry, barometry, hygrome-

 try, and the measurement of rainfall and wind. Hoff and
 Geddes have attempted to define the precise intellectual
 connections between physiologists and physical scien-
 tists at the mid-nineteenth century, yet these cannot be
 reconstructed entirely, because it is clear that the basic el-
 ements of the kymograph (the recording drum or its ana-

 logue the recording disc), were in use and available by the
 1840s.21 A set of techniques was borrowed and a category
 of instruments adapted to meet the specific needs of
 physiologists. Investigators who sought to measure tran-
 sient biological events with precision made use of this
 technology. What was not immediately evident in this
 process of adaptation of instrumentation from the physi-
 cal sciences to the biological sciences was the tremendous
 intellectual and social transformations in laboratory or-

 ganization and professional practice that would be set in
 motion by the introduction into physiology of these rela-
 tively simple instruments.

 Cognitive Effects

 The cognitive effects of the introduction of recording
 apparatus into physiology, and subsequently medicine
 and biology, were manifold and profound. Many of them
 were unanticipated. Initially, self-registration apparatus
 simply extended the senses of observers, making the in-
 visible visible and allowing investigators to measure phe-
 nomena precisely. The motivations underlying these
 innovations in technique were, first, quantification and,
 second, elimination of the subjectivity of the observer
 from that process. Physiological investigators were ex-
 plicitly following the experimental method so well devel-
 oped by physicists and chemists. They wanted to
 discover the laws of a determined world. Visualization al-

 lowed precise measurement and eventual mathematical
 analysis of rapid, complex, interrelated events.

 Registration instruments were remarkably adaptable.
 They were, in principle, infinitely expandable to the
 needs of researchers. First, the recording paper was

 lengthened; then it was replaced by a roll.22 Drums were
 enlarged, then stacked one atop another.23 Pneumatic
 transmission (of changing pressures) and eventually
 electrical and electronic transducers replaced direct me-
 chanical connection between the event and the recording

 stylus.24 Nonetheless, the principle remained the same:
 the event self-recorded on a revolving drum, the period

 of revolution generating the abscissa, plotting the event
 or position of the stylus against time. Graphic registra-
 tion, graphic recording, or graphic inscription as Marey
 later called it, allowed the physiological event to auto-

 graph itself. The permanent record was made either by
 using ink on vellum paper (Ludwig), ink on paper, or most
 frequently by scratching a line on sooted paper. The
 curves were generated, measured, and stored for re-

 56 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Nr. 2375 u. 2386. ca. 1'o nat. Gr16Be

 Durch ein starkes Uhrwerk K (mit Zifferblatt und Zeiger versehen) werden der
 Kuppeln mit einem der drei aus dem Uhrwerk hervorragenden Triebzapfen 1 3 ver
 windigkeiten gegeben. Uhrwerk und Trommel sind mittels der Ffihrung n sowohl

 ro mrlt+ im (loalk m hnri7nntR 1 Pintellhar. Zur rnenauen Vertikalsteiluna sind Stelk

 Figure 2. Recording apparatus modified for studying responses of sen-
 sitive plants (left) and plant growth (right) [E. Zimmermann catalogue,
 Leipzig, 1928; Smithsonian Institution Photo No. 86-10018].

 measurement. The event was thus quantified.

 Kymographic recording techniques effectively ex-

 panded or condensed perceived time frames, depending
 on the speed of rotation of the drum. All recorded events
 were timed by the drum's forward motion and by a time
 marker or chronograph, often a tuning fork in the early
 investigations. Rapid movement of the drum spread out
 the event and made minute fluctuations visible; slow
 movement of the drum condensed the event accentuat-

 ing rhythm, rate or gradual change. Rapid events and
 small time intervals were thus brought to the visible
 range in ways analogous to microscopic enlarg'ement.
 Slow events and longer time intervals were condensed in

 ways analogous to the telescope bringing the distant into
 view. In all cases, the event recorded itself, eliminating
 the "subjective" intervention of the observer, the
 "personal equation" that so troubled nineteenth-cen-
 tury astronomers, physicists, physiologists, and
 psychologists.25

 In this process the graph itself effectively became the

 phenomenon to be analyzed.26 The tracing could be mea-
 sured and evaluated at leisure, long after the original
 event was recorded. Marey emphasized, following

 Figure 3. Simple kymograph with various transducers derived from modifications of nineteenth-century instrumentation. Tracing shows simultaneous
 recording of (A) gastric contractions, (C) time record in minutes, (D) subjective experience of hunger pangs, and (E) pneumograph recording respiratory

 movements [From W.B. Cannon, The Wisdom of the Body, 1932; reproduced courtesy of W W. Norton & Company, Inc.].

 A ' ,

 c u tr

 IONIC

 Claude Bernard, that all life was movement and that the

 graphic method captured this movement.27 Study of the
 trajectories of dynamic processes gradually replaced the
 mere measurement of static events as the primary focus
 of physiological investigation. The graph both portrayed
 and symbolized the dynamic process under study. By the

 physiological analysis.30 Indeed, early physiological and
 medical graphs were often published in white on a black
 background rather than black on white, apparently imi-
 tating the kymographic record inscribed on sooted
 paper.31

 end of the nineteenth century, physiologists were study-
 ing multiple variables and uncovering complex control
 mechanisms which operate within the body. The signifi-
 cance of this trend, the study of process and the regula-
 tion of that process, was underscored by the introduction
 in 1926 of the concept of biological homeostasis [Fig-
 ure 3].28

 Initially, physiologists used the graphic record to ob-
 tain precise numbers. They presented these numbers in

 tabular form in their publications.32 Gradually, physi-
 cians, physiologists, and psychologists began to con-
 struct graphs from those numbers, to present even their
 numerical data graphically. The physiological recording
 instruments used by nineteenth-century investigators
 made hidden processes visible and generated numerical
 data about those processes. Such data was visualized fur-
 ther by systematic mathematical manipulation and sub-
 sequent graphic presentation.33

 The graphic records from instruments subtly encourr
 aged the graphic presentation of all numerical data, even
 data not originally gathered in graphic form. Routine sta-
 tistical analysis, graphic recording, and graphic presen-
 tation became significant features of the scientific
 method in the 1860s and ought probably to be viewed
 as cognitively interrelated and mutually supportive de-

 An interesting apparently unanticipated cognitive
 change accompanied the use of these instruments. Inves-
 tigators increasingly began to recognize the value of the
 curve itself. That is, they increasingly displayed their
 quantitative data (some of it initially derived from kymo-
 graph tracings) in graphs rather than in numerical, tabu-
 lar form.29 This graphic presentation of data became a
 significant and conspicuous element of scientific com-
 munication in the 1860s during precisely those years in
 which graphic recording became a routine method of

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 * 57

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 velopments.34 Out of this context emerged the now
 universally-applied techniques that Tufte has recently
 called the "visual display of quantitative information."35

 Recording apparatus literally created an awareness of the
 value of graphs in physiology and medicine and acceler-
 ated scientific application of graphic methods, even
 though graphic presentation of data itself was not a new
 idea.

 Especially interesting in this context is the develop-
 ment by German clinicians of temperature charting in
 the 1850s and 1860s. Ludwig Traube (1818-1876) uti-
 lized the kymograph and extended the application of
 graphic recording methods to pharmacology early in the
 1850s.36 During these years, he also suggested to Carl
 Wunderlich (1815-1877) the value of systematically not-
 ing human temperature change over time. Wunderlich's
 landmark book, Das Verhalten der Eigenwfirme in
 Krankheiten (The Behavior of Body Heat in Diseases), ap-
 peared in 1868, a second edition in 1870. Wunderlich
 emphasized:

 Whatever the nature of the thermometric observa-

 developed chrono-photography (rapid photography) to
 record the successive positions of animals during loco-
 motion.40 For each of these variations on the theme of the

 graphic method, recording instrumentation provided the
 drive behind fundamental perceptual, conceptual, and
 cognitive change in physiology.

 Recording apparatus encr- raged physiologists to de-
 velop analytical techniques ti iat are now firmly identified
 with the methods of modern science. It also provided the
 mechanism for translating the expressed experimental
 ethos of nineteenth-century investigators; i.e., the desire
 to discover the laws of nature, into common, routine, uni-

 form laboratory experience and practice. Recording
 instruments not only symbolized a new experimentally-
 based science to physiologists, they also provided the
 material basis and heraldry both for transmission of that
 science and for its institutionalization and standardiza-

 tion in a wide variety of social and cultural contexts. The
 manufacture, distribution and utilization of these instru-

 ments tells us much about the perceived goals of experi-
 mental scientists at the end of the nineteenth

 tions, if they are to be of any use at all, it is essential
 that the results obtained should be continuously re-
 corded. This can best be done and the course of the dis-

 century.

 Social Effects

 ease rendered most evident, by indicating it on a chart,
 or ruled map, as a continuous curved line ... It is conve-

 In following the spread of experimental physiology
 from Continental Europe to Great Britain, North America

 nient to note the frequency of the pulse, and the num-
 ber of the respirations in a similar manner, but in
 different colors ... In this way the entire course of the
 disease, with all its fluctuations, complications, ten-
 dencies, and changes can be seen at a single
 glance."7
 Such numerical records presented visually as temper-
 ature curves or "charts" proved diagnostically useful in
 the study of diverse fevers, allowing physicians to distin-
 guish between them and monitor their course. Such vis-
 ual presentation of data secured the place of
 thermometry in medical practice from the early 1870s.
 Graphic recording techniques also affected thermometry
 directly. The thermometer which measured tempera-
 tures, that could themselves be displayed graphically,
 was supplemented by the thermograph which automati-
 cally inscribed its own curve.38

 These interrelated conceptual themes are evident in
 the organization of Marey's La mithode graphique dans les
 sciences experimentales (The Graphic Method in the Ex-
 perimental Sciences) published in 1878. By the 1870s
 many of the most important accessories to the recording
 apparatus had been invented or were being perfected. A
 network of instrument manufacturers was developing.
 Registration techniques had become an integral part of
 physiological research as evidenced by the plans of new
 laboratories. Moreover, graphic presentation of numeri-
 cal data was an important analytical procedure that had
 already shown its value in thermometry and was being
 extended into other problem areas [Figure 4].39 Marey
 was then advancing graphic techniques through the use
 of yet another recording method-photography. He later

 and Russia, it is useful to ask how new experimental tech-
 niques were transplanted from one context to another.
 The extensive work on the training of American students

 abroad in the nineteenth century suggests that in physi-
 ology much of this transmission was accomplished be-
 tween 1860 and 1890 through the training of foreign
 students in German (and sometimes French or Italian)
 laboratories.41 Ludwig's laboratory at Leipzig especially
 was a focus for the development of skills in experimental
 design, experimental technique, and experimental anal-
 ysis. Training by apprenticeship at the laboratory bench
 has been the primary mode of transmission of research
 skills. However, this process was changed considerably
 by the advent of the new nineteenth-century instrumen-
 tation of physiology. American students returned home
 not only with newly acquired research skills, but also
 with imported German instruments. Laboratories were
 built to house these important new tools of experimental
 science.42

 The physiological laboratory thus became the site foi
 use and storage of instruments, as well as the site for
 transmission of knowledge made possible by them. From
 the 1860s in the German states and the 1870s elsewhere,

 the equipping of physiological laboratories became a
 major professional activity.43 Initially, the laboratory was
 used for the professor's personal research and for the
 training of a few advanced students or colleagues from
 other fields. However, by the 1890s, the events which oc-
 curred within the laboratory began to acquire increasing
 pedagogical importance, particularly in the United
 States. Occasional experimental demonstrations were re-
 placed first by routine demonstrations and finally by

 58 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 .... - " r - "' -

 - - 4-.-...-..-.-.-..-.-.-. - -1 -

 Figure 4. Graphic presentation of pulse data. Prompt's graphing (1867) of Boerensprung's data (1840) [From Marey, La methode graphique, 1878; repro-
 duced courtesy of Masson, Editeur s.a.].

 School. Within five years, it supplied kymographs and
 myographic equipment world-wide. In America, it trans-
 formed kymographic recording from an activity reserved

 hands-on experiments for all introductory students. The

 method, the technique, as opposed to the facts, of experi-
 mental physiology became increasingly important. All
 introductory students, not just the advanced students,
 learned to operate the kymograph and myograph, to re-
 cord and measure physiological events, to manipulate
 and modify apparatus. In other words, all students
 learned to ask questions of nature rather than rely on the
 authority of didactic lectures. Scientific knowledge was
 to be gained directly by experience in the laboratory.44
 Students learned to manipulate as well as to observe and
 describe.

 for research investigators to a skill to be learned in intro-
 ductory courses by all medical students and aspiring life
 scientists even those at small colleges.47

 ing laboratory required a major investment of personnel
 and capital by each college or university. Hands-on labo-

 The transformation from research laboratory to teach-

 MIds 2 6 8 10 Mlnult 2 6 8 10 Midi

 380

 370

 36:1

 S00,

 Such a major change in the process of physiological ed-
 ucation required that hitherto rare and expensive appa-
 ratus be provided for all students. Recording instruments
 and related apparatus had initially been made by the re-
 searcher himself or a skilled mechanic in a university lab-
 oratory or nearby industrial shop. As the demand
 increased, instruments were made and sold by an in-
 creasing number of scientific instrument companies.45 At
 first made one by one, the availability of these instru-
 ments was increased markedly by the introduction of
 quantity production and the substitution of cheap and
 durable materials like aluminum (in the case of kymo-
 graphs) for nineteenth-century brass.46 The Harvard Ap-
 paratus Company, which manufactured physiological
 apparatus in Boston from 1900, arose from the desire to
 provide high quality, reliable, inexpensive teaching ap-
 paratus to physiology students at the Harvard Medical

 ratory experience became the main emphasis in program
 building especially in the United States. Recording in-
 strumentation became the centerpiece of these efforts in
 physiology, but experimental analysis also transformed
 the methodology of biology and botany and this instru-

 mentation spread into those domains. As a result, labora-
 tory development provided jobs for succeeding
 generations of American researchers. Quantity produc-
 tion of inexpensive research apparatus allowed even
 smaller colleges to hire experimentalists to provide
 hands-on training to introductory students. In the proc-
 ess, chairs, laboratories, and departments were
 created.

 In physiology, the kymograph was the focal instru-
 ment of this institutional transformation. It represented
 both the major tool of experimental physiology and the
 intellectual power of physiology to transform medicine
 into a predictive law-bound science of health and dis-
 ease. Work organization within physiology changed as
 physiologists built research groups and schools. They

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 o 59

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 constructed their science and their newly-acquired social
 authority largely on solution of the kinds of problems
 amenable to analysis by graphic registration.

 Conclusions

 By the end of the nineteenth century, physiology
 claimed a role as the foundational subject of scientific
 medicine and as the epitome of the experimental method
 in the life sciences. The campaign for creation of journals,
 societies, separate chairs, laboratories, and departments,
 so well studied by historians and sociologists, now needs
 to be correlated with the process of the introduction and

 (1971): 28-55; Gerald L. Geison, "Social and Institutional Factors in the

 Stagnancy of English Physiology, 1840-1870," Bulletin of the History of
 Medicine 46 (1972): 30-58; idem, Michael Foster and the Cambridge

 School of Physiology: The Scientific Enterprise in Late Victorian Society
 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1978); idem, "Divided We

 Stand: Physiologists and Clinicians in the American Context" in Morris

 J. Vogel and Charles E. Rosenberg, eds., The Therapeutic Revolution: Es-

 says in the Social History of American Medicine (Philadelphia: University
 of Pennsylvania Press, 1979), pp. 67-90; and idem, ed., Physiology in
 the American Context, 1850-1940 (Bethesda: American Physiological So-
 ciety, 1987).

 3. The standard history of physiology, Karl Rothschuh's Geschichte
 der Physiologie (Springer Verlag, 1953) appeared in English translation

 in 1973 as History of Physiology,,trans. and ed. by Guenter B. Risse (Hun-

 tington, N.Y.: Robert E. Krieger). On physiology's emergence as an inde-

 pendent experimental science, see J. Schiller, "Physiology's Struggle for
 Independence in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century," History of
 Science 7 (1968): 64-89. The content of these intellectual histories must

 application of the registration techniques and instrumen-
 tation set in motion by the introduction of the kymograph
 and other recording apparatus. Physiological journals re-
 yet be integrated with the new social and institutional histories cited
 produced kymograph tracings; societies specifically ad-
 above.
 vocated the extension of the experimental and "practical"
 physiology symbolized by the kymograph; individual
 scientists pleaded for the creation of chairs, laboratories
 and departments of experimental physiology. Their Eu-
 ropean patrons, nineteenth-century governments, saw a
 role for physiology in the industrialization and moderni-
 zation of the state and in the improvement of medical
 tury. Correspondence of Emil Du Bois-Reymond and Carl Ludwig, trans. Sa-
 practice. American educators spoke of the need to train
 bine Lichter-Ayed (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
 "for power," that is, to teach methods of scientific reason-
 1982).
 ing and analysis, rather than facts.48 Instruments came
 to represent both the power and the substance of experi-
 mental physiology in each of these important
 discussions.

 physics of Today," Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences
 12 (1957): 407-423; idem, "The Philosophical and Cultural Interests of
 the Biophysics Movement of 1847," Journal of the History of Medicine

 4. Merriley Borell, "The Kymograph and the Origins of the Graphic

 5. See Paul F Cranefield, "The Organic Physics of 1847 and the Bio-

 21 (1966): 1-7; and idem, ed., Two Great Scientists of the Nineteenth Cen-

 6. Merriley Borell, "Extending the Senses: The Graphic Method,"

 Method," Electric Quarterly 7 (Summer, 1985): 2-3.

 7. Stanley J. Reiser, Medicine and the Rise of Technology (Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press, 1978): esp. pp. 91-121.

 Medical Heritage 2 (1986): 114-121.

 Continued analysis of these interrelated events will
 add important dimensions to our understanding of the
 role of instrumentation in the establishment of modern

 institutions of science. It will also clarify the intellectual

 origins of many of the analytical procedures now consid-
 ered to be integral to the scientific method. Such analysis
 will connect more persuasively, through the addition
 both of texture and of fine detail, the intellectual content
 of science with its underlying and evolving social
 structure.49

 8. Merriley Borell, "Instruments and an Independent Physiology:

 The Harvard Physiological Laboratory, 1871-1906," in Geison, ed.,
 Physiology in the American Context, pp. 293-321.

 9. Erich Bauereisen, "Carl Ludwig as the Founder of Modern Physiol-

 ogy," The Physiologist 5 (1962): 293-299; Heinz Schrcer, Carl Ludwig,
 Begriinder der mnessenden Experimentalphysiologie (Stuttgart:
 Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft M.B.H., 1967).

 10. C. Ludwig, "Beitrige zur Kenntniss des Einflusses der
 Respirationsbewegungen auf den Blutlauf im Aortensysteme," Miiller's

 Archiivfia rAnatomie und Physiologie und wissenschaftlicheMedicin 1847:
 242-302.

 NOTES

 1. For a review of this literature, see Steven Turner, Edward Kerwin,

 and David Woolwine, "Careers and Creativity in Nineteenth-Century
 Physiology: Zloczower 'Redux'," Isis 75 (1984): 523-529. Case studies
 of the development of specific physiological laboratories in German
 states will soon appear in articles by Arleen Tuchman ("From the Lec-
 ture to the Laboratory: The Institutionalization of Scientific Medicine

 at the University of Heidelberg") and Timothy Lenoir ("Science for the
 Clinic: Carl Ludwig and the Institutional Revolution in German Sci-
 ence") in William Coleman and FL. Holmes, eds., volume tentatively

 titled The Investigative Enterprise (University of California Press, forth-
 coming). I am grateful to these authors for sharing their manuscripts
 with me. See also Arleen Tuchman, "Science, Medicine and the State:

 The Institutionalization of Scientific Medicine at the University of Hei-
 delberg" (Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1985).

 2. Richard D. French, "Some Problems and Sources in the Founda-

 tions of Modern Physiology in Great Britain," History of Scienice 10

 11. See E.J. Marey, Du mouvement dans les fonctions de la vie: lecons

 faites au Collbge de France (Paris: Germer Baillibre, 1868), pp. 130-131.

 12. Ralph H. Major, "Karl Vierordt," Annals of Medical History new
 ser. 10 (1938): 463-473, esp. pp. 469-473. Vierordt demonstrated his
 sphygmograph in 1853. On its uses, see Karl Vierordt, Die Lehre vom

 Arterienpuls in gesunden und kranken Zustanden gegriindet auf eine neue
 methode der bildlichen Darstellung des menschlichen Pulses (Braun-
 schweig: Friedrich Vieweg und Sohn, 1855).

 13. [E.] J. Marey. "Recherches sur le pouls au moyen d'un nouvel
 appareil enregistreur le sphygmographe presente i la Societe de
 Biologie," Comnptes rendus des sdances et mimoires de la Socihtd de Biologie
 ser. 3, 1(1859): 281-309, and idem, Physiologie mhdicale de la circulation

 du sang basde sur l'itude graphique des mouvements du coeur et du pouls
 arteriel avec application aux maladies de l'appareil circulatoire (Paris:
 Adrien Delahaye, 1863).

 14. See E.J. Marey, La mnthode graphique dans les sciences
 expirimentales et principalement en physiologie et en mddecine (Paris:
 G. Masson, 1878), esp. pp. 112-113.

 15. On Marey's contributions, see Merriley Borell, "Marey and

 d'Arsonval: Two Visions of the Exact Sciences in Late Nineteenth-

 Century French Medicine," in J.L. Berggren and Bernard Goldstein,
 eds., From Ancient Omens to Statistical Mechanics: Studies on the History

 of Science in Honor of Asger Aaboe, volume 39 in the series Acta historica

 scientiarum niaturalium et medicinalium (Copenhagen: University Li-

 60 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 brary, 1987), and H.A. Snellen, E.J. Marey and Cardiology: Physiologist

 26. I thank Robert R. Pool, Jr. for this observation.

 and Pioneer of Technology 1830-1904-Selected writings in facsimile with

 comments and summaries, a brief history of life and work and a bibliography
 (Rotterdam: Kookyer Scientific Publications, 1980). Robert I. Frank

 considers Marey's contributions to cardiac physiology in "The Tell-Tale
 Heart: Physiological Instruments and Clinical Hopes, 1855-1912,"
 forthcoming in Coleman and Holmes, Investigative Enterprise.

 16. See the translation of this work in Thomas S. Hall, ed., A Source

 Book in Animal Biology (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1951),
 pp. 313-320. On the origins of Helmholtz's techniques in muscle and
 nerve studies by Theodor Schwann and Emil Du Bois-Reymond, see
 John Gray M'Kendrick, Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (New
 York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1899), pp. 35-38.

 17. The figure is taken from William Stirling, Outlines of Practical

 Physiology being a Manual for the Physiological Laboratory, Fourth ed.
 (London: Charles Griffin, 1902), p. 451. Similar illustrations may be
 found in most other late nineteenth-century texts. For citation of popu-
 lar texts, see Borell, "Instruments and an Independent Physiology."
 18. A chronology of plant growth registration techniques is found in

 William F Ganong, A Laboratory Course in Plant Physiology, Second edi-

 tion (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1908). Ganong (p. 200) cred-
 its Sachs with the invention of the "auxograph" about 1872: "[Sachs'
 device] consisted of a large vertical excentrically [sic] placed cylinder
 turned by a weight-and-pendulum clock, and having on one side a
 smoked paper, which was scratched by a pointer carried on a wheel con-

 nected with the plant by a thread." I am grateful to Gene Cittadino for
 directing me to Ganong's text.

 19. The easiest way to follow these changes is through trade cata-
 logues. I have used those found at the Bakken Library, Minneapolis (cat-
 alogues of Breguet, Paris; Verdin, Paris; and Boulitte, Paris); the
 National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution,
 Washington,D.C. (especially the catalogues of Rudolph Koenig, Paris;
 Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company, England; E. Zimmermann,
 Leipzig & Berlin; C.H. Stoelting, Chicago; and C.E Palmer, London);
 and the Harvard University Medical School, Boston (catalogues of
 Eugen Albrecht, Tiibingen; the Harvard Apparatus Company, Boston;
 and Baird & Tatlock Ltd., London).

 20. See Bauereisen, "Carl Ludwig," p. 297, and Hebbel E. Hoff, L.A.
 Geddes, and W.A. Spencer, "The Physiograph - An Instrument in
 Teaching Physiology," Journal of Medical Education 32 (1957):
 181-198.

 21. Marey, La mnthode graphique, pp. 111-112 and 168; Marey, Du
 mouvement, pp. 111-112; H.E. Hoff and L.A. Geddes, "Graphic Record-
 ing before Ludwig: An Historical Summary," Archives internationales

 d'histoire des sciences 12 (1959): 3-25; and idem, "Graphic Registration
 before Ludwig, the Antecedents of the Kymograph," Isis 50 (1959):

 5-21. For a critique of Hoff and Geddes' interpretation of Ludwig's inno-
 vation, see Schr6er, Carl Ludwig, pp. 111-113. See also Robert P.
 Multhauf, "The Introduction of Self-registering Meteorological Instru-

 ments," Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology,
 Paper 23, United States National Museum Bulletin 228 (Washington,
 D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1961), pp. 95-116. Multhauf's paper
 shows the ubiquity of related instruments during this period. I am
 grateful to Deborah Jean Warner for introducing me to this very inter-
 esting work.

 22. An "endless paper" kymograph is described in the Zimmermann
 catalogue of 1912 (Psychologische - und Physiologische Apparate.
 Illustrierte List 25 und Nachtrag), p. 151, item 2220. The paper is fed
 from a large roll onto the recording drum.

 23. The Double Paper Brodie Starling Kymograph listed in the 9th
 Edition (1953) of the C.E Palmer (London) Ltd. catalogue (p. 12) was
 designed by I. de Burgh Daly and described in the Journal of Physiology
 in 1930. The catalogue shows two long paper kymographs stacked on
 top of one another. Iam grateful to Chris Lawrence for sending me pho-
 tocopies of this apparatus.

 24. See Borell, "Extending the Senses."
 25. See Edwin Boring, A History of Experimental Psychology, Second
 ed. (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1957), Ch. 8, "The Per-
 sonal Equation," pp. 134-153.

 27. Marey, Du mouvemnent, p. vi.
 28. The figure is from Walter B. Cannon's classic account The Wisdom

 of the Body (New York: WW. Norton, 1932), p. 71. In it (p. 24) Cannon
 defined "homeostasis" as "[t]he coordinated physiological processes
 which mnaintain most of the steady states in the organism." For an ac-
 count of his life and work, see Donald Fleming, "Walter B. Cannon and
 Homeostasis," Social Research 51 (1984): 609-640.

 29. See Borell, "Marey and d'Arsonval," and later discussion in this

 paper.

 30. Note correspondence with H.G. Funkhouser, "Historical Devel-
 opment of the Graphical Representation of Statistical Data," Osiris
 3(1937): 269-404, and Multhauf, "Self-Registering Meteorological In-
 struments," 106.

 31. Hughes Evans made this interesting observation during our joint

 investigations this past year. See the graphs in C.A. Wunderlich and E.

 Seguin, Medical Thermometry and Human Temperature (New York: Wil-

 liam Wood & Co., 1871) and P. Lorain, De la temperature du corps humain

 et de ses variations dans les diverses maladies, 2 vols. (Paris: L'Imprimerie
 Nationale, 1977). In contrast, the early temperature charts by
 Wunderlich are displayed on white paper. However, both Ludwig and
 Traube used ink and paper for kymograph tracings, as discussed later

 in this paper.

 32. See the tabular data of Ludwig in "Einflusses der

 Respirationsbewegung auf den Blutlauf," 269-302.

 33. This transformation can be observed in the early volumes of the

 American Journal of Psychology. I thank Gail Hornstein for this evidence.

 34. See Borell, "Marey and d'Arsonval," and Note 30.
 35. E.R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Chesh-

 ire, Conn.: Graphics Press, 1983).

 36. Traube's investigations are reprinted in L. Traube, Gesammelte
 Beitri~ge zur Pathologie und Physiologie 3 vols. (Berlin: August
 Hirschwald, 1871-1878), Band I: Experimentelle Untersuchungen Band

 II: Klinische Untersuchungen and Band III: Klinische Untersuchungen.
 See especially Traube's experiments from 1851-1852, on the effects of
 digitalis. For these experiments, he used Ludwig's kymograph as
 modifiedby Volkmann (I, 252-273). Here he presented data from ky-
 mograph tracings in tables. In earlier papers from 1850-1851, on the

 clinical effects of digitalis in fevers, he presented daily pulse, respira-
 tion, and temperature data from patients in tabular form (II, 97-204).
 He used graphic presentation (white on black), however, for similar data
 from 1851-1852(11, 235-269, on pp. 258-260).

 37. C.A. Wunderlich, On the Temperature of Diseases: A Manual of

 Medical Thernmonetry, translated from the second German edition by W.
 Bathurst Woodman (London: The New Sydenham Society, 1871), pp.
 78-79.

 38. Wunderlich did not find Marey's thermograph (1865) clinically

 useful because it did not fit well on the body. Christopher Lawrence con-
 siders physicians' resistance to the introduction of instruments in "In-
 communicable Knowledge: Science, Technology and the Clinical Art
 in Britain 1850-1914," Journal of Contemporary History 20 (1985): 503-
 520, and "Moderns and Ancients: The 'New Cardiology' in Britain
 1880-1930" in W.F Bynum, C. Lawrence and V. Nutton, eds., The Emer-

 gence of Modern Cardiology Supplement 5 to Medical History (London:
 The Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, 1985).

 39. Figure 4 shows the value of the graphic method in the study of

 pulse rate. It is Marey's figure showing P.J. Prompt's 1867 graphic pre-
 sentation of Boerensprung's data originally published in 1840. The orig-
 inal caption read (La mcthode graphique, p. 45): "Hourly variations in

 the rate of the pulse put onto a curve by Dr. Prompt after the numbers
 published by Boerensprung.

 40. See E.J. Marey, "La chronophotographie: nouvelle mithode pour
 analyser le mouvement dans les sciences physiques et naturelles," La

 revue ginnrale des sciences pures et appliquces 2 (1891): 689-719.

 41. For a review of this interesting literature, see Robert G. Frank, Jr.,
 "American Physiologists in German Laboratories, 1850-1900" in
 Geison, Physiology in the American Context, pp. 11-46.

 42. For a case study of this process at Harvard, see Borell,"Instruments

 and an Independent Physiology."

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 e 61

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 43. On the British response to the rise of German laboratories, see

 Geison, Michael Foster, esp. p. 78.

 44. I describe this process fully in "Instruments and an Independent
 Physiology." This process began earlier in chemistry and physics. On
 such pedagogical reform, see especially Albert E. Moyer, "Edwin Hall
 and the Emergence of the Laboratory in Teaching Physics," The Physics
 Teacher 114(1976): 96-103, and Owen Hannaway, "The German model
 of Chemical Education in America: Ira Remsen at Johns Hopkins (1876-
 1913)," Ambix 23 (1976): 145-164.

 45. Hughes Evans and I have compiled a preliminary list of compa-

 nies supplying major physiological and psychological apparatus in the

 period c. 1870-1905. Our list includes approximately forty-six in Ger-
 many, an additional ten in other German-speaking countries, and sixty
 more elsewhere. While we have some duplication of companies (their
 names changed during this thirty-five year period), our list clearly
 shows the rise of an important instrument manufacturing industry.

 46. On the introduction of quantity production by the Harvard Appa-
 ratus Company, see Borell, "Instruments and an Independent
 Physiology."

 47. The Harvard Apparatus Company made high-quality precision
 physiological apparatus available at cost to small colleges and state uni-

 versities which otherwise could not have afforded the expense of equip-
 ping physiological laboratories. See ibid. Other American companies
 (we are aware of about twenty) also produced or supplied related equip-
 ment, but not as cheaply.

 48. See especially Tuchman, "Science, Medicine and the State" and
 the articles by Tuchman and Lenoir in Coleman and Holmes, eds., In-

 vestigative Enterprise for a discussion of the specific goals of the German
 states in promoting physiology. On the origin and significance of the
 phrase training "for power," see Borell, "Instruments and an Indepen-
 dent Physiology," p. 300, n. 35, and p. 314, n. 98 and 99. The phrase,
 attributed to Harvard President Charles W Eliot, was used by both Wil-
 liam Townsend Porter and Henry Pickering Bowditch in their promo-
 tion of laboratory physiology. See ibid. and Kenneth M. Ludmerer,
 Learning to Heal: The Development of American Medical Education (New
 York: Basic Books, 1985), p. 52, n. 19.

 49. The Boston Working Group, consisting of myself, Deborah Coon,

 Hughes Evans and Gail Hornstein, is currently examining these impor-
 tant relationships in physiology, psychology, and medicine.

 Endorsing Referee: Timothy Lenoir

 62 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

