 

 

 

 

Integral equations between theory and practice: the cases of Italy and France to 1920
Author(s): T. Archibald and  R. Tazzioli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 5 (September 2014), pp. 547-597
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569570
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:54 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569570?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2014) 68:547-597
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0132-2

 Integral equations between theory and practice:
 the cases of Italy and France to 1920

 T.Archibald · R.Tazzioli

 Received: 3 July 2013 / Published online: 13 November 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract In 1899, Ivar Fredholm discovered how to treat an integral equation using
 conceptual methods from linear algebra and use these ideas to solve certain classes

 of boundary value problems. He formulated a theory allowing him both to unify large

 classes of problems and to attack several problems fruitfully. The historical litera

 ture on the theory of integral equations has concentrated largely on the unification

 that was afforded by Hilbert and his school, but has not throughly investigated the

 roots of the subject in the older theory of partial differential equations, as developed

 for instance by Fredholm himself but also by Volterra and Levi-Civita. By concen

 trating on work issuing from this older tradition, in particular on French and Italian

 work, the paper shows how the new theory of integral equations was enthusiastically

 received, especially for its fruitful applications to areas of mathematical physics such

 as hydrodynamics, elasticity, and heat theory.

 La théorie des équations intégrales, née d'hier, est d'ores et déjà classique. Elle a
 fait son entrée dans plusieurs de nos enseignements. Nul doute que—peut-être à

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 The authors wish to thank Umberto Bottazzini and the editors of AHES for valuable comments.

 Archibald's research for this paper was supported in part by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research

 Council (Canada), by the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology, then at ΜΓΓ, and by
 Simon Fraser University.

 Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University, Bumaby, BC, Canada
 e-mail: tarchi@math,sfu.ca

 T. Archibald (13)

 R. Tazzioli

 UFR de mathématiques, Laboratoire Paul Painlevé, UMR CNRS 8524,
 Université de Sciences et Technologie de Lille, Lille, France
 e-mail: rossana.tazzioli@math.univ-lillel.ff

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 £) Springer

 548 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 la faveur de nouveaux perfectionnements—elle ne s'impose bientôt à la pratique

 courante de calcul. C'est une fortune rare parmi les doctrines mathématiques, si

 souvent destinées à rester des objets de musée.

 J. Hadamard, Préface to (Hey wood and Fréchet 1912, ν).

 1 Introduction and background

 1.1 Integral equations, functional analysis, and boundary value problems

 For the mathematics student of today, the 1900 result of Ivar Fredholm will typically

 appear in a fairly advanced introduction to analysis, in a chapter on compact operators,

 for example as a corollary to Atkinson's theorem.1 Fredholm's more limited result,

 in modern language, states roughly that the spectrum of a compact operator Τ on
 a Hilbert space consists of {0} and the eigenvalues for T, and is a countable sub

 set of the complex plane with 0 as the only possible accumulation point (Pedersen

 1988,111). This tidy description obscures the pivotal position of this theorem in early

 twentieth-century analysis. The theorem was conceived as a contribution to the theory

 of functional equations involving integrals, though the author, Ivar Fredholm, saw at

 once its usefulness in demonstrating the existence of solutions to certain boundary

 value problems involving partial differential equations. In this paper, we explore the

 context in which the theorem was developed, and discuss its reception.

 This approach contrasts with the context in which this work has often been seen

 by mathematicians and historians until recently. Already in the Enzyklopadie der

 mathematischen Wissenschaften II, 3, for example, in the 1927 article on integral

 equations by Hellinger and Toeplitz (1927), all of this work was placed in the light of

 subsequent developments in abstract functional analysis. The various traditions in the

 treatment of concrete differential equations have thus been somewhat submerged by

 the story of functional analysis. Hellinger and Toeplitz were in fact quite historically

 ambitious, pushing the antecedents of the operator approach back beyond Fredholm

 to Poisson, Fourier, and Daniel Bernoulli. The survey due to Hadamard at the Bologna
 congress of 1928 (Hadamard 1928) appears to be the only older mathematical survey

 in which some trace of the roots of the subject in solving boundary value problems

 may be found, not surprising given the role he played himself.2

 The solution of such boundary value problems, and the question of the existence of

 solutions, occupied a large number of mathematicians throughout Europe at the time,

 and the techniques provided by Fredholm's result garnered an enthusiastic audience.

 Indeed, the "integral equation method" for the study of differential equations became

 a standard feature of the mathematical landscape by around 1915, with the appearance

 of several textbooks and expository accounts of the theory as well as its inclusion

 in lecture courses on analysis. Hilbert's response to the theorem was deeper and had

 1 Atkinson's theorem (due to F. V. Atkinson in 1950) states that an operator Τ in the set of bounded operators

 on a Hilbert space Η is a Fredholm operator (that is, the kernels of Τ and its adjoint are finite dimensional
 and its range is closed) if and only if it is invertible modulo compact perturbation, i.e., for some bounded
 operator S and compact operators Cj and C2, ΤS = / + Cl and ST = I + C2.

 2 Mathematical treatments of the subject of integral equations nonetheless often retain contact with the

 roots of the subject in partial differential equations. Here, we mention in particular (Tricomi 1957).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 549

 broader consequences. By 1904, Hilbert had already grasped analogies between the

 study of certain cases of Fredholm's result and the theory of quadratic forms. Together

 with a number of students, notably Erhard Schmidt, Hilbert formulated the basic ideas

 of what are now know as Hilbert spaces and linear operators on them with decisive

 effect for the future of mathematics (See for example Hellinger, 1935). The impact

 of Hilbert's work took several decades to be fully felt. While other threads fed into

 Hilbert's understanding of this area, the insight afforded by the Fredholm's result

 provides the reader of today with one of the clearest points of entry into the study of

 the origins of functional analysis.

 There are a number of historical treatments which investigate this and related issues

 in some detail, including Dieudonné (1981) and Siegmund-Schultze (1982). In par
 ticular, Siegmund-Schultze (2003) draws attention to what he terms a split into three

 directions in the beginnings of functional analysis: abstract operator theory, the abstract

 theory of spaces, and the theory of concrete functionals. Here, we focus instead on

 the reception, largely Franco-Italian, that remains closer to roots of the problems in

 mathematical physics, adopting more modern viewpoints somewhat tentatively.

 Fredholm's work had been preceded by related investigations due to Vito Volterra,

 who appears to have devised essentially the same method by 1895, and already much

 earlier noted that methods for "inverting" integral equations—following an idea of

 Abel—would be extremely useful in the solution of physical problems. Volterra cor

 responded with Tullio Levi-Civita about this and was somewhat disappointed by the

 fact that he had not published the method before Fredholm's work appeared.

 In this paper, we concentrate on the response to Fredholm's work within the com

 munity of researchers on differential equations in France and Italy, where the results

 were understood above all as a fruitful and powerful method for proving the existence

 of solutions to boundary value problems. In contrast to the work of Hilbert and his

 students, this work appears conservative and lacks the abstract, generalizing stamp

 which was to become a hallmark of twentieth-century mathematics and that is specif

 ically associated with the German context. An exception to this conservative bent is
 provided by the Italian mathematician Giuseppe Lauricella, who skillfully adopted
 the new methods coming from some of the strongest members of Hilbert's school:

 Erhard Schmidt, Friedrich Riesz, and Hermann Weyl. The reception of Fredholm's

 work nonetheless marks an important moment in the development of research in analy

 sis in these two countries, as we shall discuss below. Furthermore, the case provides

 insight into the ways in which innovative work is received in different national and
 institutional contexts.

 This work is part of the background leading to the development of functional analy

 sis as a free-standing entity and clearly identified research specialty. However, it should

 not be imagined that all these researchers were consciously involved in the construction

 of such a research specialty, nor were they intentionally carrying out specific elements

 of what were to be its later research programs. It is of course true that ultimately

 one can see specific results from this period as special cases of functional analytic

 results. But, there was nothing called functional analysis at this point of time (all our

 discussions are limited to the period before 1915).

 In what follows, we begin with an account of some background developments in
 the theory of differential equations. We then proceed to a discussion of Fredholm's

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 550 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 result and various aspects of its reception. The work of Hilbert and his school will be

 treated in the background, insofar as it provided points of reflection for researchers in

 France and Italy. Many of the papers in this general area were very definitely seen in

 an applied context by most readers, as is shown for example by their treatment by the

 Jahrbuch iiber die Fortschritte der Mathematik, where they were routinely indexed

 with work in partial differential equations, elasticity theory, or potential theory as well

 as under functional equations.

 Italian researchers in this field were particularly numerous, and their contributions,

 like those of many of their conationals in other fields, are less well known today

 than those of their German or French contemporaries. The emergence of the Italian

 research school on boundary value problems may be traced to the mid-nineteenth

 century, with Enrico Betti and Eugenio Beltrami acting as mentors to a large number

 of future researchers in areas such as elasticity theory, hydrodynamics, and the theory

 and applications of partial differential equations more generally. By the late nineteenth

 century, Levi-Civita and Volterra had emerged in a leadership role, and most of the

 Italian mathematicians we discuss had specific links to one or both of these men,
 as we shall see. Even a certain amount of the French work was directly connected

 with developments in Italy; here, we note the strong Italian connections of Picard and

 Hadamard, and Volterra's close involvement with these and other French colleagues.3

 One of the significant contributions of the Italian group was a work related to the

 vibration of elastic plates done by Tommaso Boggio, in the context of the 1906
 1907 competition for the Prix Vaillant of the Paris Académie des Sciences. This work

 remained unpublished, and we provide here in an "Appendix" some of the more sig

 nificant portions of the memoir that are related directly to our story.

 1.2 Background: the Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation

 Integral equations are, in a sense, nearly as old as integrals. However, for our purposes,

 they are a nineteenth-century development. Early work by Abel and Liouville has been

 described well in (Liitzen 1990). Some immediate background activity related to our
 discussion was due to Carl Neumann and Poincaré in one direction, to Picard in

 another, and to Volterra.

 In order to introduce the different approaches to the theory of integral equations, we

 go back to the Dirichlet problem, a central problem in nineteenth-century mathematical

 analysis. The Dirichlet problem can be reduced to a special class of integral equations

 and, under appropriate assumptions, solved by using the methods of Fredholm's theory.

 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet stated the following problem in his lectures on

 potential theory held in 1856-1857, to find a harmonic function in a closed region

 with values given continuously on the boundary of the region. A function/is harmonic

 in a domain R if/satisfies the Laplace equation:

 92/ 92/
 —— -1 — = 0
 9*2 + 9y2

 See Mazliak and Tazzioli (2009).

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 551

 at the interior points of R. This question, which later came to be called a Dirichlet

 problem, plays an important role in potential theory, and hence in many questions

 involving gravitational or electromagnetic forces.4 Several authors, including Karl

 Weierstrass, Leopold Kronecker, Carl Neumann, Felice Casorati, Heinrich Weber, and

 Hermann Amandus Schwarz, sought to solve the problem in a general and rigorous

 way. In 1870, Schwarz developed his own method—called the alternating method—of

 solving the Dirichlet problem for special boundaries and for restricted conditions on

 the given boundary functions.5 Also in the 1870s, Carl Neumann devised a method for

 solving the Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation which was to be of considerable

 importance for many writers, notably Poincaré and Fredholm. Neumann devised his so

 called method of the arithmetic mean to permit series computation of a solution to the

 Dirichlet problem. The rather complicated method he employed involves constructing

 a function at each interior point of a bounded region defined as a kind of "mean effect"

 of the boundary values at the point in question. An iterative procedure is devised to

 replace the initial boundary value by the mean and then computing the new "mean"

 once again.6

 1.3 Picard and Poincaré

 the 1890s.

 Of more immediate relevance to Fredholm's work is work of Picard and Poincaré in

 Emile Picard became involved in research in differential equations early in his

 career, largely through his contact with his mentor Charles Hermite. Following in

 Hermite's footsteps, and influenced by contemporary French work by writers such as
 Tannery, Flocquet, and Poincaré, Picard specialized at first in questions concerning

 what can be said about the nature of the solutions of a differential equation based

 on formal characteristics of the equation (such as the periodicity of the coefficients).
 By the 1880s, this had evolved into a general interest in existence issues, and around
 1887 or 1888, he focussed his attention on existence results of Schwarz and Carl

 Neumann from the 1870s. The work of Schwarz and Neumann was intended to provide

 solutions to the Dirichlet problem, partly to replace Riemann's use of the Dirichlet

 principle. Both were iterative series methods, and it may be that this inspired Picard

 to devise his method of successive approximations, a constructive existence method

 for proving existence of solutions, widely applicable to both ordinary and partial

 differential equations.

 As a trivial example, consider:

 ~ = g(*(0,*(0))
 at

 4 Dirichlet's problem and its role in nineteenth-century mathematics figure frequently in the literature. See
 Bottazzini (1986), Monna (1975), Tazzioli (2001).

 5 For more details see Tazzioli (1994).

 6 More details about Neumann's method are in (Dieudonné 1981, 39-46).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 552 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Let xn+i(t) = /q g(T, χ„(τ))άτ. If the sequence xn(t), η = 1,2,... converges, it
 converges to a local solution, which under certain conditions may be extended to a

 global solution. In this case, the series that results is easily identifiable.

 Picard established conditions for local convergence in the case of the 2-dimensional

 Laplace equation and used Schwarz's procedure to assemble local solutions, proving

 global existence. In so doing, he shows his mastery of the Schwarz-Weierstrass lan

 guage for analysis. These results were the most powerful existence methods available

 at the time and rapidly became part of the standard repertoire. As Liitzen has pointed

 out (Liitzen 1990), the basic method was already known to Liouville, but Picard's

 discovery appears thoroughly independent.

 Simultaneously with Picard's efforts, Henri Poincaré made fundamental con

 tributions to the field of partial differential equations which were of immediate

 and long-term consequence.7 His interest in the field dated already to his doctoral

 thesis, on the functions defined by partial differential equations, a difficult work which

 was received without much understanding. In two astonishingly rich papers of 1890

 and 1894, he created a variety of tools and approaches which have had tremendous
 influence (Poincaré 1890, 1894).

 In 1890, he gave the first complete proof of the existence and uniqueness of solutions

 to the Laplace equation with continuous boundary conditions, for a large class of three

 dimensional regions. Where Neumann had defined a sequence of functions satisfying

 the Laplace equation, converging to one with the correct boundary condition, Poincaré

 instead employed a sequence of functions which are not harmonic, but have the right

 boundary values, and devised a method to make the sequence converge to a harmonic
 function via the method of "balayage" (sweeping out). He first showed that if such
 a Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation can be solved when the values on the

 boundary are given by a polynomial in three variables, it can be solved when they are

 given by any continuous function. To solve the problem when the boundary value is a

 polynomial p, Poincaré defined a countable covering of the interior of the region by

 spheres Si, S2,..., and used the known solution for the Dirichlet problem on a sphere

 to replace ρ by the harmonic function / given by this solution. A new function f\ is

 now defined, equal to / inside the first sphere, and equal to ρ elsewhere. Proceeding to

 the second sphere, we likewise "sweep" it by solving the Dirichlet problem, likewise

 getting a function fi which satisfies the Laplace equation inside Si and is equal to ρ

 elsewhere. We now need to go back to the first sphere, so we continue this process

 in the order S\,Si,S\,Si,Si,..., passing through each sphere infinitely often while

 retaining the boundary values for the region. Poincaré was able to show that this

 process leads to a function with the correct boundary values which is harmonic in the

 entire interior of the sphere.

 In the same paper of 1890, Poincaré began to look at eigenvalues. H. A. Schwarz and

 Picard had found the first and second eigenvalues of the Laplace operator for Dirichlet
 boundary conditions in 1885 and 1893, respectively (Schwarz 1885; Picard 1893).
 Poincaré, in 1894, found the infinite sequence of eigenvalues and their corresponding

 7 For studies of Poincaré's work on partial differential equations, see for example Mawhin (2006/2010)
 and Gray (2013).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 553

 eigenfunctions, to be identified later in terms of singular values as we discuss below,

 probably soon after reading of Schwarz's work in Picard's paper. This is the beginning

 of spectral theory, a fundamental tool of functional analysis in the twentieth century.

 A fine account of this work is to be found in (Dieudonné 1981).

 We mention two other innovations due to Poincaré. One of these is the so-called

 continuity method. In 1898, Poincaré had used Picard's successive approximation
 method to obtain a solution for the equation Au = eu. Here, he had the idea of

 approaching the solution of other nonlinear equations by starting with a problem with

 known solution and then continuing the existence result along a parameter to a more

 complicated equation. This method was to some degree foreshadowed in the 1890

 paper, as was a second important tool, that of the a priori estimate of which good use

 was soon to be made by Sergei Bernstein in his work on the Hilbert problems 19 and
 20 (Bernstein 1904).

 Poincaré also built on Carl Neumann's work in a way which is part of the immediate

 background to Fredholm, Hilbert, and Picard, in particular with two papers (Poincaré

 1894, 1897). In these papers, the notions of eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for a

 particular problem are introduced and termed "valeurs fondamentales" and "fonctions

 fondamentales." Poincaré obtains improved hypotheses over Neumann, for example

 getting rid of convexity. The beginning of the paper is scrupulously rigorous, but

 changes gears in the middle, where he states "Jusqu'ici j'ai cherché à être parfaitement

 rigoureuse," and then goes on to discuss in non-rigorous terms the fact that one can

 construct an infinite series of real eigenvalues (parameter values for which there is
 a solution to a DE expressed as an integral using Neumann's method). The use of

 a parameter we will see below in Fredholm's work. Poincaré notes the possibility of

 eigenfunction expansions, but cannot prove it, remarking: "une fois que l'on connaîtrait

 les fonctions fondamentales, il serait aisé de résoudre le problème de Dirichlet". The

 entire approach is not infrequently referred to as the "Poincaré-Neumann method," as
 we will see below.

 1.4 Volterra

 If Picard and Poincaré were working on elements of the theory of boundary value

 problems that were to be important for the application of integral equations, Vito

 Volterra explicitly studies integral equations and was already using them in some con

 texts for exactly such research. Though Fredholm was the first to publish a theoretical

 justification of a method for solving integral equations, Volterra had already treated

 such questions in print some years previously. Early in his career, in an 1884 paper on

 electrostatics, he had investigated the problem of "inverting" an integral of the form

 Φ(χ)= / f(a)F(a,x)àa

 a

 •S

 to solve for / when φ and F are known, and F depends also on a (Volterra 1884).

 Over 10 years later, Volterra's colleague Tullio Levi-Civita posed the question more
 generally:

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 554 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 In some research in pure analysis and in a great many problems of physics and

 mechanics it is useful to invert some definite integral. We can even affirm that

 there is no branch of physics in which difficulties of this kind are not encoun
 tered.8 (Levi-Civita 1895-96, 159)

 The interest of Levi-Civita spurred Volterra to return to this area. In a series of papers

 written in 1896, he investigates the more general problem and presented a number of

 results of the following general kind (Volterra 1896a,b,c). If we have the functional

 then under certain hypotheses on the functions and the region then exactly one con

 tinuous function exists φ such that the given equation is satisfied. This is given by the
 formula

 Φ(}0 = Jj}y\ ~ „/ Τ f fix) Σ s'(x> y)&x

 equation

 where

 /CO ~ /(«) = J Φ(χ)Η(χ, y)dx

 y

 a

 ^ 00

 H (y, y) H (y, y) J f-*
 a <=°

 X
 X

 y

 Si(x,y) = J

 So(£,y)Si-i(x,!)d£

 p/ λ 3 H/dy(x,y)
 S0(X>y):= H(x.x) ■

 Volterra did not indicate how he had obtained this expression, but merely proved that

 it satisfied the original equation. He extended these results to more general cases,

 including a case involving multiple integrals.

 Volterra was to claim later, very credibly, that he was in possession of the method of

 Fredholm and that this was more or less exactly what he had used to get the solution. In

 fact, Volterra ( 1895) had used a determinantal method on a finite system of differential

 equations, so clearly the method could have been in his mind. Furthermore as Tricomi
 remarks:

 Volterra, instead of deducing his results by the same methods he used for their

 discovery (which were identical to those employed later so successfully by Fred

 holm), simply published a verification of his solution. This was told to me by
 Volterra himself when, in 1923-1924, I lectured for the first time on integral

 equations at the University of Rome (Tricomi 1957).

 8 In alcune ricerche di analisi pura e in moltissimi problemi de flsica e di meccanica fa d'uopo invertire

 qualche intégrale definito. Si puô anzi affermai© che non v'è tamo della della fisica, in cui non si incontrino

 difficoltà di questa natura.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 555

 Volterra was to work further on related matters before Fredholm's publication. This

 was connected with later work by his students Lauricella and Almansi, a point we

 return to later. While many of his students were to work in this area in the immediately

 ensuing period, Volterra himself returned to it only later.

 2 Fredholm

 This brings us to Fredholm.9

 Fredholm's letter of Aug. 8,1899 to Mittag-Leffler announced a method for solving

 integral equations, seen as functional equations (Fredholm 1899, 1900). Fredholm

 gave an immediate application to the proof of existence theorems for the solution

 of boundary value problems. This was originally published 1900 in Swedish, but

 communicated to Poincaré10 already in Dec. 1899. Fredholm had also lectured on it at

 the Paris congress of 1900, though only the title is noted in the proceedings. A French

 summary was published 1902 in Comptes Rendus,11 with the full version appearing
 in 1903 in Acta Mathematica, in a volume in honor of Abel (Fredholm 1903).

 Fredholm noted that Neumann's "double-layer" method had shown how the solution

 to the Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation in two or three dimensions could be

 expressed as an integral, which Neumann could then find using series. Poincaré had

 extended Neumann's method (1894,1896), improving the hypotheses.

 Fredholm in turn considered the functional equation

 ι

 ο

 ι

 ο

 φ(χ) + kj fix, γ)φ(γ)dy = ψ(χ)

 where we are solving for φ. The resemblance to the problems considered by Neumann

 and Poincaré is obvious—the λ is Poincaré's parameter.

 Fredholm noted:

 Most problems of mathematical physics which lead to linear differential equa

 tions are translated into functional equations [of this form, possibly with more
 variables].

 Fredholm's basic insight consisted of the following. In the equation

 φ(χ) + λI fix, yWiy)dy = ψ(χ)

 we may consider the analogy with a system of linear equations with φ as the vari

 able. One can then get a kind of analogy with Cramer's rule, with "determinants" and

 "minors" expressed as series expansions in the parameter λ, the coefficients involving

 9 For a biographical sketch of Fredholm, see (Zeilon 1930)

 10 See Nabonnand (1999).

 11 For more details on this result see Tricomi (1957).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 556 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 functional determinants of the kernel /(x,y). The expression is easily seen to for

 mally satisfy the integral equation; convergence of the series is guaranteed by an 1893

 result of Hadamard (1893) (rediscovered independently by Fredholm). The singular

 ities of the determinantal expression are what we would now term the eigenvalues of

 the corresponding boundary value problem. In this regard, we note that while Fred

 holm understood many properties which we now interpret in a linear algebraic way,

 this viewpoint is not central to his mode of addressing the subject, nor is it used

 In Fredholm (1902), began by noting that, in the two-variable case, one can write

 many problems of mathematical physics in the form

 systematically.

 I

 ο

 Φ(χ) +j f(x,yW(y)dy = ψ (χ), 0 < χ < 1 (2.1)

 and that the left side may be denoted Α/φ(χ) for brevity. The idea of an integral as a

 transformation was not new, but we note its explicit use here. He then further explicitly

 remarked that the Eq. (2.1) is "a limiting case of the theory of linear equations," in

 which we have "all the results of the theory of determinants." (Fredholm 1902, 219).

 Both the analogy with linear equations and the concept of determinant employed in

 the infinitary setting are left implicit by Fredholm.

 Fredholm then considered (without stating it clearly) a partition of the unit square

 given by

 0 < x\ < X2 < ■. · < xn 5 1, 0 < yi < y2 < ■ ■ ■ < yn < 1

 and denoted the determinant of the η2 quantities /(*,·, y/t) by

 /

 ix\X2 ...xn\
 \y\y2---ynj'

 He defined the expression he will use as the determinant for the integral equation as

 which is defined to be equal to 1 for η — 0. He then further defined fcth order minors

 of this expression,

 Df ( ^ " " M
 J \m m ··· in J

 = yi [f(h b~'tyXi-xAàxiàx2.
 , k\ J J J \m V2 ··· n. yi ■■■ yn)

 η—1

 ..dxn.

 All integrals in these expressions are taken from 0 to 1.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 557

 If we can accept for a moment that these expressions actually correspond to the

 determinant and minors of a linear system and that the series converge, then the next

 statement by Fredholm is unsurprising. Calling on Cramer's rule, if Df φ 0, we get
 as unique solution

 φ(χ) = Α%ψ{χ)

 where the kernel g is given by

 g(x,y) = -

 Df

 (;)

 Df

 What Fredholm and many of his readers found interesting here was the possibil

 ity of taking a given boundary value problem for a partial differential equation and

 translating into an integral equation that could then be solved by this method. The

 method employed for doing this depends on the particular problem, and a detailed

 explanation would take us into a lengthy technical excursus. For examples, one can

 look at (Heywood and Fréchet 1912, 25). Given the high degree of interest, both the

 oretical and applied, in the boundary value problems of mathematical physics, such a

 promising approach turned out to ensure a wide audience.

 3 Hilbert, Picard, and the Fredholm theory to 1906

 In fact, the response to Fredholm's result was electric. Most writers seized on it as

 a method for solving classes of boundary value problems that had formerly been

 impossible, as we discuss in detail below. Hilbert's response went further. First off the

 mark in grasping the value of Fredholm's theory, he embarked on a deep investigation
 of integral equation methods, lecturing on them already in 1901-1902.12 Picard, on
 the other hand, saw relations to his own earlier work.

 3.1 Hilbert and integral equations

 In 1898-1899, after an extended period of research on the theory of numbers, Hilbert

 became interested in existence theory for PDE's. He announced that he had "saved"

 the Dirichlet principle for Laplace equation 1899, though this was not published until

 1904 (Hilbert 1900). Here, Hilbert found hypotheses he thought sufficient to guarantee

 the existence of a solution to the variational problem associated with the Dirichlet

 problem for the Laplace equation, the solution having been assumed by Riemann (for

 example, in connection with his proof of the Riemann mapping theorem). As (Brezis

 and Browder 1998) have pointed out, the methods used by Hilbert were complex and

 hard to follow, and received considerable clarification by other authors. In his 1900

 Paris lecture, Hilbert's problems 19 and 20 bear on related issues.

 12 For details see Siegmund-Schultze (1982).

 4D Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 558 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Many of Hilbert's 50 Ph.D. students between 1898 and 1910 worked in the general
 area of partial differential equations and integral equations: Hedrick, Noble, Lutke

 meyer, and others worked on classical aspects of the theory. Theses on integral equa

 tions began to appear in 1902, with the thesis of O. D. Kellogg, Mason (1903), Schmidt

 (1905), W. D. A. Westfall (1905), A. Myller (1906), W. Lebedeff (1906), C. Haseman
 (1907), W. D. Cairns (1907), R. Kônig (1907), E. Hellinger (1907), Weyl (1909), A.
 Haar (1910), W. A. Hurwitz (1910), H. Bolza (1913), and K. Schellenberg (1915).
 The work of Schmidt and Weyl in particular took a turn that gave prominence to a

 general viewpoint of the kind Leo Corry has referred to as "structural" in nature. Using

 the idea of what we would now term an inner product of two functions in a function

 space, defined as an integral, Schmidt and others were able to provide a geometry
 for function spaces, leading ultimately to the structure now referred to as a Hilbert

 space. However, many of these writers worked on applied problems of one sort or
 another.13

 Between 1902 and 1904, Hilbert realized that for integral equations of Fredholm

 type (Hilbert's type II, in the classification still used, with real symmetric kernel),

 there would be a theory analogous to that of orthogonal transformations of quadratic

 forms. He saw this as a unified viewpoint for "Schwingungslehre," as he termed

 linear problems in analysis, namely boundary value problems, and the associated

 study of eigenvalues and eigenfunction expansions for the corresponding operators.

 He rapidly moved from the determinantal viewpoint to a "function space" viewpoint,

 which is noticeable also in the work of his students, beginning with Schmidt. We

 also observe the usual Hilbertian emphasis on conventionalism in constructing a

 theory.

 Hilbert had looked at the question of the existence of "normal functions" (that is,

 eigenfunctions associated with particular equations) in the theory of differential equa

 tions, and the development of arbitrary functions in terms of them, via the introduction

 of Green's functions. In his 1904 Nachricht (Hilbert 1904), stimulated by Fredholm's

 work, had reduced this (if reduced is the appropriate term) to the question of finding

 eigenfunctions corresponding to a symmetric kernel and found the laws governing the

 development of arbitrary functions with respect to them.

 A very rapid development in Hilbert's circle between 1904 and 1910 led to an

 increasingly general viewpoint, which was to mature fully in 1920s. While we will

 discuss further some aspects of this research direction, our main aims here are to

 present it in contrast to the more classical turn and to discuss how this German work
 informed the Italian and French contexts, to which we now return.

 3.2 Picard's work on integral equations to 1906

 As early as 1902, Picard saw Fredholm's Comptes rendus article, and also the PhD
 thesis of Max Mason (or at least, the brief account of it in the Jahrbuch), which he

 described as follows (Picard 1904a, 687):

 13 See (Hilbert Ges. Abh.), Ill, 432.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 559

 The study of periodic solutions of linear ordinary differential equations has been

 the object of much research for a long time, and just recently, in an interesting

 thesis, M. Mason has arrived at important results by taking as a point of departure
 the remarkable method of M. Freedholm [sic].14

 Mason had applied Hilbert's idea of using Fredholm's results to get existence of
 solutions for a large class of problems, e.g., the equation of vibrating plates, and the

 isoperimetric problem, by combining the Dirichlet principle idea with Fredholm's

 approach. In Picard (1904a), restated results that he had already obtained together

 with certain extensions of them that the Fredholm method is well-adapted to solve.

 He did not, however, provide the solution using those methods. Picard also was soon

 to situate the results of Fredholm in the context of the work of Volterra in 1895-1896;

 and of the thesis work of his own student Le Roux (1895, 1903). In his first papers

 on the subject, Picard (1904a) and (1904b), he saw this subject above all as a place
 where his own method of successive approximation could be put to good use, since

 once the problem is reformulated as an integral equation the method of successive

 approximations can be applied to the integral version of the problem. This, indeed,

 had been the contribution of Le Roux in his study of the functional equation

 *00= / f(x)P(x,y)dx.

 y

 -I

 Grasping the importance of the results, Picard already devoted "quelques leçons"15 to

 this equation in 1903-1904. Picard employed a parameter λ in the method of solution;

 this harks back to Neumann and was likewise used by Volterra in 1896, as well as in

 Fredholm's 1903 paper (for the first time by Fredholm). Picard's reference to Abel

 strongly suggests that he had read Fredholm's 1903 article by this time. For all of

 them, the aim of the parameter is to obtain a power series expansion, by "une manière
 d'opérer par approximations successives" according to Picard (1904b, 314). Struck

 by the power of Fredholm's method, Picard lectured on "Fredholm's equation"—
 significantly, no longer on results of Le Roux—by 1905-1906.16

 In Picard (1906b), he gave a fuller account via the Rendiconti of Palermo, for some

 time a favored vehicle (like Acta Mathematica) for reaching a broad international

 audience with a longer paper. The paper begins with an exposition of the basic results

 of Fredholm and then takes on the task of formulating various previously studied

 problems as Fredholm equations. The first group consists of single- and double-layer

 potential problems, following Fredholm. Double-layer potentials arise from attempt

 ing to solve a Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation on the interior of closed

 surfaces. (By a double-layer potential is meant a dipole layer on a surface that is asso

 14 L'étude de solutions périodiques des équations différentielles linéaires ordinaires a fait depuis longtemps
 l'objet de bien des recherches, et tout récemment, dans une thèse intéressant ...M. Mason est anivé à

 d'importants résultats, en prenant comme point de départ la remarquable méthode de M. Freedholm [sic]
 pour la résolution de certaines équations fonctionelles.

 15 (Picard 1904b, 313).

 16 See (Picard 1906b, 323).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 560 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 ciated with a potential function, for example by thinking of the dipole layer as the

 density of a magnetic fluid on the surface and the associated potential as the potential

 of the corresponding "Newtonian" magnetic force.) Poincaré (1897) had posed the

 related problem of finding a single layer potential on a closed surface satisfying a

 certain equation. In particular, if such a potential is defined as

 //rd"·

 dV , dV'
 dn In

 dV' _ dV_
 dn dn

 = 2 π ρ

 dV' dV_

 dn dn  -If" COS ψ ,

 da

 dV' dV n
 —, l· μ— = 0,
 dn dn

 1 + μ f f cos Φ ,

 where ρ is the density, r the distance between the surface element da and the point at

 which the potential is being evaluated, then Picard denotes by

 the interior and exterior normal derivatives, respectively. Picard states the identities

 Here, ψ is the angle between the normal and r. With this notation, the equation

 Poincaré had sought to solve was

 which was transformed by Picard to the Fredholm equation

 After translating several such classical problems, Picard illustrated the real power

 of the method by using it to consider the generalized Dirichlet problem for linear

 elliptic equations of form

 3 2u d2u du du ,
 ^+ï?+aâ;+bfr+c'' = f·

 where a, b, and c are functions of χ and y. This has been reformulated, Picard noted, by

 "Hilbert and his students" (Picard 1906b, 333) though Picard has devised a more direct

 method for doing so. Assuming the existence of a solution u, Picard used standard
 Green's function methods and integration by parts to show that u must satisfy

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 561

 8(aG) , 9(bG) _
 θξ 8η

 H CG

 ΐί)ξ, η)άξάη

 u(x, y) +  àJJ
 "hi!

 /(ξ, η)άξάη.

 Here, ΰ(ξ, η; χ, y) is the Green's function evaluated at the point (jc, y). This has the

 Fredholm form, and after arguing that it does indeed provide a solution Picard takes

 a = b = 0 to investigate the question of a vibrating membrane. This is a convincing

 test case for the theory, since it had a long pedigree. Schwarz had already established

 the existence of the first singular value, and Poincaré in 1894 had shown that the

 integral has an infinite set of singular values that are simple poles, as we remarked

 earlier (Siegmund-Schultze 1982). Picard, using the Fredholm results, obtained this
 in a few lines.

 4 Italian work and the Prix Vaillant

 The fact that Picard's work appeared in the Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di

 Palermo guaranteed it a wide audience, particularly in Italy. In Italy, elasticity theory

 had a long and venerable tradition, and many researchers of all levels could read this

 work with understanding and interest. The result was a rather large response to Picard's

 paper, both direct and indirect, and the paper and its offshoots were to stimulate central

 theoretical developments, notably in the hands of Lauricella and Volterra.

 4.1 The Italian tradition in elasticity theory

 The Italian tradition in elasticity theory began with Enrico Betti. Betti and his some

 what junior colleague Eugenio Beltrami (1835-1900) were the founders of an Italian
 school of elasticity which was highly active for many years.17 Many researchers were

 involved, of whom the most successful was certainly Volterra, who began his research

 career in this field. This loosely knit group became dominant in the area during the late

 nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In their biography of Hadamard, V. Mazya
 and T. Shaposhnikova write (Maz'ya and Shaposhnikova 1998, 347):

 In the beginning of the 1880s there was also the brilliant work of Poincaré,

 but toward the end of the nineteenth century the French school was no longer

 dominant. The Italian school in the theory of elasticity, founded by Betti and

 Beltrami, and represented by Lauricella, Levi-Civita, Volterra, and others, had

 surpassed it.

 A letter from Lauricella to Volterra,18 dated August 18, 1897, indicates a certain

 self-awareness on the apart of this Italian group and also indicates efforts to make their
 work better known:

 17 Here, the term school is used informally, but in fact, there are direct educational and mentoring links

 among many of the members, as well as significant overlaps in method.

 18 This letter is contained in Volterra's Archive, Archivio dell'Accademia dei Lincei, Roma.

 £ï Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 562 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Very illustrious Professor,

 I received your very nice letter, followed by your postcard today. I shall send to

 Prof. IvarFredholm of Stockholm the bibliography of Italian works on elasticity,

 as you wrote me.19

 In fact, Betti's main contribution to the theory of partial differential equations was

 developed in the context of the mathematical theory of elasticity. This concerns a

 particular method for integrating the equations of elastic equilibrium, based on what

 we now term Betti's reciprocity theorem (Betti 1872-73).20

 This theorem states that two given systems of forces—volume forces (Χ, Y, Z),

 (Χ', Y', Z') and pressures (L, M, N), (L\ Μ', N')—acting on an elastic and
 homogeneous body R with boundary σ and density ρ produce two systems of dis

 placements (κ, v, w), (w', υ', w'), which are not independent of one another, but are

 linked by the following formulae:

 J(L', M', N') · (m, v, w)da + p j(Χ', Y', Z') ■ («, v, w)du

 σ R

 = J (L,M,N)· («', t/, w') άσ + ρ J (Χ, Υ, Ζ) · (κ', υ', w')dv.

 ο R

 20 See the introduction to (Capecchi et al. 2006).

 21 Green developed a direct procedure, now called the Green's function method, for solving the Dirichlet

 problem. This method requires finding a particular function, Green's function. For details see Tazzioli
 (2001).

 22 La Memoria, veramente mirabile, del Betti sulle equazioni délia élasticité gettô su queste un fascio

 di luce nuova, inattesa, e préparé, specialmente in Italia, una fioritura di lavori quale poche altre memorie

 possono vantarsi di aver prodotto. Il suo teorema di réciprocité dovette sembrare una rivelazione. Con mezzi
 semplicissimi dava gié una folia di risultati e permetteva di penetrare addentro nelle propriété analitiche

 delle equazioni di cui si tratta.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From this reciprocity theorem, Betti derived functions, similar to Green's functions,

 which allowed him to describe fundamental properties of elastic bodies. In particular,

 he was able to express the dilatation of an elastic and isotropic body by means of the
 displacements of the given forces.21

 This was a surprising and fruitful result. Betti's student Qrazio Tedone, later wrote

 (Tedone 1907,43):

 Betti's really admirable Memoir on the equations of elasticity cast a new and

 unexpected light on them, and was the precursor, particularly in Italy, to a blos

 soming of work that few other memoirs can vaunt themselves for having pro

 duced. His reciprocity theorem was like a revelation. By using very simple
 methods it at once yielded results and allowed us to penetrate the analytical

 properties of the equations at issue.22

 19 Chiar.mo Sig. Professore, Ho ricevuto la di Lei cortesissima lettera, seguita oggi da una sua cartolina.

 Invierô al Prof. Ivar Fredholm a Stockholm la bibliografia delle pubblicazioni italiane sulla élasticité, per
 come Ella mi scrive.

 Integral equations between theory and practice 563

 This "new and unexpected light" attracted other researchers interested in the theory

 of elasticity, not all of whom were under Betti's direct influence in Pisa. One of these

 was Valentino Cerruti who graduated from the University of Turin in 1873 and soon

 moved to the University of Rome, where Cremona and Beltrami had been appointed

 professors a short time before. In 1877, he became professor of mechanics in Rome,
 succeeding Beltrami—who moved to the University of Pavia—and from then on he

 did research on the theory of elastic bodies. Cerruti was typical of Italian researchers

 who worked on the theory of elasticity during the decade 1880-1890, in that he based
 his work on Betti's results.23

 Carlo Somigliana also made important contributions to elasticity theory in the Betti

 tradition. Somigliana studied at the University of Pavia, where Beltrami was professor.

 He then moved to the Scuola Normale of Pisa, where he graduated in 1881, having

 had Betti and Dini as teachers. His first papers concern the theory of elasticity and

 followed Betti's approach. In Somigliana ( 1890), he deduced the results now known as

 Somigliana's formulae, using Green's function methods. These formulae express the

 displacements of an elastic body by means of the forces and the displacements acting

 on the surface of the body. In elasticity theory, Somigliana's formulae play essentially

 the same role as Green's formula plays in potential theory.

 Somigliana's results were considerably extended by Giuseppe Lauricella, who stud

 ied at the Scuola Normale in Pisa and subsequently became full professor of analysis

 at the University of Catania, working not only in pure analysis but in mathematical

 physics. In his dissertation, supervised by Volterra, Lauricella used a version of Neu

 mann's method of the arithmetic mean in order to prove the existence of solutions

 for the equations of equilibrium of an elastic body (Lauricella 1895). Later Lauricella

 extended this result, valid for special values of the elasticity constants only, to the gen

 eral case (Lauricella 1905), displaying a deep knowledge of contemporary papers on

 the Dirichlet problem published by Liapunov (1898), Poincaré (1894,1897), Stekloff

 (1900), Korn (1899) and Zaremba (1902). We return to aspects of this in what follows.
 Italian mathematicians working in elasticity thus became adept at tailoring the

 Green's function method and related results to their advantage, particularly in the con

 text of investigating elastic equilibrium. They developed similar procedures in order

 to deal with and solve another problem of elasticity theory, the vibrating membrane
 problem, leading to a generalization of Dirichlet's problem—the Dirichlet problem

 for biharmonic differential equations.

 4.2 Biharmonic differential equations and the theory of elasticity

 In order to introduce the Dirichlet problem for biharmonic functions, let us begin with

 the following definition:

 23 Cerruti deduced a new method for integrating the equations of elastic equilibrium, which improved

 Betti's procedure. It is now described as the Betti-Cerruti method. Cerruti developed his new integration

 method (Cerruti 1882) by using Betti's reciprocity theorem and showed the efficacy of the Betti-Cerruti

 method by integrating the elastic equations of a homogeneous solid body bounded by a half-plane. Later
 on, this problem came to be called the Boussinesq-Cerruti problem.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A function U = U(x\, X2,. ■ ■, xm) of class C2(D), where D is a regular region,

 is polyharmonic or, more precisely, n-harmonic if

 564 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Λ r, /a2 92 92 Y
 U = 0.
 &2nU — ι y H y + · · ■ + ——y )
 9x2 J

 If η = 1 then U is a harmonie function in the usual sense; if η = 2, then U is called a
 biharmonic function.

 In 1869, Emile Mathieu had already noticed the importance of biharmonic functions

 in the theory of elasticity (Mathieu 1869, 378-379):

 In fact when a solid homogeneous elastically isotropic body is subjected to

 pressures on its surface that maintain it in equilibrium, the projections of the

 displacement of an arbitrary point of the interior of the body on the coordinate

 axes satisfy the equation A AU = 0; and the same is true of the components of

 elastic force that that act on plane elements parallel to the coordinate planes.24

 He had also formulated the Dirichlet problem for biharmonic functions (Mathieu

 1869, 396):

 There is further a function, and only one, that satisfies the equation Δ AU = 0 in

 the interior of the surface σ, varying there continuously together with its deriva

 tives up to order three, of which the value is given at the surface as is that of ,25

 A generalization of the usual Green's formula to the case of biharmonic functions
 can in fact be deduced easily; for a biharmonic function U in a region D in 3-space,

 with boundary σ and external normal υ, we have

 Î/w=è/(Î;";(L"C2)-/"(r-G;)7)fc

 Here, the function G 2 (called the Green's function of the second kind) is sought, subject

 to the condition that it is biharmonic in D and satisfies the boundary conditions G2 = r

 and = |^. This formula gives us the function U at each point Ρ of the region D,

 provided that the values of U and of its partial derivative are given on the boundary

 σ. The resemblance to the Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation is evident.

 24 En effet, quand un corps solide, homogène, et dont l'élasticité est la même dans tous les sens, est soumis

 à sa surface à des pressions qui le maintiennent en équilibre, les projections du déplacement d'un point
 quelconque de l'intérieur du corps sur les axes des coordonnées satisfont à l'équation AAU = 0; et il en
 est encore de même des composantes des forces élastiques qui s'exercent sur des éléments plans parallèles

 aux plans de coordonnées.

 25 II existe encore une fonction, et une seule, qui satisfait à l'équation ΔΔΙΙ = 0 dans l'intérieur de la

 surface σ, qui y varie d'une manière continue avec ses dérivées des trois premiers ordres, et dont la valeur

 est donnée à la surface ainsi que celle de j^·.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 565

 The Dirichlet problem for n-harmonic functions (with η > 2) may be stated in

 a similar way.26 We notice that, similarly to what happens for the usual Dirichlet

 problem, Green's functions of the second kind (and, generally, of the nth kind) are

 very difficult to find. Mathematicians succeeded for special shapes of the region D
 only—when D is a half-plane, a circle, a sphere, a cube, or a parallelepiped. The case

 of the Dirichlet problem for polyharmonic functions when D is an η-sphere received

 particular attention from Italian mathematicians in the years 1900-1906, among them

 Tommaso Boggio, Roberto Marcolongo, Luciano Orlando and Pierina Quintili.27

 In the classical theory of thin plates, a biharmonic equation describes the deflection

 of the middle part of the surface of an elastic isotropic flat plate, and the boundary

 conditions usually impose that the tangent plane at each point of the boundary is still

 while the plate moves.28 The theory of biharmonic equations is also connected to

 research in hydrodynamics concerning the very slow motion of a body in a viscous

 fluid, as V.V. Meleshko explains in his paper (Meleshko 2003, 36):

 Two-dimensional creeping flow of a viscous incompressible fluid can also

 be described in terms of the biharmonic problem. If the motion is assumed

 to be so slow that the inertial terms involving the squares of the velocities may

 be omitted compared with the viscous terms, the stream function ψ satisfies
 the 2D biharmonic equation Δ2Ψ = 0. This type of flow is also called the
 low-Reynolds-number flow (Happel and Brenner 1965) or slow viscous flow

 (Langlois 1964). It is also named the Stokes flow after the famous Stokes' mem

 oir (Stokes 1850) devoted to estimate of the ffictional damping of the motion of

 a spherical pendulum blob due to air resistance.

 This problem for the sphere was studied by several writers, for example by Boggio
 (see below).29

 26 Details about the generalized Dirichlet problem for n-harmonic functions can be found for example in

 Marcolongo's lectures on the theory of elasticity, Marcolongo (1903).

 27 Tommaso Boggio was full professor of rational mechanics at the University of Turin. His works concern

 potential theory, harmonic and biharmonic functions, integral equations, the theory of elasticity, and hydro

 dynamics. Roberto Marcolongo was full professor of rational mechanics at the Universities of Messina and

 Naples. He wrote important treatises on many subjects of mathematical physics and also researched on

 history of mathematics. Luciano Orlando died in the First World War, having served as an artillery officer.

 His main works concern the theory of elasticity and the theory of integral equations, where he recognized

 the importance of the so-called Goursat kernels. Pierina Quintili was a student of Volteira and graduated in

 mathematics from the University of Rome in 1906. Afterward, she taught at secondary schools in Rome.
 See Nastasi and Taazzioli (2004).

 28 On the history of biharmonic equations see the long paper (Meleshko 2003).

 29 The connections between hydrodynamics and integral equations are studied in detail in (Nastasi and

 Tazzioli 2006). In particular, we refer to some interesting exchanges of letters between Boggio and Levi

 Civita, and Henri Villat and Levi-Civita on questions concerning hydrodynamics and their reformulations

 in terms of Fredholm's integral equations. See especially the letter by Villat to Levi-Civita on June 24,1911
 published in (Nastasi and Tazzioli 2006, pp. 103-104).

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 566 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 4.3 A turning point: 1906

 In the two decades from 1895 to 1915, Italian mathematicians studied the theory of

 harmonic and polyharmonic functions deeply. Until 1906, they applied a variety of

 methods to the study of the (generalized) Dirichlet problem—among them the method

 of Green's functions, Picard's approximating method, and two other methods (due to

 Almansi and Levi-Civita respectively). In 1906, Picard's paper in the Rendiconti del

 Circolo Matematico di Palermo markedly changed the direction of research (Picard

 1906a). After that, Italian mathematicians regularly employed the theory of integral

 equations in approaching the generalized Dirichlet problem. The competition for the

 Prix Vaillant, announced in 1906, makes this shift particularly evident.

 Emilio Almansi was one of Volterra's students at the University of Turin, where

 he became Volterra's assistant. In 1903, he moved to the University of Pavia and in

 1922 to the University of Rome. In his dissertation, which treats the deformation of

 an elastic sphere, he applied the methods of Betti, Cerruti, and Somigliana, by then

 well known. Starting from these studies, he then investigated biharmonic and then

 polyharmonic equations. In a letter to Volterra on November 7,1895, he describes his

 idea of finding the solution of a polyharmonic equation by splitting it into a certain
 number of harmonic equations, and then by calculating successive integrations of

 harmonic equations. He developed this idea in (Almansi 1899) where he found aformal

 solution, though an explicit solution was exhibited for special cases only. In 1896, he

 had already solved the Dirichlet problem for biharmonic functions in some special

 regions—the circle, sphere, and half-plane (Almansi 1896). Applying these results,

 Almansi was able to calculate the displacement of each point of an elastic sphere when

 displacements and deformations are given on the boundary (Almansi 1897). Volterra
 noticed these results: In a letter on February 1, 1904, he asked Almansi to send him

 a copy of the dissertation (published in Almansi 1897), since he had used it in his
 lectures on mathematical physics.

 Almansi's method for biharmonic equations was also applied by Boggio in order

 to deduce the deformations of an elastic, isotropic, and plane lamina vibrating under

 the action of some forces on the boundary, if the displacements on the boundary are

 given (Boggio 1900a). He solved the problem, which was mathematically described

 by a biharmonic equation, in the case where the membrane could be conformally

 mapped to a circle by means of polynomials alone. In Boggio (1900d), he extended
 his own results to any plane simply connected lamina using a method developed by

 Levi-Civita (see below). In the same year, he published another paper, Boggio (1901b),

 on the equilibrium of elastic plates. There he used the classic method of successive

 approximations due to Picard. Here, he considered the generalized Green's function of

 the second kind and conjectured that this function had always to be a positive function.

 This assumption was called by Hadamard "Boggio's conjecture."30

 Volterra had an important role in the development of the theory of integral equations

 in Italy, even if we only think of his mentoring activity: Almansi, Lauricella, Orlando,

 and Quintili were his students, and did research in directions inspired by him. In

 30 This conjecture is false, as Englij and Peetre proved in 1995 [for details see (Maz'ya and Shaposhnikova
 1998,438-439)].

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 567

 the years 1900-1906, Volterra had started thinking about possible applications of

 mathematics to biology and economics (Volterra 1901). In this period, Volterra also

 published some papers on mathematical physics and gave his celebrated lectures at the

 University of Stockholm in 1906 (Volterra 1906). Volterra and several of his students

 were especially interested in the theory of elasticity, and more generally in applying

 Fredholm's theory. Volterra's main works on these subjects, where he applied the

 theory of integral equations to biology and economic models, only appeared after the
 First World War. We return to this and related issues in Sect. 5.2 below.

 Levi-Civita had a similar role; he was interested in integral equations quite early,

 published some influential papers, and had an extensive correspondence on the subject

 with Boggio, Lauricella, Orlando, Guido Fubini and Eugenio Elia Levi.31 Even before

 Fredholm's work, Levi-Civita had tried to integrate a biharmonic equation in a simply

 connected plane region without using the (generalized) Green's function (Levi-Civita

 1898a,b). He broke the problem into two steps:

 (1) To find the conformai representation of the given region over a circle.

 (2) To solve a system Ω of an infinite number of differential equations in infinitely

 many variables.

 From a theoretical point of view, this solved the problem, but not in a practical sense.

 To find the solutions of the doubly infinite system Ω poses great difficulties and Levi

 Civita was aware of that. He wrote to Volterra on April 13,1898:

 I show that formally the boundary value problem for the equation Δ2Δ2 = 0

 can be reduced under certain boundaries to the solution of infinitely many alge

 braic linear equations with infinitely many unknowns. The theory of infinite

 determinants does not shed any light on the system in question; but we can

 show with complete rigour that there is a rather broad class of boundaries for

 which the equation can be solved by a method of successive approximations. In

 such a case the function u that we seek may be expressed in a quite transparent

 form by means of definite integrals, determined by the given system, in which

 the unknowns appear linearly. I am writing a note and in due time I will allow

 myself to subject it to your judgement and ask if you will recommend it to the
 Accademia delle Scienze.32

 31 Guido Fubini graduated from the University of Pisa in 1900 and became professor at the University of

 Catania in 1901. He moved to the University of Genoa in 1906, to the Polytechnic of Turin in 1908, and

 during the Fascism, he escaped to USA. where he taught at Princeton and at the Hew York University. He

 gave important contributions to analysis and mathematical physics. In addition, he founded a new research

 field, the projective differential geometry. Eugenio Elia Levi graduated from the University of Pisa in 1904

 and in 1909 was appointed professor of analysis at the University of Genoa. He died in the First World War

 in the defeat of Caporetto. He published important papers on the theory of partial differential equations and
 on the calculus of variations.

 32 lo mostro che formalmente il "Randwerthaufgabe" per Tequazione Δ2Δ2 = 0 si puô ridurre, per
 qualunque contorno, alla risoluzione di un sistema di infinite equazioni algebriche lineari con infinite

 incognite. La teoria dei determinant! infiniti non getta alcun lume sul sistema in questione; si puô per altro

 far vedere con tutto rigore che vi è una catégorie assai ampia di contomi, per cui le equazioni si lasciano

 risolvere con un metodo di approssimazioni successive. In tal caso la funzione cercata u si esprime sotto

 forma assai perspicua, per mezzo di integrali definiti, in cui entrano linearmente le incognite, determinate

 dal sistema anzidetto. Sto redigendo una nota e mi permetterô a suo tempo di sottoporla al Suo giudizio,
 sollecitando per essa il Suo patrocinio presso la Accademia delle Scienze. (See Levi-Civita 1898a).

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 568 T. Archibald, R, Tazzioli

 paper immediately:

 Volterra's positive answer on April 19, 1898 allowed Levi-Civita to publish his

 What you wrote me about Δ2Δ2 = 0 interested me greatly. On the same subject,

 treated by Lauricella, there is a note of Dr. Almansi in the Accademia of Torino

 (Almansi 1896). Presently a memoir of Dr. Almansi is going to be published in
 the Annali di matematica on Δ2Δ2... Δ2 = 0 (Almansi 1899), but from what

 I remember of this it is not in the direction of your research.

 With regard to the question of the solution of infinitely many first-degree equa

 tions in infinitely many unknowns, I have already for some time been in pos

 session of a method of solution that I have never published, and which may be

 valid in cases where the procedure of infinite determinants is not valid. I allow

 myself to communicate to you what I remember of this, not having the details

 here, in case that may turn out to be useful.33

 Volterra used a method of approximation which was, essentially, the same as the

 one employed by Levi-Civita in his paper (Levi-Civita 1898a), as Levi-Civita himself

 pointed out.

 As mentioned earlier, Lauricella had been interested in elasticity theory since the

 beginning of his scientific career. In his papers on elastic plates (Volterra 1896a; Lau
 ricella 1896b, 1898a), Lauricella introduced an auxiliary function for a biharmonic

 equation analogous to the Green's function and solved the generalized Dirichlet prob

 lem for special regions (a circle or a ring). His solution for a circle was equivalent to

 Almansi's formula, as Volterra pointed out in his letter to Levi-Civita. In some subse

 quent papers (Lauricella 1901a,b, 1903, 1904), Lauricella derived the same formulae
 obtained by Almansi (1897) for the deformations of an elastic and isotropic sphere

 when strains or displacements on the surface are given. The methods were different—

 while Almansi used his own method for integrating biharmonic functions, Lauricella

 developed other methods (generally involving Green's function).34

 Fubini, who was a colleague of Lauricella at the University of Catania, extended
 Levi-Civita's method to regions of any dimensions by using a procedure which did

 not involve conformai representation. He wrote to Levi-Civita (16 February 1905):

 Esteemed Professor

 33 Quanto Ella mi ha scritto per rapporto al Δ2Δ2 = 0 mi ha molto interessato.

 Sul soggetto stesso trattato da Lauricella vi è una nota del D.r Almansi nell'Accademia di Torino, pure

 inserita negli Atti di Torino. [See Almansi 1896] Ora il D.r Almansi ha in corso di stampa una Memoria
 negli Annali di matematica sul Δ2Δ2 ... Δ2 = 0 [see Almansi 1899], ma ritengo da quanto ricordo, che

 egli non sia nel suo indirizzo di ricerche.

 Riguardo alla questione délia soluzione di un numéro infinito di equazioni di primo grado con infinite

 incognite sono in possesso già da vario tempo di un metodo di soluzione, che non ho mai pubblicato, e che

 pub valere in casi nei quali il procedimento dei determinanti infiniti pub non essere valido. Mi permetto di

 comunicarle, cib che mi ricordo di esso, non avendo qui gli appunti, pel caso che potesse riuscirle utile.

 34 Somigliana also had devised a new procedure in (Somigliana 1894). There he considered the equations of

 elastic equilibrium and introduced three new functions which satisfied a biharmonic equation and were the

 components of an elastic deformation. The expression of these functions was found using Green's method,

 and this allowed to find the displacement of the body. Somigliana explicitly solved the original problem if

 the region was a sphere or a half-plane.

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 569

 Prof Lauricella recently solved the problem of Δ2Δ2 for plane regions. I was

 therefore led to think about polyharmonic functions and related problems that I

 had abandoned for some time. I re-read your memoir on biharmonic functions

 that was published in Torino in 1898 (Levi-Civita 1898b); and here are some

 simple observations, that I permit myself to communicate to you, and which

 besides work for the problem of Δ 2η· For brevity I will speak only about Δ4 and

 I'll refer to the notation you used.35

 His method was based on Picard's method of successive approximations; Fubini

 also quoted the "recent methods by Hilbert" in the theory of integral equations. Fubini

 published these results in (Fubini 1905) as Levi-Civita had suggested.36

 In Boggio (1900d), Boggio also used Levi-Civita's method for improving a result

 already obtained in (Boggio 1900a) concerning the deformations of elastic plates.

 Boggio used several different procedures in order to solve a biharmonic equation and

 the corresponding Dirichlet problem, including Almansi's method, Green's method,
 Levi-Civita's method.

 Like most of his Italian colleagues, Boggio changed his approach to the study of

 Dirichlet's problem after the publication of Picard's memoir (Picard 1906b). This

 memoir made most Italian mathematicians aware of very recent work on integral

 equations published by Fredholm, Hilbert, and E. Schmidt from 1905 onward, in

 which the Dirichlet problem was tackled using the theory of integral equations. In this

 regard, Boggio wrote to Levi-Civita (November 24,1906):

 Reading the clear and interesting memoir of Picard: Sur quelques applications de

 l'équation fonctionelle, published in the last issue of the Rendiconti de Palermo

 (Picard 1906b) motivated me to study in a bit of depth the theory of integral

 equations. It was then because of this that I studied the Memoir of Fredholm
 in the Acta Math. (Fredholm 1903), and that of Hilbert in the Nachrichten of

 Gottingen (Hilbert 1904).
 I translate by "perno" [pivot] the meaning of Hilbert's "Kern" [kernel]. It seems

 to me that the idea of a pivot corresponds closely enough to the idea that Hilbert

 wanted to express by kernel.37

 At around the same time, Orlando referred directly to the "important memoirs
 by D. Hilbert" in his paper devoted to the solution of the biharmonic function in a

 35 Chiar.mo Sig. Professore,

 II Prof. Lauricella ha risoluto in questi giorni il problema del Δ2 Δ2 per aree piane. Cosl io mi sono rimesso

 a pensare aile funzioni poliarmoniche e ai problemi relativi, che da tanto tempo avevo abbandonato. Rilessi

 la Sua Memoria, relative aile funzioni biarmoniche, pubblicata a Torino nel 1898 (Levi-Civita 1898b): ed
 ecco qui alcune facili osservazioni, che mi permetto comunicarle, e che del resto valgono anche per il
 problema del . Per brevità parlerô solo del Δ4 e mi riferirô aile notazioni da Lei usate.

 36 See the letter by Fubini to Levi-Civita dated 23 February 1905.

 37 La lettura délia chiara ed intéressante memoria di Picard: Sur quelques applications de l'équation fonc

 tionnelle, comparsa nell'ultimo fascicolo dei Rendiconti di Palermo mi ha invogliato a studiare un po' a

 fondo la teoria delle equazioni integrali; ed ho appunto perciô studiato la Memoria di Fredholm negli Acta
 Math, e quelle di Hilbert delle Nachrichten di Gottinga.

 [...] Traduco con pemo il senso di Kern di Hilbert; mi pare che l'idea di pemo si avvicini abbastanza bene

 all'idea che Hilbert ha voluto rappresentare con Kern.

 Ô Spring* ;er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 570 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 rectangular parallelepiped (Orlando 1906); after that, Orlando continued by applying

 Fredholm's method to the solution of problems in elasticity theory. In the following

 year, Marcolongo pointed out the importance of Fredholm's theory in potential theory

 and analysis, and above all in the theory of elasticity (see Marcolongo 1907).

 Besides Boggio, Orlando, and Fubini, many other mathematicians, including E.E.

 Levi and Marcolongo, wrote to Levi-Civita and asked him for suggestions about the

 new theory of integral equations and its applications to mathematical physics. Levi

 Civita and Volterra were the key figures at that time in Italy and both had a fundamental

 role in the spreading of Fredholm's theory through Italian mathematicians.

 4.4 The Prix Vaillant

 A full discussion of the French and Italian reception of Fredholm's theory would be

 incomplete without an account of work on the vibration of elastic plates. This problem

 was posed by the Académie des Sciences as the Prix Vaillant problem in 1906, and

 solved by Hadamard, Lauricella, Boggio, and Korn who shared the prize in 1907.38

 The problem stated by the Paris Academy was the following:

 To improve in an important detail a problem of analysis of the equilibrium of

 clamped elastic plates, namely the problem of integrating the equation

 d4U d*U d4U
 J^+2d^2 + l/=f(X,y)

 subject to the condition that the function u and its normal derivative on the

 boundary are null. Examine more particularly the case of a rectangular contour.39

 As Boggio himself explained in a letter to Volterra (April 17,1907), he used Fred

 holm's method in his memoir and was able to solve the original problem in a satisfac

 tory and simple way:

 Last December I sent a memoir to the Paris Academy in the competition for the

 Prix Vaillant (L. 4000). The theme was the integration of the double Laplace

 equation in a plane region. I solved, more generally, for any plane area, the

 problem of deformation of an elastic membrane, for given displacements or

 tensions applied on the boundary. I obtained the solution using the solution of a

 Fredholm integral. I solved as well, very simply, the problem of equilibrium of

 an elastic solid, for given surface displacements, reducing it to the solution of a

 rather simple Fredholm equation. And I also solved using a Fredholm equation,

 38 Some of the details are discussed in Maz'ya and Shaposhnikova (1998) and Meleshko (2003). Arthur
 Kom (1870-1945) obtained a Ph.D. in Leipzig in 1890 and then went to Paris, where he attended the courses

 of Picard and Poincaré. From 1895 to 1908, he taught theoretical physics at the University of Munich. In

 1903, he discovered an early forerunner of the fax machine.

 39 Perfectionner en un point important le problème d'analyse relatif à l'équilibre des plaques élastiques

 encastrées; c'est-à-dire le problème de l'intégration de l'équation ...avec les conditions que la fonction u
 et sa dérivée suivant la normale au contour de la plaque soient nulles. Examiner plus spécialement le cas

 d'un contour rectangulaire. See Comptes Rendus, vol. 145,1907, p. 983.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 571

 the boundary value problem for equations of order 2m, and for an arbitrary plane

 area, while in my Palermo memoir (Boggio 1906), where I treated the question

 with the method of successive approximations of Picard, I needed the condition

 that the area be sufficiently small.

 As you see, I have solved the problem posed by the Academy, and even more

 general question, and as a result, I hope part of the prize will be awarded to me.

 I submitted, a few days ago, the program of the corso libero for the next year

 here at the university, where I will treat Fredholm's equation and its applications

 to mathematical physics.40

 Thus, already in 1907, Boggio was using Fredholm's theory and realized its impor

 tance for mathematical physics. Poincaré wrote the report on Boggio's memoir;

 Poincaré noted that: (1) Boggio's work was not completely original, since he often

 used results already known and obtained by others (Mathieu, Almansi, Picard); (2) he

 applied different methods (the method of Green's functions, Picard's method of suc

 cessive approximations, and Fredholm's theory). The report suggested him to publish

 the memoir in Acta Mathematica, as Boggio wrote to Volterra (December 15,1907):

 I am very happy that Mittag-Leffler will print my work. It is very long, consisting

 of over 200 pages, in parts of which results are reproduced that I already pub

 lished earlier, with simplifications and additions, and in other parts new results
 are described.

 Mittag-Leffler can get the manuscript from the Paris academy, because I don't

 have time to recopy my Memoir. I decided to compete only in the last 4 months

 of last year, and working rapidly I managed to complete it by the 27 December.

 I took it to Milan myself to be sure that it would arrive at the secretariat of the

 Academy by Dec. 31, as the announcement of the contest prescribed.

 You will already have seen, if you read the Dec. 2 issue of the Comptes Rendus,
 that I had 1000 lire, Lauricella and Korn 2000 lire each, and Hadamard 3000
 lire.41

 40 Nel Dicembre scorso ho mandate all'Accademia di Parigi una Memoria per il concorso al premio
 Vaillant (L. 4000). II tema era l'integrazione della doppia equazione di Laplace in un'area piana. Io ho
 risolto, più in generale, per qualunque area piana, il problema della deformazione di una membrana elastica,
 per dati spostamenti ο tensioni applicate sul contorno; la soluzione la ottenni mediante la risoluzione di

 un'equazione integrate di Fredholm. Ho pure risolto, molto semplicemente, il problema dell'equilibrio di
 un solido elastico, per dati spostamenti in superficie, riducendolo alia risoluzione di un'eq. di Fredholm

 assai semplice. Ho pure risolto, mediante un'equazione di Fredholm, il problema dei valori al contorno per
 te equazioni d'ordine 2m, e per un'area piana qualsiasi, mentre invece nella mia Memoria di Palermo, ove

 trattavo la questione col metodo delle approssimazioni successive di Picard, dovevo porre la condizione
 che I'area fosse sufficientemente piccola. [On the subject see (Nastasi and Taazzioli 2004)].

 Come vede, io ho risolto il problema posto dall'Accad., anzi ho risolto questioni ancor più generali, perciô
 spero che una parte di premio mi sarà accordata.

 Ho consegnato, giomi sono, qui all'Università il programma del corso libero per l'anno prossimo, ove
 tratterb delle equazioni di Fredholm e delle loro applicazioni alia Fisica Matematica.

 41 Sono molto contenta che il Mittag-Leffler stampi il mio lavoro; esso è molto lungo, perché consta di

 oltre 200 pagine, in parte delle quali sono riprodotti, spesso con semplificazioni ed aggiunte, risultati che

 avevo già pubblicato precedentemente, e in parte sono esposti risultati nuovi.

 II Mittag-Leffler potrà avère il manoscritto dall'Accademia di Parigi, perché io non ebbi tempo di ricopiare
 la mia Memoria. Io mi decisi aconcorrere solo negli ultimi 4 mesi dell'anno scorso, e lavorando alacremente

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Boggio went on to complain, since his work—in his view—was no worse than

 572 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Lauricella's.

 However it seems that Lauricella gave only one solution (without making the

 extensions to the equation...), based on integral equations. It is deduced from the

 problem of elastic plates for two dimensions... .However I already gave this in my

 first Turin note on the equilibrium of elastic membranes. Besides, it appears that

 the formulae obtained by Lauricella for the case of plates are analogous to those

 obtained by Fredholm himself in 1905, for the case of 3-dimensional bodies,
 in one of his notes in the Arkiv fur Mathematik etc. in Stockholm (Fredholm

 1905). Poincaré says that I should have treated the integration of the equation

 for the rectangle in a direct way. This would certainly have been easy for me to

 do, because it was enough to make developments analogous to those adopted by

 Mathieu to solve a problem for the rectangular prism. However, I thought to be

 more conscientious by showing that, as a consequence of a general theorem on

 plates that I gave in my note (Boggio 1904), the integration of the equation for

 the rectangle, so dear to the Academy, could be reduced to the case of the prism,

 solved by Mathieu some 30 years ago. I, however, took the solution of Mathieu

 simplifying it here and there. But Lauricella, more adroit than me, integrated it

 directly for the rectangle, imitating the solution of Mathieu.42

 However, Boggio's work was not published in Acta Mathematica, for reasons

 unknown. He may simply have assumed that the recommendation he received would

 be enough to guarantee publication. Clearly, the length of the paper would have been

 an obstacle. He did publish a number of papers on this matter in other journals; see

 for example (Boggio 1907a,b). Indeed, Boggio's memoir was never published in that
 form. It remains in the Archives of the Académie des Sciences in Paris. The "Appen

 dix" below contains a portion of the paper.

 In his winning memoir, Lauricella provided a different approach to the solution

 of the biharmonic problem. His work was published in Acta Mathematica in 1909

 Footnote 41 continued

 riuscii a terminate la memoria il 27 Dicembre; la portai io stesso sino a Milano, per essere sicuro che

 arrivasse alla Segreteria dell'Accademia entro il 31 X.bre, come era prescritto dal bando di concorso.

 Ella avrà già visto, leggendo il n° del 2 Dicembre dei Comptes Rendus, che io ebbi 1000 lire, Lauricella e
 Korn 2000 lire ciascuno, ed Hadamard 3000 lire.

 42 Invece pare che il Lauricella abbia dato una sola soluzione (senza fare estensioni all'equazione ...),
 fondata sulle equazioni integrali; essa è dedotta dalla soluzione del problème dell'equilibrio elastico per 2

 dimensioni.. .Questo, per altro, l'avevo pure detto già anch'io nella mia prima notadi Torino suH'equilibrio

 delle membrane elastiche (a. 1900) (Boggio 1900b). Inoltre pare che le formule ottenute dal Lauricella per

 il caso delle piastre, siano analoghe a quelle date già nel 1905 da Fredholm stesso, per il caso di corpi a 3
 dimensioni, in una sua nota degli "Archiv fiir Mathematik ecc." di Stoccolma (Fredholm 1905). Il Poincaré

 dice che io dovevo trattare l'integrazione della equazione per il rettangolo in modo diretto; questo certo mi

 era assai facile di fare, perché bastava fare sviluppi analoghi a quelli adoperati dal Mathieu, per risolvere

 un problema sul prisma rettangolare. Io invece ho creduto di essere più coscienzioso facendo vedere che
 applicando un teorema generate suite piastre, da me dato nella Nota "Sulla deformazione delle piastre
 cilindriche ecc." (Lincei, 1904; Boggio 1904) l'integrazione della equazione per il rettangolo, che tanto

 stava a cuore all'Accademia, si poteva ricondurre al problema anzidetto sul prisma, risolto da Mathieu un

 30 anni fa. Io perô ho ripreso la soluzione di Mathieu, semplificandola qua e là. Invece il Lauricella, più
 accorto di me, ha integrate direttamente la pel rettangolo, imitando la soluzione del Mathieu.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 573

 (Lauricella 1909a). He introduced two new functions u and v, where u = dU/dx, ν =

 dU/dy and an auxiliary function Θ = || + = AU.

 Lauricella considered the equations

 du dv
 — = —, ΑΘ =0
 dy dx

 inside the region, with special boundary conditions. After extensive transformations,

 Lauricella reduced this problem to a system of two integral equations in two unknowns.

 He proved that the solution is unique for the case of a finite region with smooth con

 tour.43 In particular, Lauricella was able to give an interesting physical interpretation

 to his procedure by using the theory of the double sheet (u and υ are known as the

 internal and the external potential of the double sheet).44

 In contrast to Boggio's laments, Lauricella expressed himself as being very happy

 to have won (a part of) the Prize Vaillant, as he wrote to Volterra (November 24,1907):

 I am, of course, extremely happy with the prize I obtained, and I feel at the

 moment a great need to express to you all my gratitude for the warm interest that

 you have always shown toward me.

 I will prepare a résumé of my results for the Lincei, and I will keep the plan to

 Please accept, dear Professor, the most distinguished expression of your disci

 publish the entire memoir.

 ple's obligation.
 G. Lauricella45

 As for the other winner, A. Korn, his account was later published in Annales de

 l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (Korn 1907). Korn did not use Fredholm's methods; in

 addition, the work appears not to have been influential in the history of biharmonic
 equations.

 On the memoirs of the Italian mathematicians Picard remarked to Volterra in a letter

 on June 5, 1907:

 The competition for the Prix Vaillant on the equation AAu = f(x, y) of elastic

 ity theory has brought a very large number of memoirs to our Academy, among

 which several Italian works are to be found. All of these memoirs appear inter

 esting to me, and it will be a lot of work to rank them.46

 43 See (Meleshko 2003, p. 46).

 44 In 1940, Sherman established a similar integral equation for a complex function (usually known as the
 Lauricella-Sherman equation). See (Meleshko 2003,46) and (Sherman, 1940).

 45 Naturaimente sono contentissimo del piemio ottenuto, ed in questo momenta sento maggiormente il
 bisogno di esprimerLe tutta la mia gratitudine per l'affettuoso interessamento che mi ha sempre addi

 mostrato. Preparerd un sunto dei miei risultati per i Lincei, e mi riservo di pubblicare per disteso la mia
 Memorie. Gradisca, Chiar. Sig. Professore, i più distinti ossequi dal Suo obblig.mo discepolo.

 46 Le concours du prix Vaillant relatif à l'équation ΔΔκ = f(x, y) de la théorie de l'élasticité a amené à
 notre Académie un très grand nombre de mémoires, parmi lesquels se trouvent plusieurs travaux italiens.

 Tous ces mémoires paraissent intéressants, et ce sera un grand labeur que de faire un classement.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 574 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 In the end, Hadamard's memoir (Hadamard 1908, 1909, 1910) placed first. His
 main goal was to study the Green's function of the second kind connected to the

 (biharmonic) Dirichlet problem in question. He also studied the variational properties
 of the Green's function and introduced the Hadamard-Boggio conjecture which we

 mentioned above. Though this was an important memoir, it did not deal with the theory

 of integral equations.

 4.5 Applications of Fredholm's theory to analysis 1907-1910

 From 1907 onward, mathematicians often applied Fredholm's theory in order to solve

 problems of mathematical physics, for the most part concerning elasticity, heat con

 duction, and hydrodynamics. In this context, Picard wrote to Volterra on December

 29,1909, complaining to some extent about the influx of newcomers:

 I read your articles on integro-differential equations in the Lincei with great

 interest; it's a collection of ideas that interests me very much. I have thought

 for a long time that it is this kind of equation, more general than differential

 equations, that will come up in mathematical physics more and more. If you

 would like to give me an overview of your research for the Annales of the École

 Normale, I would be very happy for it. This literature on integral equations is

 becoming something frightening; unfortunately not everything is equally good,

 and many beginners apply themselves to it in order to follow the fashion.47

 This fashion was international in scope, as we discuss later, but many Italian mathe

 maticians followed the new trend and published papers on this subject. We have already

 mentioned work by Almansi, Lauricella, and Boggio on the generalized Dirichlet prob

 lem, and by Orlando and Marcolongo. They approached the problems initially by using

 different methods; but after 1906, all of them employed Fredholm's theory of integral

 equations. In particular, Marcolongo wrote that the "new and very important" Fred

 holm theory had "very remarkable applications to potential theory and analysis" as

 well as to the theory of elasticity (Marcolongo 1907, 742).

 We notice that the new Fredholm theory was successfully applied to pure math

 ematics too. In Levi (1907) recognized that the results obtained by Fredholm and

 Hilbert could be applied to the theory of ordinary and partial differential equations.
 It was not by chance that Levi-Civita asked E.E. Levi to resolve a "difficulty"—

 to reduce a special complex function to an integral equation. This "difficulty" was

 soon solved by Levi who wrote a long and technical letter to Levi-Civita (May 5,

 1908), which was then published in a note in the Nachrichten of the Academy of

 Sciences of Gottingen, the same journal where Hilbert had published his notes on

 integral equations (Levi 1908). This paper was one of the most significant works

 Levi was to publish (see for example Dieudonné 1981) and is remarkable, along with

 47 Je lis avec grand intérêt dans les Lincei vos articles sur les équations intégro-différentielles; c'est un

 ordre d'idées qui m'intéresse beaucoup. Π y a longtemps que je pense que c'est ce type plus générale que

 les équations différentielles, qui se présentera de plus en plus en physique mathématique. Si vous vouliez
 me donner pour les Annales de l'École Normale un aperçu de vos recherches, j'en serais très heureux.

 Cette littérature des équations intégrales devient quelque chose d'effrayant; tout n'y est pas également bon

 malheureusement, et beaucoup de débutants se mettent là dessus pour suivre la mode.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 575

 the work of Lauricella, for its success in understanding the approach of the Hilbert
 school.

 4.5.1 The Poincaré lemma

 Another interesting application of Fredholm's theory to aproblem of pure mathematics
 concerns the so-called Poincaré lemma, which Lauricella extended to non-convex

 domains. In the third paragraph of his 1894 memoir (Poincaré 1894,70ff.), Poincaré

 argued that If V is a function of x,y, ζ in a region D such that fVdr = 0, if

 A = f V2dr, Β = / [(|f)2 + (|f)2 + (|f )2]dr then j ^ if D is convex and I
 is its maximum distance between two points of D.

 The result is linked both to the balayage method and to the problem of eigenfunction

 expansions, and in fact, it was a central tool for Poincaré in proving the existence of

 such expansions. In fact, Poincaré returned to the result repeatedly, having already

 discussed it in (Poincaré 1890). One key feature of this work is that Poincaré himself

 believed that he had established the lemma for any convex region. However, he made

 the tacit assumption that a region could be appropriately decomposed into convex

 regions, and in fact, this was false without further restriction. The lemma is used again
 in (Poincaré 1897).48

 Lauricella engaged himself in finding the proof of Poincaré's lemma for any region,

 since it was connected with other research in mathematical physics that interested him.

 He wrote to Volterra (April 28,1901):

 The work on the propagation of heat might appear inopportune since the work
 on the same problem by Stekloff (1900); but Stekloff used Poincaré's lemma

 (Poincaré 1894) maintaining it was proved for non-convex surfaces. While the

 proof of Poincaré requires essentially that the surfaces be convex; I have not

 either succeeded in extending it to non-convex surfaces.49

 And in another letter (April 7,1904):

 The study of the conditions that the density of a double layer has to satisfy for

 the existence of its normal derivatives is important because of the fact that the

 Poincaré-Neumann method for solving the Dirichlet problem requires that the

 given function of the points of the surface be such that the corresponding double
 layer have a finite normal derivative.

 With regard to the method of Poincaré-Neumann it will be known to you that

 Zaremba in a Note (Zaremba 1901) has succeeded in overcoming, so to speak,

 the last of the difficulties that this method presented. Zaremba's result is based

 on the known lemma of Poincaré, proved only for convex regions. In his memoir

 48 Note that this is not related to the "Poincaré Lemma" about closed and exact differential forms.

 49 Π lavoro sulla propagazione del calore potrebbe parère inopportuno dopo il lavoro sullo stesso argomento
 dello Stekloff (Annali di Tolosa) (Stekloff 1900); perô lo Stekloff fa uso del lemma del Poincaré (Mem.

 cit. del Circ. Mat. p. ΠΙ) (Poincaré 1894) ritenendolo dimostrato per le superficie non convesse; mentre
 che la dimostrazione del Poincaré richiede essenzialmente che la superficie sia convessa, né a me è riuscito
 estenderlo aile superficie non convesse.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 576 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 in the Circolo Matematico (p. 97) (Poincaré 1894) and the one in the American

 Journal (Poincaré 1890), Poincaré, it is true, says that non-convex regions can be

 decomposed into convex regions by a finite number of cuts. But this observation
 does not hold for Zaremba's case, because a non-convex surface that admits a

 tangent plane at each of its points can't be decomposed into a finite number of

 convex regions. Whence it seems to me that one ought to extend the lemma of

 Poincaré to non-convex regions. I thought about this, but did not succeed; and I

 would have wished to take the opportunity of this note that I am sending to you,

 to say that the method of Zaremba contains this lacuna, but I fear that the means

 are not the most opportune.50

 Lauricella produced a satisfactory solution to this problem in 1908 (Lauricella

 1908c) by using Fredholm's method. After quoting Picard and Hilbert, he wrote in the

 Introduction of his paper (Lauricella 1908c, 114):

 The extension of Poincaré's results to non-convex regions has been the object

 of various important works, among which those of Stekloff (1900, 1902) and

 Zaremba (1905) stand in the first rank. But the methods developed for such aims

 all depend on Poincaré's lemma. This lemma has been extended, it is true, to

 non-convex regions (Korn 1902; Levi 1906) but with some restrictions on the

 surfaces bounding the regions, and not with that generality which, as we shall

 see, the application of Fredholm's theory provides.51

 50 Lo studio delle condizioni, a cui deve soddisfare la densità di un doppio strato per l'esistenza delle sue

 derivate normali, è importante anche per il fatto che il metodo Neumann-Poincaré, per risolvere il problema
 di Dirichlet, richiede che la funzione data dei punti della superfici sia tale che il corrispondente doppio
 strato abbia la derivata normale finita. [...] A proposito del metodo Poincaré-Neumann Le sarà noto che lo
 Zaremba in una Nota del Bulletin Internatonal de l'Académie des Sc. de Cracovie, Ν 3 del 1901 (Zaremba

 1901) è riuscito a superare, diciamo cosi, 1'ultima delle difficoltàche il metodo stesso presentava. II risultato
 dello Zaremba si fonda sul noto lemma di Poincaré, dimostrato solo per i campi convessi. Il Poincaré, è
 vero, nella sua Mem. del Circolo Maternatico (p. 97) (Poincaré 1894) e in quella dell'American Journal

 (Poincaré 1890), relativamente ai campi non convessi dice che essi, con un numéro finito di tagli, si possono

 decomporre in campi convessi; perô questa osservazione non vale per il caso dello Zaremba; perché una
 superficie non convessa, che ammette un piano tangente in ogni suo punto, non si puô decomporre in uno

 numéro finito di campi convessi. Quindi a me pare che si debba estendere il lemma del Poincaré ai campi

 non convessi. Ιο ci ho pensato, ma non ci sono riuscito; ed avrei volto prendere occasione da questa Nota

 che Le invio, per dire che il metodo dello Zaremba présenta questa lacuna; ma temo che il mezzo non sia

 il più opportuno.

 51 L'estensione dei risultati del Poincaré ai campi non convessi è stata oggetto di vari importanti lavori,

 tra i quali stanno in prima linea quelli dello Stekloff (Sur les problèmes fondamentaux de la physique
 mathématique (Annales de l'Ecole Normale supérieure, 1902); Théorie générale des fonctions fondamen
 tales (Annales de la Faculté des Se. de Toulouse, 2 s., VI). N.d.A.) e dello Zaremba (Solution générale du

 problème de Fourier (Bulletin international de l'Acad. des se. de Cracovie ; Février 1905). N.d.A.); perô i

 metodi a tal uopo escogitati fin qui, oltre di essere poco semplici, dipendono sempre dal lemma di Poincaré.

 Questo lemma è stato esteso, è vero, ai campi non convessi (A. Kom, Abhandlungen zur Potentialtheorie, 4
 (Berlin, 1902). E.E. Levi, Su un lemma del Poincaré (Rendiconti della R. Acc. dei Lincei, vol. XV). N.d.A.);

 ma con alcune restrizioni sulla natura della superficie limitante il campo, e non con quella generalità che,

 come si vedrà, apporta Tapplicazione della teoria di Fredholm.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 577

 4.5.2 The Picard-Lauricella criterion

 Another fundamental mathematical result obtained by Lauricella (and Picard) is the

 so-called Picard-Lauricella criterion. This is a case where, independently, the two

 mathematicians sought a necessary (and ideally sufficient) condition for solvability of

 certain kinds of equations. In order to achieve this, it was necessary for both to grasp

 the essential features of the recent work of the Hilbert School, most notably that of
 Erhard Schmidt and Friedrich Riesz.

 This was achieved by Picard by 1909. While Hilbert had restricted his investigation

 to the case of continuous kernels, Schmidt generalized this to square-integrable kernels

 in his 1905 thesis (Schmidt 1905). Schmidt likewise gave a geometric interpretation

 to Hilbert's results in his thesis, as Hilbert had not. Functions with singularities could

 thus serve as kernels, and in consequence of this, Schmidt presented a spectral theory

 for non-symmetric operators. It was this theory that was used by Picard, as (Groetsch

 2003) points out.52 In so doing, Picard clarified what is now seen as the essential

 difference between integral equations of first and second type and gave an explicit

 criterion for the possibility of solving equations of type one. Picard developed this

 theory in 1909 and presented it in his lectures of that year as well as giving a short

 account in the Comptes rendus of June 14,1909 (Picard 1909a). The same result was

 found independently by Lauricella in the same year (Lauricella 1909b). No priority

 dispute resulted, and the issue of independent discovery seems clear, the more likely

 since the question is obvious and the result not difficult at the level of generality

 employed by Picard and Lauricella.

 In this research, both Picard and Lauricella demonstrated their mastery of essential

 results due to Schmidt and F. Riesz (Riesz 1907). Schmidt's result, from his dissertation

 of July 1905, had been published in the Mathematische Annalen in 1907. Schmidt's

 result states the following. Suppose we are given two "conjugate" integral equations

 φ(χ) = λ J Κ(χ,γ)ψ(γ)άγ (4.1)

 D

 a

 b

 ψ{χ) = λ j K{y,x)<t>{y)dy (4.2)

 and suppose that, in Hilbert's terminology, λι, λι,... are the eigenvalues of the prob

 lem, that is the values of λ that correspond to non-trivial solutions φί and 0,·. Then,

 the 0s form an orthonormal system, as we would now say (Picard says orthogonal and

 normal, following Schmidt). Picard combined this with a version of Riesz's result, the
 theorem we now know as the Riesz-Fischer theorem, likewise from 1907. In Picard's

 statement, this says the following: a kernel function f{x) can be found such that a

 given sequence an can correspond to the "Fourier" coefficients with respect to a given

 52 Interestingly, Groetsch does not mention Lauricella's independent discovery of the same criterion.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 578 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 orthonormal collection of functions if and only if the sequence is square-summable,

 that is, Σ an's convergent.

 The system (</>„, ψηΛη) is what would now be called a singular system of the

 kernel Κ. To understand what Picard and Lauricella had, it is useful to state a modern

 version of the theorem, as it is given in the classic work (Smithies 1965), with some

 changes in notation.

 Theorem 4.1 Let (φη, ψη, λ„) be a singular system of the C? kernel K(s,t) and let

 y(s) be a given C2 function. Then the equation

 has an C? solution χ (t) if and only if (a)

 y(s)« / K(s, t)x(t)dt

 00

 X*j||(y,6i)|2 < +oo,
 n=\

 and (b) (y, φ) = 0 for every £} function φ such that Κ*φ & 0.

 The «s here indicates equality except on a set of measure 0, and the (, ) refers to the

 usual operation of projection onto the basis functions.53

 How does Picard treat this in his original version? This appears in brief in the

 Comptes rendus of June 14, 1909, and more elaborately in a fuller version in the
 Palermo Rendiconti, submitted in July 1909 and appearing in the following year.

 Picard assumes in addition that the functions φί form what he, again following

 Schmidt, terms a closed sequence (fermé), which means that there is no function h(x)

 other than the zero function such that §^(χ)φη(χ)dx = 0. Nowadays, we would note
 that this means the sequence is complete as a basis for the entire function space, that

 is, the null space of the operator adjoint to the one defined by the integral equation
 is trivial. Under these circumstances, Picard was able to show that a necessary and

 sufficient condition that an integral equation of type 1 be solved is the criterion that

 Σ^2

 is convergent, where an are the components of the kernel with respect to the given
 basis. These are referred to as Fourier coefficients by Picard, following Riesz. The

 53 See (Tricomi 1957) on this result, see in particular (Tricomi 1957, 88-90) on Riesz-Fischer 1907
 (see Riesz 1907; Fischer 1907) and (Tricomi 1957,143-150) on this criterion in the symmetric and non

 symmetric cases. Tricomi casts all this in terms of convergence in the mean. In that case, the so-called Weyl

 lemma, the analog of the Cauchy convergence criterion for convergence in the mean, is required. The Weyl

 lemma is from a 1909 paper by Weyl (1909). Tricomi (1957, 88) observes that the Riesz-Fischer result is

 "one of the first brilliant successes of the concept of the Lebesgue integral." This is because the function /

 corresponding to a sequence a; of Fourier coefficients with respect to the system φ ι with £ aj < oo need
 not be Riemann integrable. Weyl was aware of this early on, as we see in his thesis p. 16 footnote (Weyl
 1908). Lebesgue's Leçons appeared in 1904 (Lebesgue 1904).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 579

 proof is straightforward if one uses the ideas of Schmidt and Riesz (and Hilbert), and

 thus, this demonstrates nicely that by 1909 Picard had indeed grasped these ideas fully

 and was able to put them to good use.54

 Lauricella, on the other hand, was able to take this further than Picard. In a series of

 papers between 1906 and 1912, he published a collection of important results which

 show his capacities and his good grasp of contemporary literature. In 1908, he already

 indicates that he knows the Hilbert and Schmidt results (Lauricella 1908a). Among

 his own findings in this series of papers the criterion of Picard likewise appears,
 generalized in (Lauricella 1909b) to kernels that are more general than the closed

 kernels required by Picard. In particular, they are explicitly required to be C2 and

 integrable except on a set of measure zero. In this hypothesis, using (Schmidt 1907),

 he showed that the pairs of conjugate equations correspond to pairs of eigenfunction

 solutions and eigenvalues, so the criterion was shown by him to be valid in something

 very close to the form we stated.55 Lauricella thus already understood a good part of

 the Schmidt-Riesz work as well as being familiar with the notion of almost everywhere

 convergence. His paper was published only a few months after the note of Picard in the

 Comptes Rendus. In (Lauricella 1909b), he uses the term funzione caratteristica for

 "Kern," changing to "nucleo" in 1911 (Lauricella 1911). In this 1911 paper, Lauricella

 studied conditions for the existence of a solution of an equation of the first kind,

 employing the results of Weyl that went beyond the earlier work of Schmidt and Riesz

 to deal with non-symmetric kernels. From this, Lauricella was able to find necessary
 and sufficient conditions for the existence of an £2, and even £' solution in a closed

 and bounded region under certain conditions. The full version of this now-classic

 result, obtained in 1912 (Lauricella 1912) and going far beyond any work in France
 of the time, is discussed in detail in (Tricomi 1957).

 While it would be possible to continue with a story of ongoing theoretical devel

 opments and applications of these techniques, the change in the mathematical world

 brought about by the onset of the first world war marks a place where instead it is

 reasonable to pause and look at the broader reception of this work. For not only was
 it well-received by leading researchers; it was seen as a set of tools that should be in

 the hands of every analyst.

 5 Diffusion and reception of the theory to 1915

 The rapid development of the theory of integral equations, and its immediate impor

 tant application to the solution of boundary value problems, led to many presenta
 tions in lectures in Germany, France, Italy, USA, and elsewhere. Between 1909 and

 1915 Maxime Bôcher, Adolph Kneser, Trajan Lalesco, the duo of H. B. Heywood

 and M. Fréchet, Édouard Goursat, Vito Volterra and Robert Adhémar all gave text

 book accounts, most of them based on lectures. (Plancherel 1912) gives an expository

 account for a broad mathematical audience. Some of these treatments were incorpo

 54 Heard certainly steers clear of issues involving sets of measure 0 and so on, however, by his hypotheses.

 Thus, the theorem is a bit simpler than in more recent statements such as that of Smithies, p. 164.

 55 This result had already be published in (Lauricella 1908b).

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 580 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 rated in longer works on analysis (for example, Goursat's, which nonetheless runs to

 220 pages (Goursat 1907, 1915)), while others were free-standing. Furthermore, the

 general interest of the subject made it a topic for not only short lecture courses, but

 also for international meetings. One of these is the Rome congress, only the second

 following the announcement by Fredholm in Paris in 1900.

 5.1 Integral equations at the International Congress in Rome 1908

 With excitement about the potential of integral equations still growing, it is not sur

 prising that we find them mentioned repeatedly both in the plenary lectures and in the

 scientific contributions at this meeting. Poincaré, Picard, and A.R. Forsyth all draw

 attention to these developments, in rather different ways.

 Poincaré had recently turned his attention to Fredholm's work and its outgrowths

 (Poincaré 1908a,b) Poincaré both describes the method of Fredholm and places it in
 the context of his conventionalist ideas about the use of mathematics to describe the

 natural world:

 Our knowledge of partial differential equations has recently made a considerable

 step forward as a result of the discoveries of M. Fredholm ... one sees that [his

 discoveries] consisted in modeling this difficult theory on another, much simpler,

 that of determinants and systems of first-degree equations....

 One can take a partial differential equation, representing so to speak an infinity

 of equations, and use it to determine an unknown function, representing a con

 tinuous infinity of unknowns. One thus has other infinite determinants, which are

 to ordinary determinants as integrals are to finite sums. This is what Fredholm
 did.56 (Poincaré 1908c, 178).

 Picard, on the other hand, saw the potential of extending the integral equation

 method to permit modeling of phenomena far beyond those accessible via the usual

 partial differential equations and cites biology and the study of "hereditary phenom
 ena" (those that do not depend on immediate initial conditions in a simple way) as

 possible realms of application:

 We know with what success a particular type of functional equations has been

 studied in recent times... a memorable example, amid many others, of the ease

 that a more general viewpoint can bring to the solution of a particular prob

 lem. For certain boundary conditions there is even great interest in substituting

 functional equations for differential equations... a systematic study of more and

 more complicated functional equations should therefore demand the effort of

 56 Notre connaissance des équations aux dérivées partielles a fait récemment un progrès considérable par
 suite des découvertes de M. FREDHOLM ...on voit que [les découvertes de Fredholm] ont consisté à
 modeler cette théorie difficile [des équations diff. partielles] sur une autre beaucoup plus simple, celle des

 déterminants et des systèmes d'équations du 1er degré. ... On peut prendre une équation aux dérivées

 partielles, représentant pour ainsi dire une infinité déquations, et s'en servir pour déterminer une fonction

 inconnue, représentant une infinité continue d'inconnues. On a alors d'autres déterminants infinis, qui sont
 aux déterminants ordinaires ce que les intégrales sont aux sommes finies. C'est là ce qu'a fait Fredholm...

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 581

 researchers... we can dream of more complicated functional equations that will

 bring in the role of heredity...57 (Picard 1908, 194).

 Here, heredity refers not to the biological phenomenon; the term was used by Volterra,

 Picard, and others to describe physical processes in which the time evolution of the

 phenomenon depends not only on "initial" conditions at a single point in time but

 (typically) on other states prior to that; we return to this shortly.

 While Picard's predictions about the realms of application were not to be fully

 realized, his observation about the ways in which integral equations would extend the

 domain of analysis ring true:

 A domain more vast than that of differential equations, containing them as a

 special case, opens before us. We will not take a path there by chance, but

 guided by mechanics and physics in the choice of forms to treat.58 (Picard 1908,
 194)

 A. R. Forsyth, writing on the theory of formal integration of partial differential

 equations in the same Atti, specifically mentions the importance of these recent

 developments, which he expressly omits. However, his perception of the need to

 acknowledge these developments speaks to their importance:

 The choice [of subjects for the article]... involves a study of processes which

 belong to the earlier developments of the theory, and leads me, for the present

 purpose, to omit references to many of the quite modern contributions. It is from

 no lack of appreciation of the work of Mr. Dini, Mr. Hilbert, Mr. Picard, Mr.

 Poincaré, and Mr. Volterra.. .that my choice has been made. (Forsyth 1908,87).

 In the detailed communications, we also find many papers treating integral equations

 both in themselves and for the purposes of application to the solution of boundary value

 problems. Again, sometimes these remarks are simply passing mentions indicating the

 perceived importance of Fredholm's methods. This is the case, for example, with the
 paper of Lauricella, who limits himself for simplicity to a case where Fredholm's
 method is not needed, while noting its power in more general cases (Lauricella 1908d,

 33). Boggio makes reference to results obtained by this method, in the theory of

 elasticity, citing particularly the work of Lauricella and Picard (Lauricella 1907; Picard

 1906b). He treated these papers as well known, as they certainly were in his immediate

 circles. More theoretical work on integral equations was presented by d'Adhémar and

 Orlando, d'Adhémar speaking about equations of Volterra type, and Orlando proposing

 57 On sait avec quel succès un type particulier d'équations fonctionelles a été étudié dans ces derniers

 temps ... mémorable exemple, après tant d'autres, de la facilité que peut apporté à la solution d'un prob
 lème particulier un point de vue plus générale. Pour certaines conditions i limites, il y a même grand

 intérêt à substituer des équations fonctionelles à des équations différentielles ... une étude systématique

 d'équations fonctionelles de plus en plus compliquées devra donc dans un prochain avenir solliciter l'effort

 des chercheurs... nous pouvons rêver déquations fonctionelles plus compliquées .. .qui apporteront la part
 de l'hérédité...

 58 Un domaine plus vaste que celui des équations différentielles, et les comprenant comme cas particuliers,

 s'ouvre devant nous. Nous n'y marcherons pas au hasard, guidés dans le choix des formes à traiter par la
 Mécanique et la Physique.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 582 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 a method for a different class of equations, based on Fredholm's ideas (d'Adhémar
 1908; Orlando 1908).

 5.2 Volterra's Rome lectures

 We do not propose to give an account of all the textbooks and lectures that address the

 subject of integral equations in the prewar period. However, the lectures of Volterra
 were given in various versions in Stockholm, Paris, and Italy, and we have already
 remarked on Volterra's extensive influence in the Italian arena, as well as on his close

 association with Picard. Hence, we will discuss the version of this subject that is
 recorded in these lectures.

 In the period 1909-1911, Volterra published a series of papers in Rendiconti de lia

 Reale Accademia dei Lincei concerning applications of integral equations—which
 Volterra named integro-differential equations (equazioni integro-differenziali)—to

 theory of elasticity, electrodynamics and, especially, to what he termed hereditary

 phenomena (fenomeni ereditari).

 This refers to a distinction made by Picard, but dating back to Boltzmann or even

 further, between phenomena that depend only on the present (or infinitesimally near)

 state of a system (non-hereditary) and those in which some "memory" exists that may

 surface to cause changes that are not easily modeled using differential equations and

 boundary conditions (Boltzmann 1874,1876). Picard's discussion of this matter occurs

 at the end of a paper titled La mécanique classique et ses approximations successives.

 The venue of this paper is interesting: It appears in the first issue of the first volume

 of a journal called Rivista di Scienza, published in Bologna with an editorial board

 including F. Enriques. The journal has a philosophical spin, with its subtitle indicating

 it is a Revue internationale de synthèse scientifique. (The articles are in French, Italian,

 English, and German.) As Picard noted,

 The laws expressing our ideas on motion find themselves condensed into dif

 ferential equations, that is, relations between variables and their derivatives. We

 must not forget that we have definitively formulated a principle of non-heredity,

 in supposing that the future of a system at a given moment depends only on
 its present state, or more generally (if we consider forces as being able also to

 depend on velocities) that this future depends on the preceding infinitely near

 state. This is a restrictive hypothesis, and one that, in appearance at least, many

 facts contradict. There are numerous examples in which the future of a system

 seems to depend on anterior states. In such complex cases one tells oneself that

 perhaps we must abandon differential equations and think of functional equa

 tions, in which integrals figure that are taken from a very distant time up to the

 present, integrals that will be the legacy of this heredity.59 (Picard 1907,13-14).

 59 ...les lois exprimant nos idées sur le mouvement se sont trouvées condensées dans des équations dif
 férentielles, c'est à dire des relations entres les variables et leurs dérivées. Il ne faut pas oublier que nous

 avons en définitive formulé un principe de non-hérédité, en supposant que l'avenir d'un système ne dépend

 à un moment donné que de son état actuel, ou d'une manière plus générale (si on regarde les forces comme

 pouvant aussi dépendre des vitesses) que cet avenir depend de l'état infiniment voisin qui précède. C'est

 une hypothèse restrictive et que, en apparence au moins, bien de faits contredisent. Les exemples sont nom

 breux, où l'avenir d'un système semble dépendre des états antérieurs. Dans des cas aussi complexes, on se

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 583

 In the introduction to the Rome lectures, Volterra went to some lengths also to

 discuss the history of his work from his own point of view, perhaps hoping to establish

 his priority. Noting that his work on functions of lines dates to 1883, he stated specif

 ically that he had begun to work on the subject systematically from 1887. Further, he

 had linked problems in the calculus of variations to integral equations with symmetric

 kernel already in 1884. The idea of inverting definite integrals by using infinite deter

 minants he claims to have mentioned in private conversations in Zurich in 1897, and

 in a paper on standing waves in lakes (seiches) in 1898 in Nuovo Cimento (Volterra
 1898) (see Volterra 1913a, v-vi).

 In the next few years, Volterra likewise extended the connection between integral

 equations, his complementary work on functions of lines, and various applications.
 Some of this work consisted in working out technical details, but he also made an

 effort to explain to a broader public what he saw as the future of his program.To this

 end his final lecture in the series, he gave at the Sorbonne was published in Emile

 and Marguerite Borel's Revue du Mois (Volterra 1912). In particular, the obvious

 issue of whether such "hereditary" effects could always be reduced to deterministic

 models was debated. Citing an example given by Painlevé (Painlevé 1909), Volterra

 noted that we may have two macroscopically identical nails, one of which has many

 hammer blows applied to it, with results for the microstructure. In such a case, the

 imperfect knowledge of the initial data is merely replaced or compensated for by using

 a hereditary framework.

 I think it reasonable to admit hereditary procedures as the only ones possible,

 at least in the present state of science, to include hereditary processes like those

 we have mentioned. There may be a difference of principle, but both those who

 regard the previous postulate as a truth beyond all discussion as well as those

 who doubt it, thinking that to neglect heredity is just a simple approximation,

 must agree on the practical terrain and the methods that must be followed60
 (Volterra 1912, 564-565)

 and again

 I believe that I have demonstrated to you that hereditary theories ... may be

 studied by the methods of integro-differential equations...it is useful to leave

 the constants undetermined ... it is because of this that the importance of the

 Footntoe 59 continued

 le part de cette hérédité.

 dit qu'il faudra peut-être abandonner les équations différentielles et envisager des équations fonctionelles,

 où figureront des intégrales prises depuis un temps très lointain jusq'au temps actuel, intégrales qui seront

 60 Au contraire, je pense qu' il est raisonnable d'admettre les procédés d'hérédité comme les seuls possibles,

 au moins dans le moment actuel de la science, pour embrasser les [hénomènes dont nous avons parlé. Il
 peut y avoir une différence de principe, mais, autant ceux qui admettent comme une vérité hors de toute

 discussion le postulat précédent, et ceux qui en doutent, en considérant que négliger l'hérédité n'est qu'une

 simple approximation, doivent être d'accord sur le terrain pratique et sur les méthodes qu'il faut suivre.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 584 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 application of algebra to questions of nature has increased always.61 (Volterra
 1912,573)

 Volterra's Rome lectures provide an account of the Fredholm's theory and its applica

 tions, originally given in Rome in 1909-1910, and then published in French in 1913
 (Volterra 1913a). M. Tomassetti and F.S. Zarlatti, who edited Volterra's lectures, added

 some results by Picard and Lalesco to Volterra's original lectures. Volterra's integral

 equations are defined, with Fredholm's equations, as two chapters of the same theory—

 the treatise is divided into four chapters. Some applications to the Dirichlet problem,

 liquid oscillations, vibrations, stationary waves, and hereditary electrodynamics and

 elasticity are described in detail.

 In these lectures, there is no systematic use of Fredholm's theory—in fact, Fred

 holm's works are not quoted at all—in the treatment of such problems; instead Volterra

 often applied Green's function methods for solving PDEs. In particular, in the 10th

 and 11th lectures, devoted to the equation of heat propagation, he based his results on

 the work of several of his students—such as Boggio, E.E. Levi and G. Picciati.62

 This publication was intended to accompany a second volume, on functions of lines,

 which contained the lectures he had given at the Sorbonne from January to March of

 1912. This second book was edited by Joseph Pérès, a student of Volterra's at the

 University of Rome (Volterra 1913b). Both appeared in Borel's book series on theory

 of functions. These lectures on integral equations concentrate much on the theory of

 what are here labeled the Volterra and Fredholm, with applications playing a smaller

 role in comparison to the lectures held at the University of Rome. The last chapter (the

 14th) is completely devoted to "hereditary" phenomena, as he describes hysteresis.

 5.3 Some other textbook treatments and reception elsewhere

 As already mentioned, a considerable number of expository versions of the theory of

 integral equations were written very early. Here, we restrict ourself to a quick descrip

 tion of three more: one by Maxime Bôcher, of interest in part because of its priority

 and because of the location of publication in the USA. The others, published in France

 at the same time, give competing versions associated with Picard and Hadamard.

 5.3.1 Bôcher and the USA

 Maxime Bôcher studied at Harvard, then went to Gottingen where he completed a

 PhD in 1891. He arrived in Gottingen when Klein was interested in potential theory,

 and his dissertation concerns series expansions of potential functions (i.e., functions

 61 ... je crois vous avoir démontré que les théories héréditaires ... peuvent être étudiées par les méthodes
 des équations, intégro-différentielles... il est utile de laisser... indéterminé les constantes... c'est à cause
 de cela que l'importance de l'application de l'algèbre aux question naturelles a toujours grandi.

 62 Picciati graduated from Pisa and became a secondary school teacher in Padua in 1896. He taught at the

 University of Padua occasionally but never had a professorial position. His research interests in mathematical

 physics were broad, though he is best known for a 1907 paper on the application of integral equations to the
 descent of a sphere in viscous fluid. Boggio supplied a simplification of the proof of the main result soon
 after (Picciati 1907; Boggio 1907c)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 585

 satisfying Laplace's equation), employing the cyelides of Darboux as a device to unify

 various kinds of special functions which are employed depending on the geometry of

 the problem. He was unable to solve the problem of convergence of these expansions,

 which remained open for many years, and his interest in integral equations may have

 arisen partly from the fact the Hilbert's methods offered the possibility of progress in
 that direction.63

 Bêcher completed his Introduction to the Study of Integral Equations in November

 of 1908. It appeared in the series Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical

 Physics edited by G. H. Hardy and E. Cunningham and had a second edition in 1914.

 This seventy-page account pushes the subject back to Fourier, following Hermann

 Weyl in considering Fourier an unconscious user of integral equations. Bêcher looks at

 the historical roots of integral functional equations in the work of Abel and Dirichlet,

 and his account devotes quite a bit of attention to historical developments. Bêcher

 argues that the prospective importance of the theory was already noted by Du Bois

 Reymond (1888) or even earlier by Rouché ( 1860). As for what the importance consists
 of, Bêcher is clear:

 ...like so many other branches of analysis the theory was called into being by

 specific problems in mechanics and mathematical physics. This was true not

 merely in the early days of Abel and Liouville, but also more recently in the

 cases of Volterra and Fredholm. Such applications of the theory, together with

 its relations to other branches of analysis, are what give the subject its great
 importance (Bêcher 1909,2).

 He is not specific about the issue of "relations to other branches of analysis," stating
 in a footnote: "cf., for instance, much of Hilbert's work.".

 The book is a very thorough elementary presentation, starting with work by Abel

 and Liouville, continuing with Volterra and Fredholm, and the work of Hilbert and

 Schmidt on equations with symmetric kernel. Particular attention is paid to giving a
 rigorous account of Fredholm's work. There is nothing original as far as the results

 are concerned, and most of the description is based on the work of others, notably

 Fredholm, Hilbert, and Volterra. No account is given at all of the application to bound

 ary value problems, though there is some mention of the relationship to series expan

 sions, notably the 1907 work of Kneser (1907).

 Despite the importance of applications, he expressly excludes them from his

 account, which means that this book would seem to have had at most an indirect

 effect on research in partial differential equations. Though it is useful as an introduc

 tion to the subject in English, it appeared a bit prematurely given the rapid development

 of the theory.

 Bêcher was not the only writer in the American world to take an interest in the

 field. Wally Hurwitz had done a thesis in a related area with Hilbert at the University

 of Gôttingen and then took a position at the University of Cornell in 1910. It was

 through the intermediary of Wally Hurwitz that Hu Mingfu, a Chinese student, had

 come to the U. S. sponsored by the Boxer reparation monies. Hu studied at Cornell

 63 At any rate, Osgood, in an obituary of Bôcher, mentions the feet that Hilbeit's work is relevant here
 (Osgood 1919,238).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 586 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 University from 1910 to 1914 and then went to Harvard, where he completed a PhD in
 1917 under Bôcher. Hu was thus the first Chinese student to obtain a western PhD, The

 thesis, Linear Integro-Differential Equations with a Boundary Condition appeared in

 the Transactions of American Mathematical Society, v. 24.

 5.3.2 Lalesco and Heywood & Fréchet

 Probably more mainstream was the various textbook treatments in France. Tra
 jan Lalesco was a student of Picard, completing a doctoral thesis in Paris on
 integral equations of the first kind in 1908.64 The aim of Lalesco's book (Lale
 sco 1912) is to give an account of the theory (and not the applications) to
 that date. Accordingly, he treats the Volterra and Fredholm equations, discusses
 the work of Hilbert on symmetric kernels and Schmidt's extension of that the

 ory. The corresponding eigenfunction expansions are treated in some detail. The
 concluding portion of the book gives a preliminary discussion of singular inte
 gral equations, following the work of Hermann Weyl; however, it is not a com

 plete account of that theory. Lalesco likewise treats recent work of Volterra con
 cerning adjoint pairs of integral equations (fonctions permutables in Volterra's

 terminology).

 In contrast, the book by Heywood and Fréchet restricts itself to the Fredholm equa

 tion and specifically aims at giving an account of applications to mathematical physics.

 This book comes from the orbit of Hadamard and Picard. Fréchet was very much a

 protégé of Hadamard, Maz'ya and Shaposhnikova (1998). Horace Bryon Heywood
 had completed a doctoral thesis on the Fredholm equation and its applications in 1908
 (Heywood 1908). The theory presented in this book is fully attached to the appli
 cations. In fact, the first chapter sets up a considerable number of boundary value

 problems as integral equations, beginning with an introduction to potential theory and

 the idea of a Green's function. Once the appropriate methods are developed, the final

 chapter of the book concerns the solution of these problems. The procedure is done

 in a very step-by-step fashion and indicates the author's faith in the notion that the

 Fredholm approach is one which will be generally used by anyone interested in the

 solution of such equations, notably physicists.

 6 Concluding remarks

 The distinct approaches belonging to different national "schools" were becoming

 merged in the textbook tradition by 1914, and as we observed French and Italian

 writers were beginning to be more cognizant of Hilbert's methods and approaches by

 that time. The story was then complicated by the advent of World War I.

 The picture we are left with is one in which the abstract and theoretical approach led

 by the Hilbert school had a limited reception outside Germany in the context of work on

 integral equations. While Lauricella, and to some degree Ε. E. Levi, found it possible

 64 His name is more properly taken as Traian Lalescu, as it is written in Rumanian. The French spelling

 was used in most of the early literature, however.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 587

 to assimilate this point of view, they seem to have been substantially alone (outside

 the Hilbert sphere) in their success at grasping the potential of the new framework.

 The strong Italian tradition of applied work, particularly in elasticity but also in fluid

 dynamics, was able to make good use of these tools and appears to have continued

 to build on this tradition after the war, Tricomi being a notable (if late) example.

 Further research in this direction could be interesting in illuminating this national
 context.

 The French case is to some degree intermediate between the two positions, in
 part perhaps because the two leading researchers, Picard and Hadamard, took rather

 different approaches to the interest of integral equations. While the subject was seen

 as important, there is no "majority" view, a situation indicated by the varying textbook

 treatments of Lalesco, Hey wood & Fréchet, Goursat, D'Adhémar, and so on.

 Volterra himself was later to claim that he had had a very general view of integral

 equations from early on, and the coincidence in time of his lectures on functions of

 lines and those on integral equations is only one indicator of their association in his

 mind. Writing in 1936, on the occasion of a new edition of his 1909 lectures, Volterra

 noted (Volterra and Përès 1936, vii):

 the concept of treating integral and integro-differential equations as chapters in

 the theory of functionals was already taken up in my Leçons of 1913. The devel

 opment of these theories has revealed ever-tighter links between the different
 branches ...65

 However, the differing views of the disciplinary status of this field has not been

 our main subject. Rather it is the explosive reception of a relatively simple insight
 in a variety of milieux that drew our attention to this work, and that, as Hadamard

 noted in the passage we cited at the beginning, is such a rare fate for a mathematical

 discovery.

 Appendix: excerpt from Boggio's submission to the competition for the Prix
 Vaillant

 Boggio's memoir has never been published, not in Acta Mathematica, to which it was

 submitted, or anywhere else. However, a copy of Boggio's work is contained at the
 Archives of the Academy of Sciences in Paris (Dossier "Prix Vaillant 1907"). In the

 same Dossier, all the memoirs of the candidates to the Prize can be found. Apart from

 Boggio they are (the names in brackets refer to the "rapporteurs" assigned): P. Debye

 of Monaco (Humbert), Boris Coialowitsch of St. Petersburg (Jordan), Henri Willotte

 from Quimper (Maurice Levy), John Dougall from Scotland (Darboux), Frederich

 Hollister Sofford of the USA (Darboux), Walter Ritz (Appell), Jow Simic (Darboux

 and Appell), Giuseppe Lauricella (Picard, Poincaré), Arthur Korn (Appell), Hadamard

 (Painlevé), Stanislaw Zaremba (Poincaré, Maurice Levy).

 65 le concept de traiter les équations intégrales et intégro-différentielles comme des chapitres de la Théorie
 des fonctionelles était déjà amorcé dans mes Leçons de 1913. Le développement de ces théories a révélé
 des rapports toujours plus étroits entre leurs diverses branches ...

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Boggio's memoir is entitled: Mémoire sur l'intégration de l'équation Aim = 0 and

 we present in what follows the introduction to the paper.

 588 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Introduction

 Le problème posé par l'Académie, consistant dans la détermination du déplacement

 transversal des points d'une plaque élastique plane, encastré au bord, soumise à des

 forces quelconques, est un des problèmes les plus intéressants de la théorie mathéma

 tique de l'Elasticité. Analytiquement il revient à déterminer la fonction w, régulière

 dans une aire donnée, qui satisfait aux points de cette aire, à l'équation indéfinie:

 [f(x, y) étant une fonction donnée] et qui s'annule sur le bord, ainsi que sa dérivée

 relative à la normale intérieure, c'est-à-dire:

 d4u; d4w d 4w
 d^+ fcW+d^~nx,y) ()

 u = 0, — = 0 (2)

 „ d"

 dn

 Un cas particulier de ce problème est celui où la plaque, supposée horizontale, est

 tirée par un seul poids, suspendu à un point quelconque de la plaque. Ce problème

 est très intéressant aussi pour les applications; cette importance a été reconnue déjà

 depuis longtemps : par ex. dans l'ouvrage classique Théorie de l'élasticité des corps
 solides66 (traduct. française) Clebsch, après avoir résolu le problème pour une plaque

 circulaire, écrit (p. 777): c'est un problème sur l'importance duquel, au point de vue

 des applications, il convient d'appeler l'attention des géomètres-physiciens, ainsi que

 sur la méthode au moyen de laquelle on réussira peut-être à trouver la solution pour

 d'autres formes que la circulaire.

 employée pour le résoudre.

 Donc non seulement est importante la résolution du problème, mais aussi la méthode

 Pour traiter ce problème, pour le cas d'une aire circulaire, Clebsch emploie des

 développements en série, et ses calculs résultent bien compliqués ; il écrie en effet

 (p. 777): c'est à des formules d'une telle complication que conduit un problème dont

 l'analogue, pour les tiges minces, passe à juste titre pour un des plus élémentaires. Et

 même on n'est arrivé à ces formules qu'en supposant la plaque circulaire.

 Au point de vue analytique ce problème, comme je le démontre au n. 5, se réduit

 à la détermination d'une particulière fonction, que l'on appelle deuxième fonction de

 Green, et qui pour une aire circulaire se détermine immédiatement sans recourir aux

 séries. Le problème général de l'intégration des équations (1), (2) peut toujours être
 nommé à la recherche de la deuxième fonction de Green, par conséquent lorsqu'on

 connaît cette fonction particulière, le problème en question peut être regardé comme
 résolu.

 66 Dans cet ouvrage on trouvera d'intéressants renseignéments historiques, de M. de Saint-Venant, sur

 l'équation (1), qui a été rencontrée, le premier, par Lagrange.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 L'intégration des équations (3'), (4) est un cas particulier de Γ intégration des équations:

 Integral equations between theory and practice 589

 Comme on reconnaît immédiatement, l'intégration des équations (1), (2) peut aussi

 être ramenée à l'intégration des équations:

 (dans l'aire donnée)

 d4m „ d4u d4u
 ϊ?+2ϊλ7 + 37 = 0 (3)

 du

 ιι = φ, — = ψ (4)

 (sur le bord)

 Si l'on pose, pour abréger:

 où φ, ψ désignent des fonctions données sur le bord de l'aire considérée.

 d2 d2
 2 àx2 d y2

 on peut écrire l'équation (3) aussi ainsi Ai(Aiu) = 0, ou bien:

 GM) = 0 (3')

 A%m = 0 (5)

 d'u
 —τ = φ (sur le bord) (i = 0, 1,...)
 dx'

 où φι est une fonction donnée sur le bord.

 L'intégration des équations (3'), (4) peut aussi être regardée comme un cas partic

 ulier de l'intégration des équations:

 Λ rr , d (dU àU\

 ^ + 's(d7+d7)=0 <6)

 (dans l'aire donnée)

 d (dV dV\

 w+ts:(ï+i)·0

 U = φ,ν = ψ (sur le bord),

 où k est une constante, et φ, ψ sont des fonctions données sur le bord.

 Dans mon Mémoire j'étudie précisément l'intégration des systèmes (5) et (6). Voici

 rapidement le contenu des différents Chapitres.

 Chap. I J'établie que la fonction u, qui vérifie les équations (5), est unique, et

 ensuite je démontre deux formules, qui sont pour l'opération Aim, les analogues de
 celles de Green pour l'opération Ai. Je définie en outre les fonctions Gm de Green

 de l'ordre m, en montrant aussi que l'intégrale des équations (5) est comme si l'on

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 590 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 connaît la fonction Gm. Des formules établies j'en fais une intéressante application

 en démontrant le théorème de réciprocité pour les fonctions Gm, théorème analogue

 à celui que Riemann a démontré pour l'ordinaire fonction de Green. Je termine en

 montrant l'application de la deuxième fonction de Green à la résolution du problème

 sur les plaques, représenté par l'intégration des équations (1), (2), et au cas particulier

 de la plaquer tirée par un seul poids ; de la formule que je trouve pour ce cas (et qui

 constitue la véritable interprétation physique de la deuxième fonction de Green) j'en

 fais plusieurs applications: entre autres j'en déduis une interprétation physique de mon

 théorème de réciprocité.

 Chap. //Je démontre plusieurs théorème qui donnent la représentation d'une fonc

 tion polyharmonique (c'est-à-dire qui vérifie l'équation Aim = 0) au moyen de fonc

 tions harmoniques. Ces théorèmes sont déjà connus, mais je les démontre ici avec

 des hypothèses moins restrictives par rapport à l'aire à laquelle ils se rapportent.

 Je démontre ensuite des théorèmes sur l'intégrale générale d'une équation linéaire,

 à coefficients constants, dont le premier nombre est le produit de plusieurs expres

 sions différentielles ; les théorèmes descendent facilement d'un autre théorème qui

 donne la condition nécessaire et suffisante parce que deux équations différentielles

 linéaires, à coefficients constants, dont une seule est homogène, aient des intégrales

 communes.

 Chap. Ill Je cherche l'intégrale de l'équation AimU = F(x, y), [FOc, y) étant

 une fonction donnée, que l'on suppose polyharmonique], qui est régulière dans ne

 aire circulaire, et qui s'annule sur le bord ainsi que ses dérivés normales successives

 des m — 1 premiers ordres; la fonction cherchée est exprimée au moyen d'intégrales

 simples (quadratures).

 Je détermine ensuite l'intégrale des équations (1), (2), pour une aire elliptique, et

 sous l'hypothèse que la fonction donnée / soit un polynôme du degré n; je démontre

 alors que la fonction cherchée u sera aussi un polynôme du degré n, dont les coefficients

 se calculent facilement. Ce résultat, que j'étends aussi au cas de l'équation 4 2m" = /,
 je l'établis à l'aide d'un lemme général qui peut appliqué à plusieurs questions de
 Physique-mathématique. Je cherche enfin (toujours pour une ellipse) les intégrales des

 équations (6) qui sur le bord coïncident avec deux polynômes donnés : ces intégrales

 sont aussi des polynômes.

 Chap. IV La recherche de la fonction de Green Gm de l'ordre m, pour une aire

 circulaire est l'objet de ce chapitre. Je détermine d'abord la fonction préliminaire de

 Green de l'ordre m par un procédé très simple, au moyen de calculs algébriques et

 de dérivations ; et ensuite il en résulte l'expression de la fonction cherché Gm. Cette

 expression peut s'écrire sous la forme d'une intégrale définie, très simple, de laquelle

 on déduit que la fonction Gm a un signe constant dans le cercle; la formule établie
 s'étend immédiatement au cas d'un nombre quelconque de variables, et montre que,

 dans ce cas aussi, la fonction Gm a un signe constant; en outre elle permet de démontrer

 pour la fonction Gm un théorème analogue à un théorème donné par M. Poincaré pour
 l'ordinaire fonction de Green.

 Je termine en donnant des limites supérieures pour les dérivées successives de la

 fonction Gm; ces inégalités seront très utiles pour l'application de la méthode des

 approximations successives de M. Picard à l'équation Aimu = /(m).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 591

 Chap. VII est facile de trouver, pour une aire circulaire, Γ intégrale des équations (5);

 il suffit en effet de considérer la fonction Gm déterminée au Chap. IV et d'appliquer

 une formule établie au Chap. I. On peut aussi déterminer l'intégrale des équations (5)

 par une méthode directe et très simple, indiquée par MM. Almansi et Volterra.

 Ensuite je cherche l'intégrale des équations (3), (4) pour une couronne circulaire,

 en appliquant la méthode de Venske, complétée par M. Almansi; mais tandis que M.

 Almansi doit faire des calcules pénibles pour prouver la compatibilité des équations

 que l'on trouve entre les coefficients à déterminer, j'applique un lemme établi au

 Chap. IV duquel il résulte immédiatement, sans aucun calcul, la compatibilité de ces

 équations.

 Chap. VI Je démontre un théorème intéressant établi par MM. Levi-Civita et
 Volterra, et ensuite un théorème que l'on peut regarder comme le réciproque de celui

 de M. Volterra, et une généralisation d'un théorème bien connu, de M. Painlevé, sur

 les fonctions harmoniques.

 Chap. VIIL'intégration des équations (3), (4) pour une aire elliptique a été abordée

 par M. Mathieu, mais ses calculs sont très compliqués et ne sont pas complets. Je donne,

 au contraire, une méthode bien simple par résoudre ce problème, et je démontre deux

 théorèmes analogues à des théorèmes bien connus sur les séries de puissances, qui

 permettent d'établir la convergence des séries employées.

 Je donne ensuite une méthode très simple pour intégrer les équations (3), (4), ou

 bien (5), dans l'aire extérieure à une ellipse donnée ; la solution que je trouve pour ce

 cas est composée seulement par des intégrales définies.

 Chap. VIII J'intègre les équations (6) pour les aires dont on peut faire la représen

 tation conforme sur un cercle par des polynômes, ou plus en général par des fonctions

 rationnelles. Au premier groupe d'aires appartiennent les épicycloïdes qui ont des
 points d'inflexion comme points singuliers. La solution dans les deux cas est com

 posée seulement par des intégrales définies.

 Comme application je traite le cas du limaçon de Pascal qui ne passe pas par son pole.

 Chap. IX Par un simple procédé d'intégration je réduis le problème de l'intégration

 des équation (6), pour une aire quelconque, représentable sur un cercle d'une manière

 conforme, à la résolution d'un système d'infinies équations linéaires avec infinies

 inconnues. Je résoudre ce système par la méthode des approximations successives,

 qui est plus simple que celle employée, pour un système analogue, par M. Levi-Civita.

 Chap. X J'applique la méthode des approximations successives de M. Picard, pour

 résoudre le problème généralisé de Dirichlet pour de certains types d'équations aux
 dérivées partielles de l'ordre 2m. Je considère d'abord le cas d'une aire circulaire

 et ensuite le cas d'une aire quelconque simplement connexe. Si l'aire donnée est

 suffisamment petite la méthode des approximations successives donne toujours la

 solution du problème donné, aussi dans le cas des équations linéaires que dans le cas

 des équations non linéaires. J'étends en outre ces résultats au cas d'un systèmes de
 deux équations linéaires de l'ordre 2m.

 Chap. XI Je démontre un théorème qui ramène l'intégration des équations de la

 déformation des plaques élastiques cylindriques à l'intégration des équations (3), (4).
 Des formules que j'établis pour ce cas on déduit d'intéressants propriétés : entre
 autres celle que les intégrales des équations de la déformation des plaques élastiques

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 592 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 cylindriques sont des fonctions régulières de deux certains paramètres. M. Lauricella

 a ensuite remarqué qu'il subsiste le théorème réciproque de mon théorème.

 Chap. XII Je fais une remarquable application des théorèmes établis au Chapitre

 précédent, à l'intégration des équations (3), (4) pour une plaque rectangulaire ; ces

 théorèmes en effet permettent de ramener l'intégration de ces équation à un problème

 qui a été résolu par Mathieu. J'expose la solution de Mathieu en la simplifiant un peu,

 notamment pour ce qui est relatif à la résolution d'un système d'infinies équations

 linéaires avec infinies inconnues, que je traite par la méthode des approximations
 successives.

 Chap. XIII J'expose dans ce dernier Chapitre quelques applications des équations

 intégrales à la Physique mathématique, notamment aux questions qui ont des relations

 avec le problème posé par l'Académie.

 Après avoir simplifié la démonstration de M. Hilbert, je réduis le problème général

 de la détermination de la déformation d'un corps élastique isotrope, quand on connaît
 la déformation de sa surface, à la résolution d'une équation intégrale du type de

 Fredholm. Je démontre que cette équation a une solution et une seule pourvu qu'un

 certain paramètre soit I > — 1.

 Dans le cas de deux variables, cette méthode donne l'intégrale des équations (6) et

 par conséquent, comme cas particulier, la résolution du problème posé par l'Académie.

 J'étudie ensuite la détermination de la déformation d'un corps élastique, isotrope,

 quand on connaît les tensions appliquées à sa surface; dans le cas de deux variables

 cette méthode donne une nouvelle solution du problème posé par l'Académie. De ce

 problème j'en donne aussi d'autres solutions, valides pour un nombre quelconque de
 variables.

 Enfin j'étudie, par les équations intégrales, l'intégration de certaines équations, aux

 dérivées partielles, de l'ordre 2m, et j'en trouve la solution pour une aire quelconque,

 simplement connexe. En terminant je traite l'existence des solutions singulières pour

 de certaines équations de l'ordre 2m, qui sont une généralisation des équations des

 membranes et plaques vibrantes.

 References

 Torino 31: 881-888.

 103-125.

 appl.s.III 2:1-51.

 Almansi, Emilio. 1896. Sulla integrazione dell'equazione differenziale A2 A2 = 0. Atti R. Acc. Scienze di

 Almansi, Emilio. 1897. Sulla deformazione della sfera elastica. Memorie R. Acc. Scienze di Torino s. II47:

 Almansi, Emilio. 1899a. Sull'integrazione dell'equazione differenziale A2" = 0. Ann. matem. pura ed

 Atti del IV Congresso Internazionale dei Matematici. Roma, Accademia dei Lincei. 3 v. 1909.
 Bernstein, Sergej. 1904. Sur la nature analytique des solutions des équations aux dérivées partielles du

 second ordre. Math. Annalen 59: 20-76.

 Betti, Enrico. 1872-73. Teoria délia elasticità. Pisa: Tip. Pieraccini, 1874; Nuovo Cimento s. II, vol. 7-10.

 Reprinted in (Capecchi, Ruta and Tazzioli 2006).

 Bôcher, Maxim. 1909. An introduction to the theory of integral equations. Cambridge: Cambridge University

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1900a. SuH'equilibrio delle membrane elastiche piane. Nota I. Atti Acc. Scienze di
 Torino 35: 219-239; Nota II, Ibid., 239 (1901a); see also Nuovo Cimento s. IV, vol. 12,1900,170-190;
 s. V, vol. 1,1901,161-178.

 Press.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1900b. Sull'equilibrio delle membrane elastiche plane. Atti Acc. Scienze Torino 35:

 Integral equations between theory and practice 593

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1900c. Un teorema di reciprocità sulle funzioni di Green d'ordine qualunque. Atti Acc.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1900d. Integrazione dell'equazione in una corona circolare e in uno strato sferico. Atti

 1st. Veneto di Scienze, Lettere edArti 59(11): 497-508.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1901a. Integrazione dell'equazione in un'areaellittica. Atti 1st. Veneto di Scienze, Lettere

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1901b. SuU'equilibrio delle piastre elastiche incastrate. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V

 219-239.

 Scienze di Torino 35: 498-509.

 edArti 60(11): 591-609.

 10(1): 197-205.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1904. Sulla deformazione delle piastre elastiche cilindriche di grossezza qualunque.

 Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 13(11): 419-427.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1906. Risoluzione del problema dei valori al contomo per alcuni casi di equazioni allé

 derivate parziale. Rend. CircoloMat. Palermo 21: 283-306.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1907a. Nuova risoluzione di un problema fondamentale della teoria dell'elasticity Rend.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1907b. Sull'equazione del moto vibratorio delle membrane elastiche. Rend. R. Acc. dei

 R. Acc. dei Lincei 16(11): 248-255.

 Lincei (5) 16(11): 386-393.

 Boggio, Tommaso. 1907c. Integrazione dell'equazione funzionali che reggie la caduta di una sfera in un

 liquido viscoso. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei (5) 16(11): 613-620,730-737.

 Boltzmann, Ludwig. 1874. Theorie der elastischen Nachwirkung. Ber. Κ. K. Akad. Wien 70: 275-306.

 Boltzmann, Ludwig. 1876. Zur Theorie der elastischen Nachwirkung. Pogg Ann. Erg. 7: 624.
 Bottazzini, Umberto. 1986. The higher calculus. A history of real and complex analysis from Euler to

 Weierstrass. New York: Springer.

 Brezis, Chaim and F. Browder. 1998. Partial differential equations in the 20th century. Advances in Math

 Capecchi, Danilo, Ruta Giuseppe, and Rossana Tazzioli. 2006. Enrico Betti. Teoria della Elasticità.

 ematics 135: 76-144.

 Benevento: Hevelius.

 Charpentier', Ε., É. Ghys, and A. Lesne. 2010. Eheritage scientifique de Poincaré. Paris: Belin . English

 translation The Scientific Legacy of Poincaré. Providence: AMS.

 Cerruti, Valentino. 1882. Ricerche intorno all'equilibrio dei corpi elastici isotropi. Memorie R. Acc. dei

 Lincei s. Ill 13: 81-123.

 d'Adhémar, Robert. 1908. Sur les équations intégrales de M. Volterra. In (Atti Roma 1909), II, 115-121.

 Dieudonné, Jean. 1981. History of functional analysis. Amsterdam: North Holland.

 Du Bois-Reymond, Paul. 1888. Bemerkungen iiber Az = 0. Jour, f tir Math. 103: 204-229.
 Fischer, Ernst. 1907. Sur la convergence en moyenne. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences 144:

 1022-1024.

 Forsyth, A.R. 1908. On the present condition of partial differential equations of the second order as regards

 formal integration. In (Atti Roma 1908) I, 87-103.

 Fredholm, Ivar. 1899. Sur une classe d'équations aux dérivées partielles. Comptes rendus de l'Académie

 Fredholm, Ivar. 1900. Sur une nouvelle méthode pour la résolution du problème de Dirichlet. Stockholm

 Fredholm, Ivar. 1902. Sur une classe de transformations rationnelles. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des

 Fredholm, Ivar. 1903. Sur une classe d'équations fonctionelles. Acra Math. 27: 365-390.

 Fredholm, Ivar. 1905. Solution d'un prolblème fondamentale de la théorie de l'élasticité. ArkivforMat.fys,

 Fubini, Guido. 1905. Un'osservazione sulla teoria delle funzioni poliarmoniche. Rendiconti Istit. Lombarde

 Goursat, Édouard. 1907. Sur un cas élémentaire de l'équation de Fredholm. Bulletin de la Soc. math, de

 Goursat, Édouard. 1915. Traité d'analyse. 2nd edn., Paris. On Integral equations see v. 3, chaps 30-33,

 Gray, Jeremy. 2013. Henri Poincaré: A scientific biography. Princeton: Princeton University Press

 Groetsch, Charles W. 2003. The delayed emergence of regularization theory. Bollettino Storiadelle Scienze

 Matemetiche 23: 105-120.

 des Sciences 129: 32-34.

 Ôfver 57: 39^16.

 Sciences 134: 219-222.

 och ast. 2(28): 8

 38: 449-453.

 France 35:163-173.

 324-544.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 594 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1893. Sur le module maximum qui puisse atteindre un déterminant. Comptes rendus

 de l'Académie des Sciences 116: 1500-1501; in Oeuvres (vol. 4, Paris, CNRS, 1968) vol. 1,237-238.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1908. Sur certains cas intéressants du problème biharmonique. Atti del IV Congresso

 dei Matematici 2: 61-63. Roma: Accademia dei Lincei; in Oeuvres vol. 3, 643-645.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1909. Sur le problème d'analyse relatif à l'équilibre des plaques élastiques encastrées.

 Mémoires savants étrang. s. II 33(4); in Oeuvres vol. 2,515-629. Prix Vaillant.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1910. Sur les ondes liquides 1ère et Iléme notes. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des

 Sciences 150: 609-611,772-774; in Oeuvres vol. 3,1301-1303,1317-1320.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1928. Le développement et le rôle scientifique du calcul fonctionnel. Atti del Congresso
 Internazionale dei Matematici, Bologna, Zanichelli, Bologna 1929, vol. 1,143-161; In Oeuvres vol. 1,
 435-453.

 Happel, J., and H. Brenner. 1965. Low Reynolds number hydrodynamics. Englewood Cliffs NY: Prentica

 Hellinger, Ernst. 1935. Hilberts Arbeiten fiber Integralgleichungen und unendliche Gleichungssysteme. In

 (Hilbert Gesammelte Abhandlungen) vol. Ill, 95—145.

 Hellinger, Ernst and Otto Toeplitz. 1927. Integralgleichungen und Gleichungen mit unendlichviele unbekan

 nten. Enzyklopàdie der mathematischen Wissenschaften 11.3.2, section IIC. 13:1335-1597.

 Heywood, Horace B. 1908. Léquation de Fredholm et quelques-unes de ses applications. Thèse, Université

 Heywood, Horace B., and Maurice Fréchet. 1912. Léquation de Fredholm et ses application ά la physique

 mathématique. Préface de J. Hadamard. Paris, Hermann

 Hilbert, David. 1900. Sur le principe de Dirichlet. Trans. M. Laugel. Nouvelles Annales de Mathématiques

 Hilbert, David. 1904. Grundziige einer allgemeinen Théorie der linearen Integralgkleichung. Gott. Nachr.

 Hall.

 de Paris.

 s. III 19: 337-344.

 49-91: 213-259.

 1970.

 Hilbert, David. 1935. Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Berlin: Springer. Cited here from the Second edition,

 Korn, Arthur. 1899. Lehrbuch der Potentialtheorie, allgemeine Théorie des Potentials und der Potential

 funktionen im Raume. Berlin: F. Dfimmler.

 Kneser, Arthur. 1907. Die Theorie der Integralgleichungen und die Darstellung willkfirlicher Funktionen

 in der mathematischen Physik. Math. Annalen 63:477-524.

 Korn, Arthur. 1902. Ftinf Abhandlungen zur Potentialtheorie. Berlin: F. Dfimmler.
 Korn, Arthur. 1907. Sur les équations de l'élasticité. Ann. Sci. Ecole Normale Sup. s. III24: 9-75.
 Lalesco, Trajan. 1912. Introduction à la théorie des équations intégrales. Préface de E. Picard. Paris,

 Hermann.

 1-119.

 Langlois, W.E. 1964. Slow viscous flow. New York: Macmillan.
 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1895. Equilibrio dei corpi elastici isotropi. Annali R. Scuola Norm. Sup. di Pisa 7:

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1895-96. Integrazione dell'equazione in un campo di forma circolare. Atti Acc.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1896. Sull'equazione delle vibrazioni delle placche elastiche incastrate. Memorie

 Scienze Torino 31: 1010-1018.

 Acc. Scienze Torino s. II46: 65-92.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1898. Integrazione délia doppiaequazione di Laplace in un campo a forma di corona

 circolare. Atti 1st. Veneto di Scienze, Lettere edArti 57: 236-250.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1901a. Sulle funzioni biarmoniche. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 10:147-150.
 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1901b. Sulla deformazione di una sfera elastica isotropa per dati spostamenti in

 superficie. Ann. matem. pura ed appl. s. III6: 289-299.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1903. Sulla deformazione di una sfera elastica isotropa per date tensioni in superficie.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1904. Sulle formole che danno la deformazione di una sfera elastica isotropo. Rend.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1905. Sull'integrazione delle equazioni deU'equilibrio dei corpi elastici isotropi. Ann.

 Nuovo Cimento s. V 5: 5-26.

 R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 13(11): 583-590.

 matem. pura ed appl. s. III 11: 269-283.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1907. Alcune applicazioni délia teoria delle equazioni funzionali alla fisica matem

 atica. Nuovo Cimento s. V 13: 104-118,155-174,237-262,501-518.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1908a. Sulla vibrazione delle placche elastiche incastrate. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s.

 V 17(11): 193-204.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 595

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1908b. Sopraalcuneequazioni integrali. Rend. R. Acc. deiUnceis. V 17(1): 775-786.
 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1908c. Applicazione della teoria di Fredholm al problema del rafîreddamento dei

 corpi. Ann. matem. pura ed appl. s. Ill 14: 143-169.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1908d. Sull'equazione Δ2' V = 0 e su alcune estensioni delle equazioni

 dell'equilibrio dei corpi elastici isotropi. In (Atti Roma 1908d) vol. Ill, 33-59.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1909a. Sur l'intégration de l'équation relative à l'équilibre des plaques élastiques

 encastrées. Acta Mathematica 32: 201-256.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1909b. Sull'equazione intégrale di prima specie. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 18(11):

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1911. Sulla risoluzione dell'equazione intégrale di prima specie. Rend. R. Acc. dei

 71-75.

 Lincei s. V 20:528-536.

 Villars.

 249-252.

 Springer.

 Gôttingen.

 Lauricella, Giuseppe. 1912. Sulla chiusura di sistemi di funzioni ortogonali e dei nuclei delle funzioni

 integrali. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 21(1): 675-685.

 Lebesgue, Henri. 1904. Leçons sur l'intégration et la recherche de fonctions primitives. Paris: Gauthier

 Le Roux, Jean Marie. 1895. Sur les intégrales des équations linéaires. Ann. Sci. ENS s. III12: 227-316.

 Le Roux, Jean Marie. 1903. Recherches sur les équations aux dérivées partielles. Journal de mathématiques

 pures et appliquées S. V. 9:403-455.

 Levi, Eugenio Elia. 1906. Su un lemma del Poincaré. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 14: 83-89, 353-358.
 Levi, Eugenio Elia. 1907. Sulle equazioni integrali. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 16(11): 604-6012.
 Levi, Eugenio Elia. 1908. Sur l'application des équations intégrales au problème de Riemann. Gott. Nachr.,

 Levi-Civita, Tullio. 1954-1973. Opere Matematiche vol. 6. Zanichelli: Bologna.
 Levi-Civita, Tullio. 1895-96. Sull'inversione degli integrali definiti nel campo reale. Atti Acc. Scienze di

 Torino 31: 25-51; In (Levi-Civita 1954-1973) vol. 1,159-184.

 Levi-Civita, Tullio. 1897-98. Sopra una trasformazione in se stessa dell'equazione Δ2Δ2 = 0. Atti 1st.

 Venetodi Scienze, Lettere edArti 56: 1399-1410; In (Levi-Civita 1954-1973) vol. 1, 357-367.

 Levi-Civita, Tullio. 1898. Sulla integrazione dell'equazione Δ2Δ2 = 0. Atti Acc. Scienze di Torino 33:

 932-956; In (Levi-Civita 1954-1973) vol. 1, 331-355.

 Liapunov, Alexander Mikhaylovich. 1898. Sur certaines questions qui se rattachent au problème de Dirichlet.

 Journ. de math, pures et appl. s. V 4: 241-311.

 Liitzen, Jesper. 1990. Joseph Liouville 1809-1882: Master of pure and applied mathematics. New York:

 Marcolongo, Roberto. 1903. Teoria matematica della elasticità: lezioni dettate nella R. Università di

 Marcolongo, Roberto. 1907. La teoria delle equazioni integrali e le sue applicazioni alla Rsica matematica.

 Messina, anno scolastico 1902-1903. Messina.

 Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 6(1): 742-749.

 Mason, Charles Max. 1903. Randwertaufgaben bei gewdhnlichen Differentialgleichungen. Ph. D. thesis,

 Mathieu, Emile. 1869. Mémoire sur les équations aux différences partielles du quatrième ordre A Au = 0
 et sur l'équilibre d'élasticité d'un corps solide. Joum. Math, pures et appliquées, s. II 14: 378-421.
 Mawhin, Jean. 2006/2010. Henri Poincaré and the partial differential equations of mathematical physics.

 Mazliak, Laurent, and Rossana Tazzioli. 2009. Mathematicians at war: Volterra and his French colleagues

 In Charpentier, Ghys, and Lesne, 257-278.

 in World War I. New York: Springer.

 Providence: American Mathematical Society.

 Mechanics Reviews 56: 33-85.

 Maz'ya, Vladimir, and Tatyana Shaposhnikova. 1998. Jacques Hadamard, a universal mathematician.

 Meleshko, V.V. 2003. Selected Topics in the history of the two-dimensional biharmonic problem. Applied

 Monna, A.F. 1975. Dirichlet's principle: A mathematical comedy of errors. Oosthoek, Scheltena & Hoel

 tema.

 Birkhauser.

 Nabonnand, Philippe (ed.). 1999. La correspondance entre Henri Poincaré et Gôsta Mittag-Leffler. Basel:

 Nastasi, Pietro, and Rossana Tazzioli. 2004. Sulla determinazione della m.ma funzione di Green e question!

 connesse. Rend. Cire. Matem. Palermo Suppl. s. 1174: 71-101.

 Nastasi, Pietro, and Rossana Tazzioli. 2006. Problems of method in Levi-Civita's contributions to hydro

 dynamics. Revue d'histoire des mathématiques 12: 81-118.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orlando, Luciano. 1906. Sull'integrazione della Δ4 in un parallelepipedo rettangolo. Rend. Circolo Matem.

 596 T. Archibald, R. Tazzioli

 Orlando, Luciano. 1908. Sulla risoluzione delle equazioni integrali. In (Atti Roma 1908) II, 1908,122-128.
 Osgood, William Fogg. 1919. The life and services of Maxime Bôcher. Bulletin of the American Mathe

 Palermo 21:316-344.

 matical Society 25: 337-350.

 Painlevé, Paul. 1909. Mécanique: Le genèse de la mécanique et ses influences sur les autres sciences. De

 la méthode dans les sciences, par MM. les professeurs Bouasse [et al]. Paris, F. Alcan, 363-409.

 Pedersen, Gert K. 1988. Analysis Now. New York: Springer.
 Picard, Émile. 1893. Traité d'Analyse, vol. 3. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Picard, Émile. 1904a. Sur certaines solutions doublement périodiques de quelques équations aux dérivées
 partielles. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences vol. 138, 181-183; in (Picard 1981) vol. 2,
 687-689.

 Picard, Émile. 1904b. Sur une équation fonctionelle. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences 139:

 245-248; in (Picard 1981) vol. 4, 313-316.

 Picard, Émile. 1906a. Sur quelques problèmes de Physique mathématique se rattachant à l'équation de M.
 Fredholm. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences 142:861-865; in (Picard 1981) vol. 4,317-321.
 Picard, Émile. 1906b. Sur quelques applications de l'équation fonctionelle de M. Fredholm. Rendiconti

 Circolo matem. Palermo 22: 1906, 241-259; in (Picard 1981), vol. 4, 323-341.

 Picard, Émile. 1907. La mécanique classique et ses approximations successives. Rivista di Scienza

 1(1): 14.

 Picard, Émile. 1908. La mathématique dans ses rapports avec la physique, in (Atti Roma 1908), 1,183-195.
 Picard, Émile. 1909a. Quelques remarques sur les équations intégrales de première espèce et sur certains
 problèmes de Physique mathématique. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences 148: 1909, 1563
 1568; in (Picard 1981 ) vol. 4, 379-384.

 Picard, Émile. 1909b. Sur les équations intégrales de première espèce. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des

 Sciences 148: 1707-1708; in (Picard 1981) vol. 4, 385-386.

 Picard, Émile. 1910. Sur un théoréme général relatif aux équations intégrales de première espèce et sur

 quelques problèmes de physique mathématique. Rendiconti Circolo Matem. Palermo 29: 79-97.

 Picard, Émile. 1981. Œuvres de Charles-Émile Picard, vol. 4. Paris: CNRS.

 Picciati, Giuseppe. 1907. Integrazione dell'equazione funzionali che reggie la caduta di una sfera in un

 liquido viscoso. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei (5) 16(11): 45-50.

 Plancherel, M. 1912. La théorie des équations intégrales. Enseignement mathématique 14: 89-107.
 Poincaré, Henri. 1913-1965. Œuvres, vol. 11. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1890. Sur les équations aux dérivées partielles de la physique mathématique. American

 Journal of Mathematics 1:211-294; in (Poincaré 1913-1965) vol. 9, 28-113.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1894. Sur les équations de la physique mathématique. Rendiconti Cire. Matem. Palermo

 8: 57-156; in (Poincaré 1913-1965) vol. 9, 123-196.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1897. La méthode de Neumann et le problème de Dirichlet. Acta Math 20: 59-142; in

 (Poincaré 1913-1965) vol. 9, 202-272.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1908a. Remarques sur l'équation de Fredholm. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences

 147: 1367-1371; In (Poincaré 1913-1965) vol. 3, 540-544.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1908b. Sur quelques applications de la méthode de Fredholm. Comptes rendus de

 l'Académie des Sciences 148: 125-126; In (Poincaré 1913-1965) vol. 3, 545-546.
 Poincaré, Henri. 1908c. Lavenir des mathématiques, in (Atti Roma 1908), vol. 1,167-182.

 Riesz, Friedrich. 1907. Ueber orthogonale Funktionsysteme, Gott. Nachr., 116-122.
 Rouché, Eugène. 1860. Sur le calcul inverse des intégrales définis. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des

 Schmidt, Erhard. 1905. Entwicklung willkurlicherFunktionen nach Systemen vorgeschriebener Funktionen.

 Schmidt, Erhard. 1907. Zur Théorie der linearen und nichtlinearen Integralgleichungen. Math. Annalen 63:

 Sciences 51: 126-128.

 Gottingen.

 433-476.

 Schwarz, Hermann Amandus. 1885. Ueber ein die Flâchen kleinsten Flàcheninhalts betreffendes Problem

 der Variationsrechnung. Acta Soc. Sci. Finn. 15: 315-362. In Festschrift zum siebzigsten Geburtstage

 der Herrn Karl Weierstrass. Helsingfors, Druck der Finnischen Literatur-Gesellschaft

 Sherman, D.l. 1940. On the solution of a plane static problem of the theory of elasticity under prescribed

 forces. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 28: 25-28.

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Integral equations between theory and practice 597

 Siegmund-Schultze, Reinhard. 1982. Die Anfange der Funktionalanalysis und ihr Platz im Umwâlzung

 sprozefi der Mathematik um 1900. Arch. Hist. Exact Sciences 26: 13-71.

 Siegmund-Schultze, Reinhard. 2003. The origins of functional analysis. In A history of analysis, ed. H.N.

 Jahnke, 385-407. Providence: American Mathematical Society.

 Smithies, Frank. 1965. Integral equations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Somigliana, Carlo. 1890. Sulle equazioni délia élasticité. Ann. matem. pura ed appl. s. II 17: 37-64.
 Somigliana, Carlo. 1894. Sopra gli integrali delle equazioni délia isotropia elastica. Nuovo Cimento s. Ill

 Stekloff, Vladimir. 1900. Mémoire sur les fonctions harmoniques de M. Poincaré. Toulouse Ann. s. II 2:

 36(29-39): 113-126.

 273-303.

 Stekloff, Vladimir. 1902. Sur les problèmes fondamentaux de la physique mathématique. Annales de l'Ec.

 Norm. Sup. s. Ill 19: 191-259,455-190.

 Stokes, George Gabriel. 1850. On the effect of the internal friction of fluids on the motion of pendulums.

 Transactions Cambridge Philosophical Society 9: 8-106.

 Tazzioli, Rossana. 1994. Π teorema di rappresentazione di Riemann: Critica e Interpretazione di Schwarz.

 Rend. Circolo Matem. Palermo Suppl. s. II 34: 95-132.

 Tazzioli, Rossana. 2001. Green's Function in some contributions of 19th century mathematicians. Historia

 Mathematica 28: 232-252.

 Parma.

 reprint by Dover, New York.

 Tedone, Orazio. 1907. Sui metodi della fisica matematica. Atti del Primo Congresso délia S.I.P.S., 33-47.

 Tricomi, Francesco. 1957. Integral equations. New York: Interscience. Page references here from the 1985

 Volterra, Vito. 1954-1960. Opere matematiche, vol. 4. Roma: Bardi.
 Volterra, Vito. 1884. Sopra un problema di elettrostatica. Nuovo Cimento s. Ill 16: 49-57; in (Volterra

 Volterra, Vito. 1895. Sopra un sistemadi equazioni differenziali. Atti R. Acc. Scienze di Torino 30:445-454;

 1954-1960) vol. 1, 188-195.

 in (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 2, 122-128.

 Volterra, Vito. 1896a. Sulla inversione degli integrali definiti. Atti R. Acc. Scienze di Torino 31: 311-323,

 400-408,557-567,693-708; in (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 2,216-254.

 Volterra, Vito. 1896b. Sulla inversione degli integrali definiti. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 5: 177-185; in

 Volterra, Vito. 1896c. Sulla inversione degli integrali multipli. Rend. R. Acc. dei Lincei s. V 6: 289-300; in

 (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 2,255-262.

 (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 2,263-275.

 Volterra, Vito. 1898. Sul fenomeno delle seiches. Conf. tenuta al Congr. della Soc. italiana di Fisica in
 Torino il 23 settembre 1892. Nuovo Cimento s. TV 8:270-272; in (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 2,370-372.
 Volterra, Vito. 1901-02. Sui tentativi di applicazione delle matematiche allé scienze biologiche e sociali.

 Ann. R. Univ. di Roma, 3-28; in (Volterra 1954-1960) vol. 3,14-29.

 Volterra, Vito. 1906. Leçons sur l'intégration des équations différentielles aux dérivées partielles; in (Volterra

 1954-1960) vol. 3,63-141; publ. also Paris, Hermann, 1912.

 Volterra, Vito. 1912. IIapplicazione del calcolo ai fenomeni di eredità, French version Revue du Mois, 556

 575 and Italian version in Saggi Scientifici, 1920, Bologna, Zanichelli, 189-218; in (Volterra 1954-1960)
 vol. 3,554-568.

 Volterra, Vito. 1913a. Leçons sur les équations intégrales et les équations intégro-différentielles. Paris:

 Gauthier-Villars.

 Volterra, Vito. 1913b. Leçons sur les fonctions de lignes. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Volterra, Vito, and Joseph Pérès. 1936. Théorie générale des fonctionelles. Paris: Gauthier-Villart.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1908. Singulàre Integralgleichungen mit besonderer Berucksichtigung des Fourierschen

 Weyl, Hermann. 1909. Ueber die Konvergenz von Reihen, die nach Orthogonalfunktionen foitschreiten.

 Zaremba, Stanislaw. 1901. Ueber die Laplacesche Gleichung und die Methoden von Neumann und Robin.

 lntegraltheorems. Gôttingen.

 Math. Annalen 67: 225-245.

 Krak. Anz, 171-189.

 8:59-117.

 Zaremba, Stanislaw. 1902. Sur l'intégration de l'équation Au + « = 0. Journ. de Math, pures et appl. s. V

 Zaremba, Stanislaw. 1905. Solution générale du problème de Fourier. Krak. Anz, 69-168.
 Zeilon, Nils. 1930. Biographie de Ivar Fredholm. Acta Mathematica 54:1-XVI.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:54:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

