 

 

 

 

Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor and subsequent development:

the resilience of an inconsistent theory
Author(s): Jed Z. Buchwald and  Chen-Pang Yeang
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 5 (September 2016), pp. 463-511
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913250
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:56 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913250?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2016) 70:463-511 /fi\ CrossMarl(
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-016-0176-1 VQ/

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its
 predecessor and subsequent development: the resilience
 of an inconsistent theory

 Jed Ζ. Buchwald1 · Chen-Pang Yeang2

 Received: 13 January 2016 / Published online: 23 February 2016

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016

 Abstract Kirchhoff's 1882 theory of optical diffraction forms the centerpiece in

 the long-term development of wave optics, one that commenced in the 1820s when

 Fresnel produced an empirically successful theory based on a reinterpretation of Huy

 gens' principle, but without working from a wave equation. Then, in 1856, Stokes

 demonstrated that the principle was derivable from such an equation albeit without

 consideration of boundary conditions. Kirchhoff's work a quarter century later marked

 a crucial, and widely influential, point for he produced Fresnel's results by means of

 Green's theorem and function under specific boundary conditions. In the late 1880s,

 Poincaré uncovered an inconsistency between Kirchhoff's conditions and his solution,

 one that seemed to imply that waves should not exist at all. Researchers nevertheless

 continued to use Kirchhoff's theory—even though Rayleigh, and much later Sommer

 feld, developed a different and mathematically consistent formulation that, however,

 did not match experimental data better than Kirchhoff's theory. After all, Kirchhoff's

 formula worked quite well in a specific approximation regime. Finally, in 1964, Marc

 hand and Wolf employed the transformation of Kirchhoff's surface integral that had

 been developed by Maggi and Rubinowicz for other purposes. The result yielded

 a consistent boundary condition that, while introducing a species of discontinuity,

 nevertheless rescued the essential structure of Kirchhoff's original formulation from

 Poincaré's paradox.

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 S Jed Z. Buchwald

 buchwald@caltech.edu

 Chen-Pang Yeang

 chenpang.yeang@utoronto.ca

 1 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

 2 Institute for the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology, University of Toronto,

 Toronto, Canada

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 464

 Contents

 1 Introduction

 2 Fresnel applies Huygens' principle to diffraction
 3 Stokes' "Dynamical Theory of Diffraction" . . .

 4 Kirchhoff renovates Huygens' principle
 5 The Poincaré paradox

 6 The Rayleigh-Sommerfeld alternatives

 7 Kirchhoff's integral transformed

 8 A form of consistency achieved
 9 Conclusion

 References

 1 Introduction

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 464

 466

 469

 474

 485

 491

 497

 503

 506

 509

 On 22 June 1882, the University of Berlin's professor of theoretical physics, Gus

 tav Robert Kirchhoff (1824-1887), read an influential paper titled "Zur Theorie der

 Lichtstrahlen" ("On the theory of light rays") to a meeting of the Prussian Academy of

 Sciences in Berlin. The purpose of the paper was to deduce from the wave equation the

 expression governing the diffraction of light by an aperture on an otherwise opaque

 screen. To do so Kirchhoff assumed a particular set of boundary conditions: namely,

 that both the amplitude of the disturbance as well as its spatial gradient vanished on

 the screen, but that they remained unaltered over the aperture itself.1 He was in this

 way able to generate a solution for scalar diffraction that could yield the empirically

 successful (so far as was then known) expression that Augustin Fresnel (1788-1827)

 had produced six decades before using an altogether different line of argument (on

 which more below). Despite its frequent presence in physicists' and engineers' publi

 cations, Kirchhoff's theory of diffraction has not until recently attracted the attention

 of physics (or mathematics) historians for understandable reasons: historical focus has

 principally aimed at episodes in nineteenth century physics that brought either funda

 mental changes—e.g. the wave theory of light, electromagnetic field theory, kinetic

 theory and statistical mechanics—or influential technological breakthroughs—e.g.

 Hertz's production of electric waves and the subsequent invention of wireless telegra

 phy. Kirchhoff's theory fits neither criterion. It did not introduce any novel physical

 entities or mechanisms beyond what wave optics had stipulated; nor did it lead to

 technological innovation. It nicely fits, one might say, Thomas Kuhn's conception

 of "normal science," in which practitioners solve problems that arise within a given

 system without violating its fundamental boundaries.2

 Although Kirchhoff's theory did not have significant ontological or technological

 implications, it nonetheless raised important questions concerning the use of mathe

 matics in theoretical physics. What made the theory interesting in subsequent years

 1 Kirchhoff (1882), also printed as Kirchhoff (1883). In this article, we use an English translation by

 Hentschel and Zhu (forthcoming).

 2 Kuhn (1962), pp. 10-34.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 465

 is the mathematical inconsistency of the boundary conditions that were used. So far

 as was known at the time, however, his solution worked quite well empirically, and

 Kirchhoff himself never remarked the inconsistency. Decades after the French math
 ematician Henri Poincaré (1854-1912) published a deleterious consequence of the

 inconsistency in 1892,3 the theory nevertheless continued to appear in major textbooks

 and research periodicals in optics and electromagnetism. Physicists and engineers

 treated it not as an antiquated and inconsistent effort to derive empirically workable

 results, but as a good enough working model, for Kirchhoff's solution nicely fit both

 optical and microwave experimental data under particular, but commonly applica

 ble, conditions. Indeed, physicists' and engineers' interest in, and use of, Kirchhoff's

 theory has certainly not waned over the decades.4

 The persistent deployment of an apparently inconsistent theory even after recogni

 tion of its flaws is not unique in the history of physics. The infamous divergence of the

 quantum field integrals in self-energy calculations in quantum electrodynamics (QED)

 and physicists' various ad-hoc manipulations to bypass the problem before the intro

 duction of renormalization provides one noteworthy example.5 Another concerns early

 twentieth century Cambridge mathematicians' continued use of circulatory theory to

 explain airfoil lifting despite a salient contradiction—namely, d'Alembert's paradox,

 according to which there should be no lift at all in a perfect fluid—that had been well

 known for centuries.6 In these cases, a major reason for the tenacity of an admittedly

 problematic theory was essentially pragmatic: the physical-mathematical problem was

 simply too complex, and no comparable alternative was available at the time.

 Despite the similarities, Kirchhoff's account of diffraction differed in one essential

 respect from these two examples that makes this situation particularly compelling. In

 the first decades of the twentieth century, Lord Rayleigh ( 1842-1919) and Arnold Som

 merfeld (1868-1951) derived different solutions to the same diffraction problem under

 a set of consistent boundary conditions. Unlike the cases of QED before renormaliza

 tion and the circulatory theory of airfoil lifting in the early twentieth century, therefore,

 a mathematically consistent alternative was in fact available. Yet the existence of a
 seemingly more appealing and logical alternative did not eliminate or marginalize

 Kirchhoff's theory. This mathematically inconsistent (and physically untenable) solu

 tion has continued to appear and thrive in textbooks and periodicals as the standard

 approach to the problem of diffraction. Why, one may ask, did scientists continue to

 stay with Kirchhoff's theory despite the presence of a consistent alternative?

 Recently, several historians and philosophers have begun to pay closer attention

 to this curious episode.7 These studies deepen our understanding of conceptual and

 3 Poincaré (1892b), pp. 187-188.

 4 According to Werner Marx's bibliometric analysis, Kirchhoff's 1882 work from 1900 to 2010 has been

 specifically cited 70 times in research articles; moreover, the citation count has increased over the years:
 Marx (2016).

 5 Schweber(1994)

 6 Bloor(2011).

 7 Klaus Hentschel, Ning Yan Zhu, Ann Hentschel, and Werner Marx have provided a comprehensive

 historical study of Kirchhoff's 1882 paper by translating it into English, presenting a commentary, situating

 it within Kirchhoff's intellectual biography, and conducting a scientometric analysis of citations to it:

 Hentschel and Zhu (forthcoming). In light of the realism debate in philosophy of science, Juha Saatsi and

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 466

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 technical aspects of Kirchhoff's theory and help us clarify its philosophical implica

 tions, but in what follows we are concerned with the details of the theory's persistence

 and with the consistent alternatives to it. The theory's empirical success within the

 experimental regime of nineteenth and early twentieth century optics certainly goes

 reasonably far in accounting for its persistence. More, however, was involved than the

 results of experiment. The theory's tenacity also reflects the hold of a long-standing

 intellectual tradition in optics. Rooted in a principle introduced by Christiaan Huy

 gens (1629-1695) in 1678 and first deployed for diffraction by Fresnel in 1818, this

 approach calculated wave intensity by means of a single integral over regions that are

 not blocked by a diffracting object. Such an integral could be interpreted as comprised

 of waves, or wavelets, that emanate from each of the points on the object's open regions

 and so on the incident wave front proper. Even after the scope of the inconsistency

 became altogether clear, physicists continued to seek (and to find) a single integral

 that could give physical meaning at least to a form of Huygens' principle, if not to the

 original, a principle that Kirchhoff's theory so nicely exemplified. In what follows we

 explore the structure of Kirchhoff's theory and the alternatives to it in order to bring

 out the several ways in which mathematical structures that exemplify principles akin

 to Huygens' generated theories of diffraction.

 2 Fresnel applies Huygens' principle to diffraction

 When Fresnel first tackled the problem of diffraction neither he nor Thomas Young

 (1773-1829) before him had deployed Huygens' principle. Instead, both Young and

 Fresnel initially considered interference to take place between rays of light emanating

 directly from the source and from emission stimulated by the source at the edges of
 diffracting objects. That way of thinking essentially conformed to a long-standing

 tradition that only Huygens himself had challenged, one in which the central physical

 entity in optics was the ray of light.8 Fresnel broke with that tradition and introduced

 Huygens' principle when confronted with an empirical conflict that arose in a particular

 situation. But to deploy the principle Fresnel had to develop a method for decomposing

 waves from a multiplicity of different loci into ones with common phases but different

 amplitudes. Such a method had emerged previously in his exploration of the chromatic

 effects generated by the passage of polarized light through thin, birefringent crystals.

 To achieve that result Fresnel assumed a wave of the form a sin [2n(ft — χ/λ)],

 with λ the wavelength and / the frequency of the disturbance. If the wave emanat

 ing from the source reaches a point via two different paths, one of which traverses

 Footnote 7 continued

 Peter Vickers have used Kirchhoff's theory as a counterexample to primitive realism—what they have

 termed "naïve optimism"—which contends that any significant novel predictive success can be explained

 by the truth content of the assumptions that play an essential role in the derivation. Kirchhoff's boundary

 conditions, Saatsi and Vickers noted, are both mathematically inconsistent and physically untenable. Yet they

 are essential assumptions for the derivation of Kirchhoff's empirically-successful (within certain regimes)

 formula (Saatsi and Vickers 2011). We thank Ning Yan Zhu for catching a number of misprints and missing

 or incorrect references in a previous version of the present article.

 8 On the history of Huygens' optics and its background see Shapiro (1973). On Young see Kipnis (1991),
 and on Fresnel see Buchwald (1989).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kii'chhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 Fig. 1 Fresnel's configuration
 Fig. 1 Fresnel's configuration
 for diffraction
 for diffraction

 467

 G

 Ο

 Β

 a distance χ while the other requires an additional distance d, then the latter will be
 a sin [2 π(/ί — χ /λ) — i] where i is 2nd/λ. Algebraically decomposing this expres
 sion, Fresnel could split the second wave into two parts:

 a sin [2π(/ί — χ/λ) — i] = a cos(i) sin [2n(ft — χ/λ)]

 — a sin(i) cos [2π(/ί — χ/λ)]

 That is, a single wave with arbitrary phase i can always be considered to arise from
 two other waves with amplitudes acos(/), asin(i) that differ in phase by 90°. This
 involves the same kind of process, Fresnel noted, as the composition of two mutually
 perpendicular forces of magnitudes equal to the component amplitudes. Whence, he
 concluded, the magnitude of the resultant of two waves with the same frequency that
 otherwise differ in phase by 90° is just the square root of the sum of the squares of
 the component amplitudes. This decomposition enabled the application of Huygens'

 principle to diffraction.

 Consider with Fresnel a point light source /, a semi-infinite plane obstacle AG
 whose edge A is directly beneath /, and a screen parallel to AG. His objective was
 to calculate the resultant wave at a point Ο on the screen but outside the shadow cast
 by AG (Fig. 1). According to Huygens' principle the wave intensity at Ο should be
 the sum—or integral for an effectively continuous distribution—of all the wavelets
 emanating from the front m'MmA, calculated as it passes the obstacle AG.

 Fresnel assumed that the remainder of the wave was completely blocked by the

 obstacle, that the obstacle neither modified the wave's spherical shape, nor affected

 the phase of the vibrations at any unblocked point of the front. Note that in so assuming

 Fresnel essentially ignored the finite dimensions of such an obstacle in that he did not

 separately consider what the wave front might be on the side of the obstacle facing

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 468

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 the luminous point and on the side facing the screen point. He simply annulled the
 wave altogether at the obstacle's locus. We shall see below that the introduction of a

 solution to the scalar wave equation by Kirchhoff mandated explicit consideration of
 both surfaces.

 The resultant at Ο was, then, the integral of all the wavelets over the semi-infinite

 front m'MmA whose phases were respectively proportional to the path lengths AO,

 m Ο, MO, m'O, etc. To carry out this integral, Fresnel had to choose a convenient origin.

 For various reason he selected M (subsequently termed the 'pole'), the intersection

 between the direct line 10 and the wave front m'MmA.9 Fresnel easily calculated that

 the distances m's' (s' is the intersection between the line m'O and the arc around the

 center Ο ) by which the wavelets differ in their distances to the point of observation are

 to a very good approximation for points reasonably near the pole as z2(b + c)/(2bc)

 with b representing I A and c representing AB, where Β is the screen point, while ζ is the

 distance Mm'. Consequently the phase difference i in Fresnel's original decomposition

 becomes nz2(b + c)/bc'k. Each of the wavelets decomposes accordingly, with the

 consequence that the square of the resultant amplitude (and so the optical intensity)

 at the observation point must be:

 J dzsin(nz2(b + c)/bck) + J dzcos(nz2(b + c)/bcX)

 Fresnel's successful demonstration that his formulae worked well empirically won

 him a Paris Academy prize in 1818 despite the presence on the judging committee of
 no less than Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827) and Siméon Denis Poisson (1781—
 1840), neither of whom was sympathetic to wave optics. Today, his expression is
 a particular approximation to wave propagation under a specific condition: it is the

 second-order expansion of the propagating phase that takes into account the spherical

 wave front when the distance of interest lies between the quasi-static near-field zone

 and the plane-wave-like far-field zone.10 At the time, and for decades thereafter, his

 expression had a broader and more profound meaning, for it demonstrated that, far

 from being a curious conception which could at best be used to generate known

 results in a hitherto-unacceptable theory, Huygens' principle had proven empirical

 consequences. The result was to entrench the principle as a physically-meaningful

 foundation over the following decades as the wave theory of light was gradually

 assimilated, understood and produced altogether novel results. Most of these novelties

 did not depend on the principle itself since they were for the most part concerned

 with polarization phenomena. Nevertheless, as a unifying physical conception with a

 specific mathematical expression Huygens' principle provided a powerful foundation

 for this new, complex and difficult theory. John Herschel (1792-1871), who published

 the first comprehensive article on wave optics in 1827, placed particular emphasis on

 the principle, which he expressed in the following way:

 9 For full details see Buchwald (1989), Chap. 6.

 10 See, for example, Kong (1986), pp. 671-695

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 469

 ... conceive the surface of any wave A Β C to consist of vibratory molecules, all

 in the same phase of their vibrations (sic). Then will the motion of any point X

 ... be the same, whether it be regarded as arising from the original motion of S

 [the source], or as the resultant of all the motions propagated to it from all the

 points of the surface.11

 The essence of this way of treating the problem can be concisely expressed. The

 diffracted wave intensity u(r, t) at a given location r and time t is taken to be

 u(jr, t) = J dr'A(r, r')uin(r', t-\r-r'\ /c)

 Ω

 The integration takes place over the open parts of a blocking screen, while «,·„(?', t)

 is the intensity of the wave directly from the light source at a point Ψ on Ω at time

 t, A(r, r') is the inclination and any other necessary factors for propagation from Ψ

 to r, c is the wave speed, and |? - r'\ /c is the time delay (or, equivalently, phase
 factor) from r' to r. In this manner of working, which remained common for decades

 after Fresnel's original work, the solution to the wave equation is presumptively given

 (because of the known wIM) under the assumption that the screen has no other effect

 than to stop propagation except at its open parts. That is, the source wave is assumed

 to be completely unaltered at the screen's openings and completely extinguished over
 its surface.

 3 Stokes' "Dynamical Theory of Diffraction"

 Neither Fresnel nor those who worked in wave optics for decades afterwards began

 their analysis of diffraction with a differential equation. In other areas of optics, such as

 dispersion and birefringence, analysis did proceed in the 1830s by generating solutions

 to a wave equation, but in those cases boundary issues were irrelevant, posing a very

 different type of problem. Nevertheless, the physical foundation of wave optics then

 required the existence of an ether, a substance that pervades space and material bodies

 and that must be governed by the laws of mechanics. In France and Germany for

 decades the ether was presumed to be constituted of particles governed by Coulomb

 like forces of various presumptive intensities, whereas in Britain after circa 1830 it was

 widely treated as an effective continuum governed by variously-assumed constitutive

 stipulations.12

 Fresnel himself never deployed a differential equation for optics to any major extent,

 though he certainly did consider what sorts of forces must obtain between the elements

 of the ether in order to justify his assumptions concerning the relationships required

 between wave speed and direction of oscillation in birefringent media. That is, the

 only circumstances at the time that raised questions of the forces that act on ether ele

 11 Herschel (1827), Sec. 623.

 12 For the example of dispersion and Augustin Cauchy's ( 1789-1857) elaborate mathematics see Buchwald

 (2012). For a broad overview of the period see Buchwald (2013) and Darrigol (2012).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 470

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 ments were ones in which the wave speed varies with the direction of propagation and

 of oscillation. Diffraction required nothing of the sort because the empirical circum

 stances were limited at the time to propagation in isotropic media. There was however

 one important question that did demand a consideration of the wave equation, namely

 the form of the inclination factor governing the amplitude of the Huygens wavelets

 as a function of the angle between the line to the observation point and the normal to

 the front which the wavelets comprise. Fresnel had argued on rather weak physical

 grounds that, in the circumstances he was considering, the amplitudes are independent

 of direction for the hemisphere tangent to the incident front in the direction of propa

 gation, which meant that in his diffraction formulae the inclination factor was simply

 ignored. The first effort to determine that factor required a consideration of the wave

 equation, and it was accomplished in 1849 by George Gabriel Stokes (1819-1903).

 A senior wrangler and Smith's prizeman at Cambridge University and eventually

 Lucasian Professor of Mathematics there, Stokes had worked on optics (including

 the aberration of light and spectroscopy) as well as fluid dynamics, a subject whose

 mathematical structure resembled that of optics precisely because the optical ether was

 presumptively governed by mechanical relations.13 Stokes introduced his "Dynamical

 Theory" with the following words:

 When light is incident on a small aperture in a screen, the illumination at any point

 in front of the screen is determined, on the undulatory theory, in the following

 manner. The incident waves are conceived to be broken up on arriving at the

 aperture; each element of the aperture is considered as the centre of an elementary

 disturbance, which diverges spherically in all directions, with an intensity which

 does not vary rapidly from one direction to another in the neighborhood of the

 normal to the primary wave; and the disturbance at any point is found by taking

 the aggregate of the disturbances due to all the secondary waves, the phase of

 vibration of each being retarded by a quantity corresponding to the distance from

 its centre to the point where the disturbance is sought.14

 This much is entirely similar to the standard assumption since Fresnel, and Stokes

 did not go beyond it. Nevertheless, he penetrated very far into the mathematical core

 of contemporary wave theory—farther than anyone had since Fresnel—by deriving an

 entirely new result involving the polarization of diffracted light that he immediately

 sought to confirm in the laboratory. Stokes' primary purpose however was to uncover

 the inclination or amplitude factor. To do so he began at once with the general differ

 ential equation of motion for an isotropic, inviscid elastic solid that he had himself

 developed, and that he now applied to the optical ether:15

 d2u/di2 = b2S72u + (a2 - fc2)V(V · u)

 13 Stokes (1856); reprinted in Stokes (1883), pp. 243-328.

 14 Ibid., 243-244.

 15 Stokes (1845c). Of course neither Stokes nor anyone else, with the partial exception of James Clerk
 Maxwell (1831-1879), used vector notation until the 1890s. Nevertheless physicists and mathematicians

 of the period were able almost at once to produce the component equivalents of even complex vector

 operations, so that modern notation does not unduly alter their original understanding.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 471

 where u is the displacement, and a, b are elastic constants. He then separated the

 equation by defining 'for shortness' δ as the negative compression V · (or 'dilatation'

 as he called it), and ω as the rotation (or, again in Stokes' terminology, the 'distortion')

 (1/2)V χ m:

 d2S/dt2 = a2V2<S

 d2ù)/dt2 = b2V20)

 The single equation for the compression, and the three for the components of the

 rotation, all have precisely the same form, and Stokes could at once write down the

 following solution, which he obtained from Poisson16:

 V = J-J F(.a,)ia +

 (1)

 Here U is the solution at some point P, t is the time, and f(at), F(at) are respectively

 the initial values of the function S (or a component of ω) and of its time derivative at all

 positions whose distance from Ρ is at (or bt). The integrals, which correspond to the

 mean values of the functions, are taken over a spherical surface of radius at (or bt) that

 surrounds the field point P. Poisson's solution has the peculiarity of representing the

 effect at Ρ in terms of a time- dependent radius that is drawn from P. Instead, that is,

 of following a pulse as it expands outwards, with this solution we start at a given point

 and cut space with surfaces drawn about it until we find surfaces that pass through the

 regions which contain the initial disturbance. Poisson, as it were, held fixed the initial

 disturbance and went looking for it from the field point, and this solution (which is

 difficult to formulate in a rigorous manner17) applies to any disturbance that begins

 at some moment. In contrast to the manner in which the wave equation would be

 treated decades later, wherein the time-varying part, subjected to a Fourier expansion,

 is separated from the location-varying part, this solution lumps together space and

 time, treating the whole as an initial-value problem. Stokes then justified its extension

 from, in effect, a pulse to infinitely long wave trains in the following way:

 In the investigation it has been supposed that the force [disturbance] began to

 act at the time 0, before which the fluid was at rest, so that /(f) = 0 when t is

 negative. But it is evident that exactly the same reasoning would have applied

 had the force begun to act at any past epoch, so that we are not obliged to suppose

 f(t) equal to zero when t is negative, and we may even suppose fit) periodic,
 so as to have finite values from t = -oo to t = +00.18

 16 It is particularly ironic that Stokes took this from Poisson, because he at once used it to argue that the

 inclination factor varies in a fashion that Poisson himself would probably not have (Buchwald (1989), p.
 192).

 17 On which see Baker and Copson (1939), pp. 12-15.

 18 Stokes was a bit disingenuous here, since not only his investigation, but Poisson's solution, requires the
 limitation. Stokes' quick attempt to extend the class of allowable functions to cover those which are not

 temporally delimited requires a great deal more justification than this Stokes (1883), pp. 278.

 4b Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 472

 J. Z. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 source
 source

 Fig. 2 Stokes' configuration for diffraction

 To generate a formula that could be applied to diffraction, Stokes simply assumed

 the disturbance to be sinusoidal in form. The final result for the wave of distortion

 produced the following expression for its value at a field point located at a distance r

 from the disturbance on a surface element da that forms part of an unblocked region:

 da
 -—(1 4- cos Θ) sin φ cos
 2 Xr

 A

 bt - r)

 (2)

 Here θ is the angle between the normal at the surface element and the line from there

 to the field point, while φ represents the angle between the direction of the oscillation
 and that same line: it was introduced to take account of polarization (Fig. 2). This
 expression constitutes the first of an inclination factor, namely 1 + cos Θ.19 Stokes'

 main interest here was to show that, were the expression integrated over a completely

 unblocked surface, then the original wave would be regenerated, demonstrating thereby
 the consistency of an analysis based on Huygens' principle. He did not however go
 further to amend Fresnel's original formulae by incorporating the inclination factor
 - which would in any case be pointless given that the configuration of diffraction
 experiments at the time made the factor inconsequential.

 Unlike Fresnel, Stokes did not have to simply assume Huygens' principle because

 its wavelets now appeared as the integrands of a solution. Still, Stokes had not gone any

 further than had Fresnel in respect to the conditions that should obtain over a blocking

 19 Stokes set the compression wave to the side. However, the mechanically-necessary existence of both
 compression and distortion generally posed a problem for such investigations because they cannot easily
 be divorced from one another, particularly if the model involves, like Cauchy's, forces between particles
 [on which see Buchwald (1980, 1981)]. Cauchy assumed the compression wave to be invisible (which
 raised energy issues that might in principle be detectable), while Stokes took the compression constant to
 be so large that the corresponding wave speed was infinitely larger than the speed of the distortional wave,

 implying that the former would not be visible or otherwise affect the latter. This amounted to assuming that
 the ether is incompressible, requiring the rate of displacement du/dtof any element to satisfy V-du/dl = 0.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 473

 surface and within its open regions. He had also simply assumed that the wave function

 must vanish on the surface and remain completely unaffected over its open regions. The

 consistency that he proved concerned only the question of whether the expression he

 had generated for the wavelets could reproduce the original disturbance, not whether

 the presumed values of the wave within the bounded regions and over the blocking

 surface could themselves be justified.

 Questions concerning the boundary conditions and uniqueness requirements that

 arise when working with partial differential equations had previously been dealt with

 in respect to the Laplace equation for the potential function (V2<p = 0), most notably

 in England by the mathematician George Green (1793-1841) in 1828.20 Green devel

 oped, among other results, what became known as "Green's theorem" (of which more

 below), and he did argue that, given the value of the potential over a closed surface,

 there is one and only one unique solution to the Laplace or Poisson equation within

 or without the closed surface, provided that the potential vanishes at an infinite dis

 tance from it, or what would eventually be termed the Dirichlet principle by Bernhard

 Riemann (1826—1866).21

 Now in 1845 and 1846 Stokes published two influential papers concerning the

 aberration of light that invoked a condition for the ether's velocity with respect to

 the earth.22 He was almost certainly not familiar with the work in which Green had

 deduced his theorem since it had not been published in a journal, and since in any

 case its title seemed to concern itself with electricity. Only in 1845, when William

 Thomson (1824-1907, later Lord Kelvin) rediscovered Green's Essay, did it become

 broadly known. Even if Stokes had known Green's theorem, he would not have thought

 it relevant to the problem of aberration, despite the fact that both Green's Essay and

 Stokes' aberration problem concerned the question of solutions to the Laplace equation

 under specific boundary conditions.

 The question Stokes addressed was to find an appropriate condition on the motion

 of the ether near the earth's surface that could yield the constant of aberration, i.e. the

 expression for the deviation of a star's apparent position as a function of the speed of

 light through otherwise stationary ether and the earth's velocity through the medium.

 Stokes demonstrated that the appropriate expression would follow provided that two

 conditions were satisfied: first, that the ether's velocity at the earth had to be the same

 as the earth's with respect to the ether at a distance, i.e. that the earth must fully drag

 the ether along, and second that the part of the ether's velocity due to the earth's

 motion must be irrotational, i.e. that V χ υ must vanish, in which case that part of the

 velocity must be the gradient of a scalar function.23 Since Stokes had also required

 the divergence of the velocity to vanish in his diffraction theory in order to eliminate

 the compression wave, this would have meant that the ether's velocity had to satisfy

 a Laplace equation were it not that Stokes had limited the requirement to a 'part' of

 20 Green (1828).

 22 Stokes (1845a, b).

 21 After Peter Lejeune Dirichlet, 1805-1859; c/Riemann (1857), p. 17.

 23 Of course optical polarization required the existence of transverse oscillations, i.e. of V χ 5, and so

 Stokes emphasized that irrotationality could hold only for "that part of the motion of the ether which is due

 to the motion of translation of the earth and planets" (ibid., p. 137).

 ί) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 474

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 the velocity, which accordingly essentially avoided having to deal with a boundary

 value problem. He was able in this way to ignore altogether the earth's surface by

 simply assuming in his calculation of the aberration constant that the small additional

 'part' of the ether's velocity due to the ether's being entangled with the moving earth

 was that of the earth itself relative to an ether undisturbed except by the (V χ υ

 bearing) motions of light. Nearly half a century later, in 1887, the Dutch physicist H.

 A. Lorentz (1853-1928) returned to the question and decided that Stokes' analysis

 had to be treated as a boundary-value problem. Whatever the mechanism of earth

 ether entanglement might entail, Lorentz effectively assumed that, since the ether is

 acknowledged to be incompressible, the Laplace equation must be satisfied, in which

 case the ether's motion is specified altogether by the scalar function's normal gradient

 at the earth's surface, i.e. by the velocity, assumed to be that of the earth itself. Lorentz

 then demonstrated that under these circumstances, the component of the gradient of

 the requisite scalar function tangent to the surface will differ from the corresponding

 component of the earth's velocity, so that the ether will slip over the surface, ruining

 the general applicability of Stokes' calculation.24

 Stokes in the mid-1840s had paid no attention at all to boundary-value conditions,

 while Lorentz in 1887 insisted on invoking one immediately by jettisoning Stokes'

 admittedly-vague separation of earth-plus-ether velocity for that of the ether. Lorentz

 in other words constrained the problem to be one that simply had to satisfy a specific

 boundary requirement on the Laplace equation, namely the so-called Neumann con

 dition, according to which specification of the scalar function's normal gradient over

 a closed surface completely determines the function's value.25 However, as late as the

 1870s physicists at least were not generally paying close attention to the mathematical

 conditions imposed on harmonic functions by boundary-value requirements, as we
 shall now see in detail in the case of Kirchhoff.

 4 Kirchhoff renovates Huygens' principle

 Gustav Robert Kirchhoff was well-known when he left his two-decade-long academic

 base in Heidelberg and took the first chair for an Ordinarius in theoretical physics

 at the University of Berlin in 1875. His Berlin years from 1875 to his death in 1887

 were capstones to a career, since his major contributions—electric circuit theory, spec

 troscopy, and thermal radiation—had all been made well before, while at Berlin he

 devoted himself principally to teaching.26 Precisely because of the need to prepare

 lectures Kirchhoff looked into the issues in optical diffraction that Stokes had only par

 tially resolved. In 1882, Kirchhoff read a seminal paper on optics at the Royal Prussian

 Academy of Sciences in Berlin. It was published in the Academy's Sitzungsberichte

 and the following year in the Annalen der Physik und Chemie.

 24 Lorentz (1887).

 25 Named after the German mathematician Carl Neumann (1832-1925). For histories of the boundary

 value criteria for harmonic functions see Cross (1985); Cheng and Cheng (2005). See Kline (1972), Chap.

 28 for an overview of partial differential equations in the period.

 26 Jungnickel and McCormmach (1986), pp. 30-32, Vol. 2.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 475

 The aim of Kirchhoff's paper was similar to Stokes' three-decades earlier work

 but more general: Kirchhoff aimed to develop a "fully satisfactory theory" of light,

 and not solely of diffraction per se, by starting with the wave equation itself.27 Like

 Stokes, Kirchhoff assumed that the ether displacement u corresponding to light was

 altogether transverse, setting aside the possible existence of a compression wave (on

 the widely-accepted premise that the ether is incompressible), yielding thereby the

 following equation:

 Also like Stokes, Kirchhoff used a scalar variable ψ to express any of u's components,

 but unlike Stokes he altogether ignored polarization [which Stokes had partially taken

 into account through the introduction of the variable φ (c/2)]:

 d^U 2t-r2-*
 tt = a y u
 dt2

 —- =

 d2<P 2\j2
 dt2 Y

 Kirchhoff's method of solving the equation however differed in fundamental ways

 from Stokes'. Stokes had treated the situation entirely as an initial-value problem,

 and he had accordingly used Poisson's formulation to express the solution in terms of

 the subsequent evolution of the distributed sources at time zero (cf 1). That solution

 tacitly assumed that the disturbance vanishes on a blocking surface and is otherwise

 unaffected, but Stokes did not directly incorporate the conditions into the wave equa

 tion's integral solution. By contrast, Kirchhoff explicitly involved the boundaries of

 the illuminated region.

 He began with a point source in unbounded space. Assuming a trigonometric oscilla

 tion with period Τ for an outward-propagating spherical wave, Kirchhoff first assumed

 the following expression for the wave function:

 ψ=ros [2* (i - ?)]+τsin [2π (ϊ - ?)]

 or (following the decomposition that Fresnel had originally developed)

 ,mKn) +(?HHi-?)]-')

 in which r,· is the distance between the source or, in Kirchhoff's word, 'luminous'

 point and the locus of observation, while D and D' are amplitude coefficients whose

 ratio determines the wave's phase.28

 27 Kirchhoff (1883), cf pp. 663. The paper was included in the posthumous publication of Kirchhoff's
 works: Kirchhoff (1891a), pp. 22-54.

 28 Ibid., 665.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 476

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Kirchhoff next set his "luminous point" to the side, together with his presumptive

 expressions for the wave, and turned instead to "Green's theorem" specifically in

 order to obtain an expression that "specifies and generalizes the so-called Huygens

 theorem"—that, in other words, can be interpreted as an expression for the effect

 of Huygens' wavelets in open regions of an illuminated space. Kirchhoff's friend

 and now colleague at Berlin, Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-1894), had years before

 shown how to deploy Green's theorem for the vibrations of sound in open-ended tubes.

 Moreover, Kirchhoff had already developed the basis of what follows in 1876 in his

 published lecture on propagation in a compressible fluid.29

 Consider two scalar functions U and G of χ, y, and ζ within a bounded space

 V whose surface is denoted by s, and whose first and second spatial derivatives are

 defined and continuous. Let du be a differential volume element within the space V,
 dî a differential element of the surface s, and Ν the normal to ds directed toward the
 interior of V. Then in Kirchhoff's formulation:30

 §d°{uW-GJfi )-///<· (ο*2"-"v2<0

 Kirchhoff assumed 'initially' that the function G, like φ, satisfied the wave equation.

 Accordingly, he set U to φ and inserted both it and G into his formulation, replacing

 the spatial derivatives V2i/ and V2G with the time derivatives d2U/9i2 and 32G/9i2

 via the wave equation. He then integrated over a time interval, requiring however that

 the lower limit be negative and the upper limit positive:

 hM-ay-iliiH-ï-'t)

 -t' s L ν

 -t '

 (3)

 Kirchhoff then set G to an expression whose numerator bears a limited resemblance
 to what would decades later become known as Dirac's delta function:

 G _ F(r0 + at)

 ro

 Here r0 is the distance from any point to an arbitrary but fixed point 0, with both

 points lying within the volume of integration in (3). The unusual function F satisfies

 F(x) = 0 for χ Φ 0, while /J F(x) = 1 where the lower limit d is a finite negative
 number, and the upper limit e is finite positive.

 This distinguishes Kirchhoff's F from Dirac's delta since the latter's defining inte

 gral runs from negative to positive infinity. In his later optical lectures Kirchhoff

 29 Kirchhoff (1876), pp. 314-317. There Kirchhoff had used a different specification for the limits in his

 time integral with attendant changes in the argument which was however less detailed than it later became,

 perhaps because Kirchhoff wanted to ensure the analysis would work for an infinite train of disturbances
 (see below).

 30 Kirchhoff (1883), p. 666.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 477

 justified the existence of such a function as a limiting case by way of an example.

 Suppose F{x) to be (μ/^/π)β~μ2χ2ει.ηά let the constant μ be so large that F(x) is
 "vanishingly small for every finite value of x" and so as infinite as μ itself when

 χ is zero. Setting ζ = μχ, then even integrating over infinity the function would

 equal unity because (l/Vjr) / e~z dz — 1, in which case Kirchhoff's F converges

 +°0 2

 -00

 asymptotically to Dirac's delta.31

 Kirchhoff's purpose in introducing the strange 'function' F was to generate surface

 expressions that could be applied to the physical situation he had in mind, namely the

 propagation of light within a region that is illuminated by one or more point sources that

 are external to the region. Sections of the bounding surfaces can then be assimilated

 to light-blocking or reflecting obstacles, allowing as well for different propagatory

 speeds within different parts of the region in order to accommodate refraction. In

 doing so, Kirchhoff assimilated the point at which the wave function's value is to be

 calculated to the point at which the distance r0 in the definition of function G vanishes.

 This required two steps. First the volume integral on the right-hand side of (3) had

 to be removed. To do so Kirchhoff imposed a second condition on the lower limit of the

 time integration, namely that r0-aif must be "negative and finite." This implies that the

 distances r0 from Ο to any point in the region, thereby including points infinitesimally

 near the bounding surface, are always less than at'. What might that mean in terms

 of the physics of the situation? Likely this, though Kirchhoff made no comments: the

 initial optical disturbance must have begun at a point in time sufficiently distant that it

 had long passed point 0. This presumably licensed Kirchhoff to work thereafter with

 an effectively continuous train of disturbances of arbitrary form.

 From the requirement that r0-af must be less than zero (and finite) it followed that

 the 'function' F must be zero at both limits of the integral, namely -t' and t", since f "is

 positive, and so the entire right-hand side of (3) will indeed vanish, leaving only the

 surface integral on the left. This was not enough for the equation to be made physically

 applicable. Kirchhoff's unusual 'function' F did wipe out the volume integral, but
 G still appeared, and it did not have any apparent physical meaning, having been

 chosen for the express purpose of using Green's equation, thereby permitting the

 consideration of surfaces and hence the general behavior of light in the presence of

 physical boundaries. Moreover, the inclusion of point 0 involves a singularity since r0

 vanishes there. Which is why Kirchhoff decided to cut 0 altogether out of the volume

 over whose surfaces the integration takes place.

 To that end Kirchhoff surrounded Ο with an "infinitesimal sphere" which he sub

 tracted from his region. That produced two bounding surfaces: the original one as

 external boundary, and the spherical surface surrounding 0 as internal boundary

 (Fig. 3). The result was to split the surface integral into two parts, one over the exter

 nal, the other over the internal boundary. With lowercase s denoting the external, and

 31 Kirchhoff (1891b), pp. 24-25. Note that the requirement that the integration limits of F must be "finite

 positive and negative" is maintained. He had first developed an argument for the existence of F in his 1876

 derivation for propagation in a compressible fluid. This addenda to the original specification of the function

 F was added by the editor, Kurt Hensel (1861-1941), of the Optik (Kirchhoff 1891b, p. 267), indicating
 the existence of disquiet concerning the function. We thank Ning Yan Zhu for noting Hensel's intervention.

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 478

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Fig. 3 Kirchhoff's configuration for Green's theorem

 uppercase S the internal boundary, Kirchhoff's equation thereby becomes:32

 /d'#(14£-c^)d(s + S)

 —s+S

 =/dt §{φΒ - cw)ds+Id'§{^- G^i)is=°<4)

 -t' S -t' S

 33 At time zero because F(at) is itself non-zero only when its argument vanishes.

 32 Ibid., pp. 666-668.

 •ê) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff next moved to eliminate G. First of all, r0 now becomes the radius R of the

 "infinitesimal sphere," while its surface element dS has the factor R2. Consequently

 Gds is proportional to R which, since the sphere is infinitesimal by assumption, means

 that the second term in the integral over the sphere's surface S can be discarded. Taking
 however the normal gradient of G at the sphere's surface yields—(1 /R2)F(R + at),
 which is—( 1 /R2)F(at) since 7?can be neglected in the function's argument. Multipli
 cation by dS accordingly leaves just F (at), and so the integral over S simply reduces
 to —4πφο where φο is the value of the wave function at the locus of the fixed point Ο

 at time zero.33 To eliminate F altogether Kirchhoff recurred to his requirement that its

 integral over any finite interval must be equal to one, in which case integrating F(at)
 over time simply produces 1 /a, with (4) thereby reduced to the following:

 /d'#("^-G^)ds = ^rM(0)

 (5)

 -t' s

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 479

 Note that the locus of whatever luminous point gives rise to the source wave is not as

 yet under direct consideration in Kirchhoff's analysis beyond requiring that it must

 lie outside the bounded region in order to avoid a further singularity.

 Both G and a time integral still appear here and had to be removed in order to reach

 a physically useful result—in order, that is, to calculate the amplitude at a given point

 in the region bounded by the surface of integration. The region in question must not at

 this stage contain a source. Again using the integral requirement over the finite interval

 f"] and now shifting the time origin to f, Kirchhoff reduced (5) to the following

 form, which we shall call his fundamental result:34

 S

 where

 d (p(ro,t-r0/a) _ /(r0, t - r0/a)
 dN r0 ro

 and / = d<p/dN (6)

 Helmholtz, as Kirchhoff knew, had derived a similar formula in 1859 to characterize

 the acoustic vibration within a pipe with one open end, albeit in a considerably less

 general manner. Unlike Kirchhoff, Helmholtz assumed temporal harmonic variation,

 thereby separating the time- from the space-dependent part of the wave function.

 Kirchhoff, recall, had not required such a limitation, which is why he had introduced
 his function F.35 Note that in Kirchhoff's formulation the loci of whatever luminous

 points are responsible for the radiation do not appear explicitly. The waves that they

 engender will appear only by supposition in the boundary conditions that Kirchhoff

 adopted. Kirchhoff did not, in other words, separately develop Green integrals for the

 incident and resultant waves and then relate them through his boundary conditions.

 Kirchhoff now interpreted his fundamental result explicitly in terms of Huygens'

 principle: "the motion of the ether [at any point] in the space enclosed in surface s
 can be regarded as caused by a layer of luminous points on surface s, because each

 one of the two terms of which Ω is composed may be described as corresponding to a

 luminous point situated at the location of ds."36 However, where Huygens had based

 his principle on a consideration of the physical tendency to expand at each point of

 34 Ibid., 668-669.

 35 Helmholtz, "Theorie der Luftschwingungen in Rôhren rait offenen Enden," Journal fir die reine und
 angewandte Mathematik, 62:1 (1859), 23. Suppose with Helmholtz that

 <p(r, t) = <pc(r) cos(cti/) + <ps(r) sin(wi) so that the time and space dependencies could be separated.
 Helmholtz's equation may then be written as follows:

 4jt«pc,s(r0 = 0) = ©di

 d<Pc,s n , , dGc,s(ro)
 -jjj-Gc,s(ro) ~ <Pc,s dN

 with

 S

 cos(kr)

 Gc(r) =

 Gs(r0) ■

 sin(fcr)

 36 Ibid., pp. 669-670. The translation is by Anne Hentschel in Hentschel and Zhu (forthcoming).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 480

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 a wave front, Kirchhoff's version emerged as a result of his application of Green's

 theorem without any direct consideration of the physics beyond the wave equation

 proper. Of primary significance, his expression (6) indicated that the contribution

 from each point on an arbitrary surface s to the ether vibration at a point Ο that is

 enclosed by s is determined by both the ether vibration φ and its normal gradient on

 s. Both values had consequently to be specified.

 Kirchhoff recognized that his result could be extended to a case in which the point Ο

 is exterior to the bounding surface s while the originating luminous points (which are

 thus far exterior to s ) lie within the enclosed region, amounting thereby to an inversion

 of the existing situation. Key to the first step in the derivation of this extension was to

 redefine the space exterior to s as a volume bounded internally by s and externally by

 the infinitely large surface Soc so that (6) becomes:

 Here the normal to s is turned from inward to outward. Supposing a "particular condi

 tion" to be satisfied—namely, that before some finite past moment the values of both

 functions (φ and /) were everywhere zero—then, provided that the point Ο is not

 itself at infinity and choosing a subsequent but otherwise arbitrary moment, both func

 tions will at that time also vanish on the infinitely large surface Soc·37 This licensed

 a principle of inversion, according to which whatever holds for a Ο point applies as

 well to a luminous point by exchanging their locations. In such an exchange the locus

 of evaluation for the wave remains near the Green function singularity.

 To further extend the situation, Kirchhoff envisioned two closed surfaces that

 enclose volumes which have an intersection within which point Ο lies, while any

 luminous points I lie outside both regions (Fig. 4). Each of these surfaces then yields

 φο near 0. Subtracting the intersection from the union of the volumes creates a region

 with a new surface that bounds a region from which both Ο and any luminous points
 are excluded (because Ο now lies within the extracted intersection of the two origi

 nal volumes). Under theses circumstances the integral in (6) always vanishes. By the

 principle of inversion the same follows if the original two surfaces enclosed luminous

 points, with Ο lying outside both. A similar procedure, but this time forming the com

 posite union of two intersecting surfaces, implies that the integral in (6) also vanishes

 if a surface includes both Ο and I. In summary Kirchhoff has demonstrated:

 1. a region that includes Ο but excludes I can produce a non-zero value for the integral

 in (6). The same holds vice versa by inversion.

 2. a region that excludes both Ο and I produces a zero value for the integral in (6).

 3. a region that includes both Ο and I also produces a zero value for the integral in

 37 Kirchhoff's requirement was in later years subsumed under what became known as the Sommerfeld

 radiation condition, according to which the limit at infinity of the difference 3 φ/dN - 2πίφ/λ must vanish:

 (6).

 c/Goodman (1988), p. 44.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 481

 Fig. 4 Kirchhoff s further configuration for Green's theorem

 These three correspond respectively to cases in which (1) / and Ο are separated
 by a surface, (2) the radiation from I simply passes through the region, and (3) /'s
 radiation reaches Ο unimpeded.

 Before any specific results could be obtained, Kirchhoff had to produce a useful

 expression for the general integral, jj) ds · Ω, given the locus of Ο and the waves

 ί

 engendered by whatever luminous points are present. To do so he assumed a single

 radiating point / and limited the form of the wave that it produces to a time harmonic
 expression, namely to φ — (1 /r,·) cos [Ο,'/λ — t/T)2π]. The distances r0/, that now

 both appear in the general integral are respectively drawn from the loci 0,1 to points
 on the surface of integration. This produced the following form for the integrand Ω:

 Π = (Lti _ IS»)cos\('i±J± _ i) 2„1

 r,r.\r,3 Ν r0bH) [Λ λ τ) J

 rir0k\dN dN ) LV λ T ) J

 Kirchhoff next introduced a specific coordinate system and an approximation linked

 to it. The origin of the new coordinate system was placed on the surface of integration

 at a very specific point: namely, where the sum r0 + r,· is a minimum and so is
 stationary. This will occur if the line joining I to Ο passes through the surface of

 integration, in which case the origin will lie at the intersection of the joining line with

 the integration surface. Kirchhoff's new origin is effectively the same as the one that

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 482

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Fresnel had introduced decades before, namely the pole. Using this coordinate system,

 he expanded r0,r, as functions of po, Pi, these being the distances from 0,1 to the

 pole, but only up to second order. That limitation amounted to the requirement that the

 wavelength is vanishingly small in comparison to the distances r0, rt ,38 This would in

 contemporary parlance be referred to as the "stationary phase approximation."

 For a completely unobstructed wave Kirchhoff could then show that integrating

 the resultant expression simply reproduces the presumptive wave from the luminous

 point because the normal gradients that appear in the sine term simply cancel one

 another, obliterating it, leaving only the cosine term. He was now ready to grapple

 with the general problem of optics, including retrieving the situation that would repro

 duce a facsimile of an optics based on bundles of rays. To do so required a crucial

 physical assumption, known later as "Kirchhoff's Ansatz" or as his "physical optics

 approximation:" namely, that the light wave φι (and its gradient 3ψί/dN) at any point

 on the surface of integration is approximately equal to the source wave from / (and

 its gradient) plus any reflected wave (pr (and its gradient d<pr/dN), meaning that the

 presence of any obstructing body does not alter the wave that is incident upon it other

 than by affecting the values of the wave function and its normal gradient over the

 body's actual surface:39

 φ S ψί +φΓ,

 3 φ

 3Ν

 3 Ψί 3 <pr
 3 Ν dN'

 Kirchhoff considered three specific situations: light scattering from a "black body,"

 light diffracted from a black-body screen with an aperture, and diffraction by a grating.

 For our purposes here, we will consider only his treatment of diffraction. A light source

 at point i is enclosed by an opaque screen whose surface 5 is punctured by an aperture

 A. To simplify the calculation, Kirchhoff transformed the screen from an enclosed

 surface to an infinite plane, so that the light source i and the point of observation

 Ο were on opposite sides of the infinite, flat screen. Here we encounter Kirchhoff's

 requirements for both the wave function at the screen's two surfaces and its normal

 gradients there. Divide S into a part S; that faces the light source and a part S0 that is

 shielded from it. Since the screen extinguishes all light striking it, the wave function

 must vanish altogether over S0 In addition, the wave over the aperture A should have

 the same form as the source wave ψι according to Kirchhoff's Ansatz, which leaves

 the wave near 5; (and so over the aperture) unaltered if the screen is black (there being

 no reflection). Note Kirchhoff's explicit consideration of both sides of the screen.

 However, neither the Ansatz nor Kirchhoff's definition of an opaque screen in

 themselves placed any limitation on the wave's normal gradient over S0. Kirchhoff

 38 Kirchhoff expressed this as the wavelength being 'infinitesimal' and the sum r0, r, being effectively

 constant throughout the integration since the limitation to a second-order expansion restricts the integration's

 accuracy to loci within the vicinity of the origin, where the sum is a minimum (Kirchhoff 1883, p. 672).

 39 Ibid., pp.683-685.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The term containing the difference between the normal gradients of r0, /·,· required

 two further approximations: namely that these distances are much larger than the

 dimensions of the aperture and so can be considered constant across it outside of the

 sine term in the integrand, and that the line from / to a point in the aperture forms

 an "infinitesimal angle" with the line from Ο to that point. In that case the normal

 gradients in Ω become equal and opposite since they are simply the cosines of the

 angles that the lines from I and Ο make with the normal, while the product r0r,· is

 effectively constant, yielding the following expression for the wave at Ο:

 φ°=>^^ΙΙάι™[2π(Η^-ψ)}

 A

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 483

 nevertheless assumed that it too would vanish over the shadowed surface of the screen,

 producing the following set of boundary conditions:40

 <P = <Pi, Jn = m 0Ili4

 φ = 0, f$ = 0 on S0

 Using these boundary conditions with a source wave set to (1/r,·) cos[(r, /À - t/T)

 2π], the integrand Ω produces the following result for the wave at an observation

 point Ο under the approximation that the wavelength is vanishingly small in compar

 ison with the distances of both the source and observation points from the aperture

 (Fig. 5):41

 = fjtoa = i If £ $ - 5£) sin [2, - i)]

 A A

 40 Given these boundary conditions, and a special condition, Kirchhoff could also retrieve geometric optics.

 Require that the sum of the distances from / and Ο to the surface must not be constant for any finite part

 of it—meaning in effect that both the observation and luminous points are very far away. If, under this

 condition, the line joining I to Ο does not anywhere intersect a body that does not reflect light—a "black

 body"—then the wave at Ο remains unaltered. If, on the other hand, that line passes through the black body

 at least once, then "darkness occurs at the location of O," a true shadow is formed and in consequence "the

 light from the luminous point propagates rectilinearly in rays that can be regarded as independent of one

 another" (ibid., pp. 686-687). This retrieves geometric optics for a black-body obstacle and an effectively

 infinitesimal wavelength. The limitation to constancy over a finite area of the surface for the sum r0 + η is

 dropped for diffraction.

 41 Ibid., p. 688. Note that 9η/3Ν = cos(r,·, «,·) and -dr0/dN = cos(r0, n0), where r,· is the vector from

 an arbitrary point on A to the point of illumination I, r0 is the vector from the same point on A to the point

 of observation Ο, η,· is the vector normal to A and pointing toward the side of I, n0 is the vector normal

 to A and pointing toward the side of 0, and cos(a, b) is the cosine of the angle between the two vectors 3

 and b. Kirchhoff's diffraction integral may thereby be written as

 fo = 2X If rjrï + C0S^· "")] Sin [2π - f )]·

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 484

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 '0
 0

 Jo
 Jo

 Fig. 5 Kirchhoff's diffraction configuration

 Note immediately one difference from Fresnel's original expression: the Huygens
 wavelets are shifted by a quarter-wavelength in phase from the source wave, which
 generated discussion in subsequent years.42

 Kirchhoff added an incident time-harmonic sine wave with a different amplitude for
 generality and could at once write down an expression for the optical intensity at Ο.

 For simplicity we will assume a unit total incident intensity in which case Kirchhoff's

 diffraction integral yields:43

 1 /9r, \2, , »
 {c+s)

 where c — J J di cos Γ"^2π and s = J J ds sin ^ Γ" ^ 2π

 The functions c, s are of course the Fresnel integrals, while the factor in the square of
 the normal gradient of r,· is Kirchhoff's inclination factor, here obtained for the first

 time directly from the solution to the wave equation via Green's theorem and suitable

 approximations. Except for this factor multiplying the integrals, the result has the

 same form as the one that Fresnel had produced decades before for the same situation.

 Kirchhoff's is more general in two ways: first it includes a factor that depends directly

 on an inclination factor and inversely as the product of the wavelength by the distances

 42 Fresnel took the wave in Huygens' principle to differ from the source wave solely by virtue of distance
 to the surface of integration, so that, e.g., a cosine wave remained a cosine wave plus a phase addition to
 its argument. However, the integrands in Kirchhoff's expression are shifted by a quarter wavelength from
 the source wave in addition to the phase addition. The shift is a direct consequence of applying Green's
 theorem to the wave equation.

 43 Kirchhoff (1883), p. 689.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where the surface of integration is denoted by Σ. Suppose next that G has a singularity

 at the origin Ο of coordinates but such that the product Gr becomes unity there, with

 r denoting distance from O. Surround Ο with an infinitesimal sphere and calculate

 the integral over its surface, producing (as with Kirchhoff) the value -4πφ0, which

 gives the value for φ at the locus Ο of the singularity for G. Assuming further that

 both φ and G satisfy the wave equation, then the volume integral vanishes, leaving

 Poincaré' with (7) for the value of φ ο at a point that lies within an infinitesimal sphere

 which is itself surrounded by a closed surface Σ:46

 II{v>-^r-G(rp)^i)'"'=-4'"1" <7)

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 485

 of /, Ο to the aperture loci, and second Kirchhoff left his result in terms of r(K r,· instead

 of further approximating in terms of the vertical distances of /, Ο to the screen.

 5 The Poincaré paradox

 Trained in engineering at the École Polytechnique and the École des Mines, Poincaré

 had always kept an active line of research in mathematical physics and applied mathe

 matics, in spite of his better known works in more abstract areas. In 1886 he assumed

 the chair of mathematical physics at the University of Paris, where he lectured on

 optics in the winter semester of 1887-1888, which he again taught in 1891-1892.44

 Both sets were published, and in the 1892 lectures Poincaré reviewed what he then

 termed "Kirchhoff's hypotheses" for diffraction.45 If, he began, two functions G, φ

 are continuous and finite within a given region, then Green's theorem requires:

 §{φ3-ΊΓ~ e(r) w) d<r =IIIdv (G(r)vV - ψν^ή)

 Σ V

 Σ

 If point Ο is not surrounded by Σ then the integral vanishes.

 To apply the theorem to diffraction, Poincaré considered a situation that was similar

 to Kirchhoff's but that was configured in a different manner. He divided space into

 four distinct surfaces as follows. Marking an arbitrary point that we shall designate as

 M, Poincaré denoted the surface of the screen facing M as Β and the screen's opposite

 surface as C. He then described a closed surface S, part of which coincides with Β

 and within which point M lies; A denotes the part of S that excludes Β. Surface S is

 consequently the union A + Β. Finally, he surrounded M with an infinitesimal sphere

 sm that lies within the region surrounded by S. We have added a point Ρ that lies

 44 For a thorough account of Poincaré's life and career see Gray (2013). Also Dieudonné (2008) ; Charpentier

 et al. (2010). On anomalous dispersion and its theoretical consequences see Buchwald (1985), chap. 27.

 45 Poincaré had derived formulae akin to Kirchhoff's in the 1887-1888 lectures, though at that time he was

 unaware of Kirchhoff's theory; he had then also noted that the boundary conditions cannot strictly hold at
 the same time: Poincaré (1889), pp. 115-116. On Poincaré and light see Darrigol (2015).

 46 Poincaré (1892b), pp. 141-143.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 486

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 entirely outside the union C + A and have surrounded it, like M, with an infinitesimal

 sphere sp. Poincaré's configuration placed the locus of his luminous point at point M
 within the region surrounded by the surface, which is where Kirchhoff had placed his

 observation point. The observation point, though Poincaré did not mark it, here lies at
 a point Ρ, outside C + A.

 Poincaré introduced a function ψ1 to represent the wave at any point emitted by

 the luminous point M in the absence of a physical screen. When Β and C are the

 surfaces of a physical object, then the wave φ1 is altered by their presence to φκ

 according to Kirchhoff's boundary conditions. Poincaré employed the distinction to

 establish relations between the two functions using the boundary conditions for an

 opaque body. Kirchhoff had not done anything similar since he had in the end directly

 inserted the value of the wave from the luminous point into his integral and had applied

 boundary conditions without having reached the result by means of relations between

 distinct Green's integrals for φ' ,φκ.

 To clarify Poincaré's somewhat terse discussion we introduce the following con

 vention: the value ψ ρ at a point Ρ of the integral ^ ff \ G ρ dσ of a

 "k

 function ψ and a Green's function Gp, the latter of which has a singularity at P,over a

 set of surfaces σk that bound the region enclosing Ρ will be represented by ff [φ].47 In

 order to employ Green's theorem for the value of the wave function at Ρ we surround

 Ρ with an infinitesimal sphere in Kirchhoff's fashion so that we can use Green's the

 orem to replace the integral over the surface of that sphere with the value of the wave

 function at P. Then, with reference to Fig. 6, we can with Poincaré build expressions

 for both φ', <pR by considering different sets of the surfaces. Consider first a surface

 formed by the union of s m with the surfaces B,C. A source wave φ'ρ from M that
 reaches the point Ρ within the region bounded by these surfaces will accordingly be

 represented by the following expression:

 ψ'ρ = J J |V] (8)

 The resultant wave φ ρ at Ρ can be similarly represented by integrals over these same
 three surfaces:

 <PHP= J J [φ*] (9)

 However, the latter is affected by Kirchhoff's boundary conditions, for which Poincaré

 assumed the region surrounded by Β and C to be opaque. Accordingly, and assuming
 Kirchhoff's Ansatz, the source wave at surface B, which faces the luminous point at

 M, is unaffected by the presence of the body, while at surface C Kirchhoff's boundary

 47 Poincaré always presumed an outer surface Soo at infinity at which the wave function φ and its normal

 derivative vanish, with the surfaces σj forming inner boundaries. The Green's function at point U is G ρ =

 exp(-ikrp)/rp, where rp is the distance between U and P,k = 2π/λ and the time dependence has been
 removed due to the monochromatic assumption.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 487

 ' /
 /

 I
 \
 \
 \ V

 B
 Β

 /*" \
 ι Μ ι
 i M i
 \ _ y
 SM
 SM

 i Pi \
 I Pi \
 ^ ^ \

 \

 \

 Λ
 \
 \ 1
 \ '
 ) / '
 i / /
 / '
 / ^ /
 / /

 Fig. 6 Poincaré's first surfaces

 conditions required the resultant wave and its normal derivatives to vanish. Conse

 quently φ ρ can be expressed in terms of the source wave and just the two surfaces
 Β, S M'·

 «■?=//Μ = H M-//M <10)

 sm+B+C C

 We next follow Poincaré by introducing a new set of boundaries using the surfaces
 in Fig. 6, specifically the space bounded internally by the union of A with C (and
 externally by the surface at infinity). The source wave at any point in this region
 consequently has the expression:

 <P,p=ff\<P'\ (Π)

 A+C

 Equating the expressions (8) and (11) for φ'ρ produces (12):

 ψίρ= if [φ'] = ff |V] (12)

 sm+B+C A+C

 As a result expression (10) for the diffracted wave φ ρ becomes (13):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 7 Poincaré's surfaces adapted to an opaque screen (Β + C), with an aperture (A), enclosing a luminous
 point (M) and an observation point (Ρ)

 φρ = JJ [y]~ jj\v'] = jj\vl]~ff \f'] = ff v1 (13)

 s\f B-\-C C A+C C A

 That is, the diffracted wave at a point Ρ can be found by integrating the wave from
 the luminous point M over an open surface whose unclosed portion is bridged by the

 obstacle, with M lying within the region enclosed by the bridged surface and Ρ lying
 outside it, precisely as Kirchhoff had found.

 For clarity, we can redraw as follows to represent the typical case of a screen with an

 aperture. If we imagine the obstacle bounded by Β and C to be an infinite plane screen
 and the open surface A to be an aperture on the screen, then Poincaré's configuration

 in Fig. 7 is nothing but the configuration for Kirchhoff's diffraction problem (surface
 C in that case becomes the screen surface facing away from Poincaré's luminous point
 M, i.e. C becomes the shadowed surface).

 Poincaré's explicit introduction of integrals for the source wave revealed a problem
 that Kirchhoff would not have seen precisely because he had considered the source
 wave only towards the end of his calculations—until then his luminous point, though

 necessarily present, had not directly entered. With Poincaré we now consider a point
 L located within the region Β + C bounded by the surfaces of the screen itself. This
 point is the locus of a Green's function Gl■ In doing so we first consider Β and C
 merely as surfaces and not as the boundaries of an opaque screen in order to produce

 © Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 iliaiai

 Fig. 8 Poincaré's point L within the region bounded by Β + C

 an expression for the source at L that will lead us to the difficulty that Poincaré
 discovered.48

 Recall first that in these calculations a surface Sœ at infinity is presumed where the

 wave function and its normal derivatives vanish. We now develop expressions for the

 values of the source wave and of the total wave at L by integrating within the region
 that does not enclose it—the darkened area in Fig. 8, which is bounded by sm, Soo,
 and the surfaces Β, C of the screen itself.

 Since point L does not lie within the region of integration, and since there are no

 singularities for the source wave, the total wave, or the Green's function Gl within that

 region, then Green's theorem requires that the integral for either the source wave or
 for the total wave over the boundaries and using the Green's function Gl must vanish

 (since the values also vanish at infinity by assumption we may as always neglect that
 boundary):

 ' W i 3Gl
 G ι — φ
 3Ν Ψ dN

 da — 0

 Gl»ï1-v**£L·
 dN dN

 da = 0

 II

 II

 s\j B-\~C

 48 Poincaré's deduction of the difficulty is extremely terse. What follows draws out the several relations
 that he developed in somewhat greater detail. Also see Baker and Copson (1939), pp. 70-72.

 (14)

 (15)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 490

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 However—the key element in Poincaré's proof—Kirchhoff's boundary conditions

 reduce (15) to (16) since (pRand its normal derivatives should both vanish over C,

 while taking the values of φ1 over Β and sm

 Subtracting (16) from (14) accordingly yields (17):

 sm+B

 c

 (16)

 (17)

 And here we find Poincaré's problem. Since ψ1 is an arbitrary source wave, and since

 surface C is itself not only arbitrary but also without physical constraints when con

 sidering the source wave, (17) would imply that such a wave would have to vanish

 "whatever the form of the screen," i.e. even in its physical absence. Waves could sim

 ply not exist at all. Something was clearly wrong with the boundary condition over
 the shadowed surface of the screen, since it is that condition which produces (17).

 Poincaré did not also deduce through an example that the wave which results from

 Kirchhoff's boundary conditions cannot reproduce the very conditions over the aper

 ture proper that led to it (c/footnote 81 below). He had instead found that waves could

 simply not occur at all given Kirchhoff's conditions.

 In working with Green's theorem earlier in his lectures, Poincaré had remarked that

 "in general, it will not be possible arbitrarily to assign to one a system of values, whether

 of φ or άφ/dΝ, because these two functions are linked by a relation expressing that the

 integral is null in an exterior point."49 This is perhaps what led him to investigate what

 occurs when the integrations are carried out for "an exterior point" in Green's theorem,

 leading to the contradiction between the existence of waves and Kirchhoff's boundary

 conditions that he uncovered. Poincaré's remark concerning overdetermination would

 certainly have been clear to most mathematicians and physicists in his day. However,

 that fact alone does not lead to his result, which requires considerably more: the

 problem arises because the total wave (and its normal derivative) is presumed to be

 the same as the source wave over the entire visible part of the obstacle (surface Β

 in Fig. 8. Poincaré's point L within the region bounded by B+C), for that was why

 φ' appeared in Poincaré's several expressions for φτ, but that it must vanish on the
 shadowed surface (C).

 In 1897 Lord Rayleigh in England took an entirely different tack. He did not mention

 the Poincaré paradox at all, but instead developed two alternative expressions for the
 diffracted wave. Neither of the two solutions suffered in the manner that Poincaré

 had pointed out because, unlike Kirchhoff's expression, Rayleigh's alternatives did

 not impose simultaneous requirements on both the wave and its normal derivative—

 which Poincaré had himself pointed to as a possible source of the problem, though

 49 Poincaré (1889), pp. 144-145.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 491

 we have seen that it required both that and a discontinuity of the wave and its normal

 derivative in crossing from the unshielded to the shielded region.

 6 The Rayleigh-Sommerfeld alternatives

 By the mid-twentieth century, the inconsistency of Kirchhoff's theory seemed to many

 to be an obvious consequence of the well-known boundary conditions for partial

 differential equations. As E.W. Marchand (1914-1999) at Eastman Kodak's Research

 Laboratory and Emil Wolf (1922-) at the University of Rochester (the latter of whom

 had studied under Max Born) remarked in 1966:

 Since the time-independent wave equation for U is elliptic, the specification of

 U or its normal derivative 3 U/dn in the plane of the aperture (together with the

 specification of the asymptotic behavior of the solution at infinity in the appro

 priate half-space) is sufficient to specify the solution uniquely. The inconsistency

 in Kirchhoff's theory arises from the specification of both U and dU/3 η and has

 the consequence that, as the point of observation Ρ approaches the plane of the

 aperture, the Kirchhoff solution Uk(P) does not recover the assumed boundary
 conditions.50

 It had for decades been common knowledge that solutions to hyperbolic or elliptic

 partial differential equations are fully determined by either, but not both, of the fol

 lowing two conditions: (1) the Dirichlet, which specifies the value of the function on a

 given boundary, or (2) the Neumann, which specifies the value of the function's normal

 derivative there.51 From this perspective, of which we have just seen that Poincaré was

 quite aware, Kirchhoff's theory must be problematic. Yet the result seemed to work

 quite well empirically given the approximations that Kirchhoff had made. Poincaré

 accordingly thought that, though the two requirements are not "rigorously compati

 ble, they are at least so in an approximate manner, when one neglects quantities of the

 order of a wavelength."52 He did not however provide any clear justification for such
 a claim.

 In 1897 Rayleigh, the leading expert on the theory of sound (having published the

 first edition of his magisterial treatise on the subject in 1877) detailed a theory that

 avoided overspecifying the boundary conditions.53 Rayleigh examined two situations:

 in one (φ1) the normal gradient of the wave vanishes over the shadowed surface of

 the screen, while in the other (φ") the wave itself does. In both cases the wave and

 50 Marchand and Wolf (1966), p. 1712.

 51 Hyperbolic equations, of which the time-dependent wave equation is one, have the form

 d2(p/dx2 - (χ/ε^'ό^φ/'άί1 = /( χ, t) while elliptic equations satisfy

 (Ρ-φβχ^+ίΡ-φ/'άγ1 = f(x, y)—Laplace's, Poisson's and the time-independent wave equation developed
 by Helmholtz are all elliptic.

 52 Poincaré (1892b), p. 188.

 53 Rayleigh (1897). The details of Rayleigh's analysis depended upon results he had developed in his
 Theory of Sound, whose second edition of the first volume had appeared in 1894 and, for the relevant parts
 of the second volume, the year before.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 integrating solely over an aperture A, that are presumed to modify these solutions to

 take account of the perforation. The functions Ψ,„, Ψρ must satisfy the reduced wave
 equation.

 492

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 its normal gradient must be continuous across the aperture. This produces a duo of
 possible solutions as follows, wherein S denotes the surface of the screen including

 any aperture and A denotes an aperture:54

 φ

 11

 -1

 4π

 9G

 di

 //

 . S-A

 Ψ dN  +IIis

 A

 _1_
 4π

 II·

 L S-A

 dN

 + Uds

 A

 dG dcp
 ψ G—
 rdN 8Ν

 d G 3φ
 φ— — G—
 Ψ3Ν dN

 This division into two situations raised the problem of how to find distinct expressions

 for φ in each case. The issue did not arise with Kirchhoff's integral across the aperture

 because he dropped the integral across the screen proper. Rayleigh solved the problem

 by considering two cases. For ψ1 he envisioned a perfectly reflecting plane screen

 on which a plane wave parallel to it is incident. He then offered expressions xm, χρ
 respectively for what such a wave would be on either side of the screen when it is

 imperforated, so that for a screen S in the yz plane xm = e lkx + elkx and χρ

 : 0.

 I ^

 To these he added, again respectively, i/rm = ff ^m^j—dS, ψρ
 A A

 = JfVm^dS, ψρ = ffVp^dS,

 For continuity conditions in φ1, again, Rayleigh needed the normal gradient of the

 wave over the shadowed surface of the screen to vanish, but for the wave as well as its

 normal gradient to be continuous across the aperture, i.e. at the screen, where x — 0

 Rayleigh required in ψ1 that:

 r , 3 (Χρ + Ψρ) n
 on S - A : —= 0

 dN

 t „ , , , . 9(Xm + Ψη) d(xp + ψρ)
 on A : 2 + = ψρ and —

 dN

 dN

 Since χρ (and so its normal gradient) is required to vanish over the entire surface S,

 and the normal gradient of xm also vanishes over 5 (where χ = 0), these requirements

 can be satisfied provided that ^m^p are equal and opposite on A, with the wave

 functions ψΜ,ψρ then being equal and opposite by reflection of the one across the
 screen to produce the other, with the additional stipulation that the wave function ψm

 must have the value -1 on the aperture proper. The problem then consists, as Rayleigh

 put it, "in so determining Φ», that this shall be the case." Conversely, in the case

 of φ11, where the wave is presumed to vanish over the shadowed surface 5 - A,

 Rayleigh altered xm to the difference e~kx — ekx instead of the sum, so that both

 and xp vanish everywhere at the screen. In this situation ψη, ψρ are, respectively,

 54 Rayleigh (1896), secs. 277, 278 and 292, the last of which Rayleigh referred to in his paper on optical

 diffraction, Rayleigh 1897.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 If ff Ψρ à(e AS. To satisfy continuity over the aperture then
 A A
 required Ψ,η,Ψρ to be equal and opposite there, where takes a value such that
 δψη,/dN becomes ik.

 Note, then, that Rayleigh's duo each in its specific manner only partially satisfy

 Kirchhoff's boundary conditions over the body S-A of the screen: in the case of φ1 the

 wave function over S - A must vanish, whereas its normal gradient need not, whereas

 in the case of φ11 the reverse holds. The problems then require judicious choices of

 the wave functions and appropriate conditions at the aperture using the same Green's

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 493

 —ikr

 function . Rayleigh's aim had not been to avoid the inconsistency that plagued

 Kirchhoff's solution, but rather to obtain expressions that followed directly from the

 assumption of one of the two different boundary conditions on S - A. Kirchhoff's

 theory of course required that both be satisfied at once. Because Rayleigh had not fun

 damentally altered the physical presumptions that underpin Kirchhoff's (or Poincaré's)

 analysis, viz that the screen can annul the wave or its normal gradient, and that the

 wave in the aperture remains unaffected, his two possible integrals were distinguished

 solely by the a prion imposition of different conditions. That is, Rayleigh's theory,

 like Kirchhoff's, remained tied to imposed requirements without investigating what

 might underpin such stipulations on the grounds, just then becoming prevalent, of

 electromagnetic optics.

 In the early 1890s the young German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld (1868-1951)

 developed a theory for diffraction that avoided Green's theorem by recurring to elec

 tromagnetic relations.55 He was at the time assistant to the mathematician Felix Klein

 (1849-1925) at the University of Gôttingen. Like Kirchhoff and Poincaré, Sommer

 feld was a dedicated teacher, and as a professor of theoretical physics at Munich from

 1906 he trained an imposing array of students, including Wolfgang Pauli, Rudolf

 Peierls, Alfred Landé, Linus Pauling, 1.1. Rabi and Max von Laue (the latter three

 as post-graduates.56 In 1894 Sommerfeld, referring to Poincaré, had remarked in an

 article that Kirchhoff's boundary conditions are 'inadmissible' and would entail that

 wave function must vanish everywhere, though the theory nevertheless yields good

 agreement with observation (so far as was then known).57 Two years later Sommerfeld

 published an intricate alternative that avoided the inconsistency but that was limited to

 the two-dimensional case of an infinitely thin, semi-infinite plane barrier with infinite

 electric conductivity struck by a linearly-polarized, plane wave parallel to it. To do so,

 Sommerfeld calculated the scattering of such a wave under the usual electromagnetic

 condition that the electric field vector in the plane of the screen vanishes, resulting

 after extensive, and intricate, calculation in an expression for the scattered wave.58

 55 Sommerfeld (1896); translated as Sommerfeld (2004).

 56 For a comprehensive examination of the Sommerfeld school at Munich, and in particular its concentration

 on the solution of specific problems, see Seth (2010).

 57 Sommerfeld (1895), pp. 341-342.

 58 In 1892 Poincaré had himself considered the case of diffraction from a sharp metallic edge at large

 diffraction angles in an effort to account for experimental results that Gouy had obtained (Gouy (1886)). To

 do so he limited his analysis to infinite conductivity and examined the two-dimensional case by considering
 the wave from the edge produced by the scattering of a converging cylindrical disturbance whose axis
 parallels the edge (Poincaré (1892a); on this and Gouy's experiments see Darrigol (2015), pp. 14-16.)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 494

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 The resulting expression indicated that a modified form of Young's original convic

 tion that the illuminated edge of a diffractor could be treated as though it emitted

 waves. This result, however limited, constituted the foundation for a rigorous theory

 of diffraction, and to reach it Sommerfeld deployed a form of imaging in the complex

 plane in order to maintain the boundary condition on the electric field. Although the

 theory proved influential over the years, the intricacy of the calculations continued

 to limit its application.59 The use of an image procedure did nevertheless also lead

 Sommerfeld in his optical lectures to deploy images using Green's theorem proper.

 His approach there invoked the same duo of integrals that Rayleigh had used in 1897

 albeit derived, unlike Rayleigh's, which worked with the form of the wave function,

 from a different specification of Green's function.60

 Sommerfeld noted that if the Green's function G{r) vanishes on 5, then the term

 containing the normal derivative of the wave function will also vanish there:

 φ(Ρ)

 his  ds

 ΒφΓ(Λ BG(r)
 dN (Γ) Ψ dN

 G(r) = 0 over S =>■ φ(Ρ)

 -£//  ds

 BG(r)

 dN

 In that case only the values of the wave function and of the Green function's normal

 derivative need to be specified. Simple in principle, but difficult to apply in prac

 tice since there is no general Green's function that could satisfy such a requirement.

 Accordingly Sommerfeld had to limit his theory to a situation in which the Green's

 function could be so specified, and the only one that worked required the screen to be

 a plane.61

 This can be done in the following way. Consider with Sommerfeld an infinite screen

 located at the origin and parallel to the xy plane (Fig. 9). Place point Ρ at (Px . Py· Pz)

 and consider an arbitrary point Q whose coordinates are (Qx, Qy. Qz). Now reflect Ρ

 across the screen to form its image P' whose coordinates will therefore be(Px Py.-Pz).
 Then the respective distances r, r' from Ρ, P' to Q will be:

 Footnote 58 continued

 Sommerfeld referred to Poincaré's results for support since he had obtained a similar final expression under

 the same approximation (far field close to the edge of the geometric shadow): Sommerfeld 1896, p. 374.

 59 Sommerfeld produced a version of his theory in his lectures on optics: Sommerfeld (1954) present the

 lectures that he gave in 1934. Sees. 38-39 provide his "mathematically rigorous solution" for the infinitely

 thin, semi-infinite screen. See Born and Wolf (2002); chap. 11 develops the Sommerfeld theory up to the

 early 1950s. For subsequent developments see Babich et al. (2007).

 60 Sommerfeld (1954), pp. 195-201. Sommerfeld had likely been giving these lectures for decades in
 some form, so that his version of the Rayleigh alternatives probably date to his early years at Munich, so a

 decade or more after Rayleigh's work on the subject. Sommerfeld did not mention Rayleigh in the published

 lectures, perhaps because his version of the alternatives involved a considerably different Green's function,
 as we shall see.

 61 Ibid., 198-200.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 495

 Fig. 9 Sommerfeld's
 Fig. 9 Sommerfeld's
 configuration for his Green's
 configuration for his Green's
 function
 function

 S

 r = yjiQx - PX)2 + (Qy - Py)2 + (Qz - Pz)2

 r' = J(Qx - ΡχΫ + (Qy - Py)2 + (Qz + Pz)2

 Now define a new Green's function as follows:

 G(Q) = exp('^r) _ exP(''^'r,)

 r r'

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The new function is, as it were, formed by envisioning the image of a Green's

 function at point Ρ across the screen and then summing the image with its progenitor.
 This new expression meets all the requirements for a Green's function, for it is a
 solution of Helmholtz's equation, converges to the appropriate form as r, r' reach

 zero, and adds nothing at infinity. We can calculate the derivative of G in the direction

 of the z-axis, viz. in the direction normal to the screen itself. Having done so, we move
 Q to the screen itself, where the result is that G vanishes. Over the shadowed part of

 the screen the wave function ψ must vanish, while it must be continuous across the
 aperture. Sommerfeld assumed a point source and so expressed the emitted wave as

 ~τ" where r is the distance from the source to a point of the aperture. For the alternative
 case in which the normal derivative of the Green's function must vanish, Sommerfeld

 merely had to form the sum instead of the difference, viz. G(Q) = exV^k') + exP ) ;
 since the normal is opposite in direction on either side of the aperture.

 Neither of the two Rayleigh-Sommerfeld expressions yields the Fresnel integrals—

 only their sum does. Consequently evaluation of either requires novel series expan

 sions. In 1913, for example, Rayleigh applied φ1 to the case of an infinite narrow

 slit, which required extensive numerical computation via a series for the resulting

 496

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Sommerfeld's route to a duo of mathematically consistent solutions differed con

 siderably from Rayleigh's. Sommerfeld had altered the Green's function by forming

 a difference or sum between the original function and its image across the screen but

 had retained a spherical source wave. Rayleigh had instead retained the single-term

 Green's function but had required a plane source wave. Both proceeded to apply their

 expressions to the standard configuration in which, namely, the distance from the aper

 ture to the field point is much greater than a wavelength. Moreover, though neither

 noted the point, the Kirchhoff integral is easily shown to be the mean of the Sommer

 feld duo, which are limited to a plane screen, with Rayleigh additionally requiring the

 incident wave to parallel the screen.62 Kirchhoff's full integral had no such limitation,

 but then it suffered from the Poincaré paradox.

 I/s 1 ff 9 (exp(—ikr)\
 ° 2π J J Ψ"*Τν \ r j

 A

 11/ \ II rv "v'/vrinCj

 _ Ζiff exP(~^r) 9Wnc,
 ψ « = -//—τ—w*

 " ~ 2π JJ

 Kirchhoff: ]

 2

 _L if 9 /exp(—ifcr)\ _ J_ f f exp(-ikr) 9yinc
 2π77^ιης9Λ^\ r ) S 2π J J r dN

 Λ A

 integral.63

 In his rigorous diffraction theory of 1896 Sommerfeld had concluded with a few

 remarks concerning the results of experiment that are worth quoting in full in order

 to gain a purchase on the empirical issues of the period. Since Poincaré in 1892 had
 obtained the same final results under the same circumstances, he concluded as follows:

 The question of the experimental confirmation of our [1896] theory can be here

 settled in a word. On the one hand Kirchhoff's formulas have been often proven

 by observations at a small diffraction angle; on the other hand Mr. Poincaré

 compares his formulas with Gouy's observations under large diffraction angles

 and finds them to be essentially confirmed. In the same circumstances, that is

 for small as for large diffraction angle our theory therefore is also confirmed by

 experiment [sic].64

 Consequently Kirchhoff's full integral could account for experiments at small dif

 fraction angles, but not at the large ones in Gouy's experiments, which latter could

 62 For y7 the normal derivative of the Sommerfeld difference Green's function reduces to twice the value

 of the positive term, while for ^"the Sommerfeld function is just twice the value of either term.

 63 Rayleigh(1913).

 64 Sommerfeld (1896), p. 374.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 497

 be handled by Poincaré's 1892 analysis based on electromagnetic relations (see note
 58 above). Sommerfeld's scattering theory, which avoided Green theorem methods,
 could handle both.

 In his optical lectures Sommerfeld did not directly address empirical issues, but he

 did point out that any theory involving the imposition of boundary conditions on an

 expression derived from Green's theorem (and so leading to an interpretation in terms

 of Huygens' principle) was questionable, including the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld duo:

 The question remains, are these assumptions also physically justifiable? The

 answer again is that they are only approximations for sufficiently small wave

 lengths. The field does not vanish completely behind the screen, nor is the field in

 the aperture entirely unaffected by the presence of the screen, at least not within

 distances of the order of magnitude of a wavelength from the edge of the screen.

 The introduction of the Green's function therefore involves no final justification
 of the method.65

 Sommerfeld accordingly remained unconvinced that the boundary conditions asso

 ciated with any such form of diffraction theory were physically reasonable, whereas

 the approach that he had developed in the early 1890s avoided the problem, at least to

 a certain extent. Nevertheless, half a decade after the appearance of Kirchhoff's paper

 an alternative expression based on his theory was produced that, we shall see, would

 lead decades later to a reformulation that could avoid the Poincaré paradox—but only
 at considerable mathematical cost.

 7 Kirchhoff's integral transformed

 A year after Kirchhoff's death in the fall of 1887, and before the appearance of the

 Poincaré paradox, an Italian mathematician modified Kirchhoff's theory by converting

 it from a surface to a line integral, a transformation that implicated a different way to

 work with Kirchhoff's boundary conditions. A native of Milan, Italy, Gian Antonio

 Maggi (1856-1937) attended Kirchhoff's lectures in Berlin. In 1886 he had become an

 ordinary professor in analysis at the University of Messina.66 Two years later Maggi

 published a transformation of Kirchhoff's fundamental integral that avoided the use of

 Kirchhoff's function F with its peculiar properties. Of his time in Berlin Maggi wrote

 in 1914 that he "was fortunate, not long before [writing his 1888 paper] to follow

 Kirchhoff's lessons at the University of Berlin, and so I was in a privileged position

 to pay attention to that supremely important result [Kirchhoff's diffraction theory],

 which the present state of the theory of the electromagnetic field has recently enriched

 with new applications."67

 65 Sommerfeld (1954), p. 200. The italics are Sommerfeld's.

 66 Maggi (1888). On Maggi see Cisotti (1938), Anonymous, 2015. The reminiscence is from Maggi (1914).

 Maggi wrote the latter paper in order to compensate the difficulty of his 1888 presentation which, he wrote

 in 1914, "had somewhat harmed its perspicuity."

 67 Maggi (1914). Since Kirchhoff died in 1887, Maggi's "not long before" means several years prior to
 1888.

 ζ} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 498

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Kirchhoff was known for his strict adherence to precision and rigor. For example, the

 young Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894)—student of Kirchhoff's colleague Helmholtz—

 had sent him a paper on elastic collisions that Kirchhoff had extensively edited because

 Hertz had not been sufficiently explicit in laying out the precise conditions of the

 problem.68 Perhaps Kirchhoff had expressed to Maggi directly or in his lectures some

 doubts concerning the propriety of his function F, or it may be that Maggi noted its

 presence and decided to avoid it in order to purify Kirchhoff's integral of one possible

 objection.69 To do so Maggi deployed three points: two of the points are fixed, while

 the third is not. The wave equation's solutions V have the following usual form, with

 r representing the distance between a fixed point xq, yo, zo and a point x, y, ζ within
 the enclosed volume:

 = a2V2V with r = J(x0 - x)2 + (yo ~ y)2 + (zo ~ z)2

 v _ ~ r!a)

 r

 Maggi then noted that the function can contain, separately, the variable coordinates
 x, y, ζ and still satisfy the wave equation, so that V becomes V(t — r/a, x,y,z).

 By considering the two fixed points, one of whose coordinates Qto, Jo. Zo) appear

 in the expression for r whereas the coordinates of the other does not, Maggi was

 able to obtain Kirchhoff's fundamental integral without using the function F while

 nevertheless leaving the form of the wave open. The reasoning was sufficiently obscure

 that he attempted a simplification in 1914 (see above, note 66).

 This was not Maggi's only innovation. In addition, he effected a significant trans

 formation of the fundamental integral. To do so he used the line joining his two fixed

 points to specify the edge of a plane that could be used in a complicated manner to

 create a surface that separated space into two contiguous regions within which the

 analysis took different forms. These two points represented the loci of the source and

 of the point at which the wave is observed past a surface that represents a screen, and

 the regions in question correspond respectively to the space defined by the geometric

 shadow and to the space outside it. Kirchhoff's boundary conditions were separately

 applied to these two regions. The result of the procedure yielded a complicated func

 tion (due to the choice of coordinates) for the value of the wave that involved in both

 regions a line integral around the edge of an aperture. In the geometrically-illuminated

 region the disturbance is determined by the sum of a direct wave from the source added

 to the line integral, while in the geometric shadow only the line integral holds. This

 accordingly implicated a discontinuity across the shadow boundary, though Maggi's

 use of prolate coordinates rather obscures the configuration. The transformation to a

 line integral was effected by Maggi's use of Stokes' theorem based on the assumption

 that the medium is incompressible, as was usual. If, then, Û represents a disturbance in

 68 On which see Buchwald (1994), chap. 8.

 69 The fact that the addition by Hensel in the published lectures a few years later writes of F that such

 a function "actually" exists may indicate doubt at the time concerning the propriety of basing such a

 fundamental result upon it.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor...

 499

 such a medium, V · û must vanish, in which case u can be represented by V χ ν with

 υ an appropriate function. Consequently Stokes' theorem affords the transformation

 of a surface integral for u into a line integral for v:

 σ

 σ

 3σ

 In a brief consideration at the end of his article, Maggi concluded that, in the limit

 of vanishingly small wavelength, the disturbance occurs entirely outside the region of

 the geometric shadow. The signal purpose of his transformation to a line integral, then,

 was to yield that result, which in effect retrieved geometric optics. Yet it seems that

 very few people paid attention to this latter result, perhaps because it was obscurely

 framed in terms of prolate coordinates. Which makes it hardly surprising that the first

 to re-achieve such a transformation did not mention Maggi at all.

 Wojciech (Adalbert) Rubinowicz (1889-1970) was born in Bukovina to Polish
 parents, and received his Ph.D. in physics at the University of Czernowitz in 1916.

 He planned to stay there as a post-graduate assistant, but the university then closed

 during the First World War. He obtained a temporary position at the University of

 Munich's institute of theoretical physics, where he began work as assistant to Arnold

 Sommerfeld in 1916.70 A year later, Rubinowicz published an article in the Annalen der

 Physik that explored a line-integral expression for Kirchhoff's fundamental integral.71

 He was stimulated to do so by Sommerfeld's 1894 analysis of diffraction based on

 electromagnetic theory (on which see above), as Rubinowicz aimed to see whether a

 similar result could be obtained directly from Kirchhoff's integral by means of a line

 integral transformation. Although Rubinowicz's work became much better known

 among European physicists and mathematicians than Maggi's, the conversion that

 both effected, though in considerably different ways, would later become known as

 the "Maggi-Rubinowicz transformation."72

 Rubinowicz did not maintain Kirchhoff's original formulation that allowed for an

 arbitrary wave but instead used the reduced Helmholtz equation and so presumed that

 the time and space variables could be separated. Consequently, unlike Maggi he did
 not have to concern himself with Kirchhoff's delta-like function. Rubinowicz first

 introduced the general surface integral over the boundary of a region G with a Green's

 function etkr/r, with û representing the value of the wave function over the region's
 boundary:

 G

 70 Eckert (2013), p. 226.

 71 Rubinowicz (1917).

 72 In 1923, the Austrian professor of physics Friedrich Kottler at the University of Vienna pointed out that
 Maggi, not Rubinowicz, had first produced the transformation. See Kottler (1923).

 (18)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 He then remarked that Kirchhoff had reduced (18) to an integral solely over an aperture

 F, producing the following expression for the wave at a point Ο in the diffraction

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 500

 73

 region.

 u{0)  'hJi  dj

 .8(g''*7 r) e

 dn

 '^dû
 r dn

 Rubinowicz next effected a clever choice of region and geometric boundary for the

 otherwise arbitrary surface G, one that was effectively the same as Maggi's but con

 siderably clearer due to the avoidance of prolate spherical coordinates. Limit G to a

 surface consisting of the region that would be geometrically illuminated by a source

 L of the form exp{ikp)/p shining through an aperture F which has a rim β.This

 demarcates a region with one end a surface K^ at infinity, capped at the other by the

 finite aperture F, and delimited by the conical boundary Κ (Fig. 10). The integral over

 Koo vanishes as usual, leaving only the region F + K. Since we have not introduced

 a physical aperture, the value of û over F + Κ must be the same that it would be

 in the absence of the screen, hence just exP^p). Consequently the expression for the
 field at a point Of within the F + Κ bounded region—which is, again, completely
 unobstructed—must be:74

 F+K

 _d_ /exp(ikp)\ /exp(ikr)\ 1 _ expjikp)

 3»\ Ρ A r /( ρ

 Introduce a screen such that the surface F corresponds to a physical aperture. In

 that case for a point Ο located anywhere in the diffraction region Kirchhoff's integral

 requires (with û on F having the same value that it would were the screen absent):75

 U(0) = — Hds exp(ikp) 9 ^exP(*'fo·)^ _ ^exp(i'fcp)^

 (20)

 Now place the general Kirchhoff point Ο at Ο ε within the region bounded by F + K.

 Then for such a point, since (20) integrates over F only, whereas (19) integrates over
 F + K, Rubinowicz could subtract (20) from (19) to write:

 73 Rubinowicz (1917), p. 259.

 74 Ibid., p. 260.

 75 Ibid., p. 259.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 501

 screen

 Fig. 10 Rubinowicz's surfaces

 Ι(0ι)-±//Λ |»(«)

 κ

 d (exp(ikp)\ {exp(ikr)\|
 / V r jj

 (21)

 Rubinowicz's expression (21) for u(Oe) applies only to a point within the F + Κ
 bounded region. Outside of this region Kirchhoff's general expression (20) for u(O)
 would presumably apply. This might seem to be a pointless formality—we have as it

 were introduced surface Κ in (19) only to remove it again in (21). But we have in fact

 done something more, because we assert that (21) does properly represent the resultant

 wave within the region bounded by F + Κ when a screen perforated by F is present.
 This is nothing more than Kirchhoff's claim for such a region but Rubinowicz's (21)
 has an important representational effect.

 Because the value of the normal gradient vanishes over Κ. Rubinowicz could
 transform the Κ integral into one entirely around the rim Β of the cap F. Integrating
 from ρ — pi (at a point on the rim) to infinity thereby produced (recall that ρ in the
 Κ integral is the distance between L and a point on Κ):

 oo

 J J ds = dl J dp (22)

 κ Β Pl

 exp[ik(pi + rt)] cos (η,η) . 7
 u(Oe) = ue(Oe) + -— φ dl
 τ- -, sin(p/, dl)

 (23)

 Απ

 p/ri 1+cos (η,ρι)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Attention to the geometry yields an expression for the wave field within F + Κ that

 involves an integral over the rim Β added to the geometric-optics field:

 502

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 In Rubinowicz's (23), r/ is the distance between the field point Ο and a point I on B,

 h is the normal there to the screen aperture F, pi is the distance from the rim point

 to the luminous point at L, and cos(n, η) is the cosine of the angle between the two

 vectors η and r/. The source wave ue(B) at the rim appears as the factor exP^'fI, so
 that (23) may also be written as follows:

 Β

 — sin(p,,d/) (24)

 Rubinowicz's (24) entails an inherent discontinuity at the boundary Κ : on it the inte

 grand of the rim integral becomes infinite because there the two vectors ?/, p/ point

 in opposite directions. In the region external to F + Κ the untransformed Kirch

 hoff expression (20) presumably obtains, and so also do his conditions that both the

 wave function and its normal gradient vanish over the shadowed surface of the screen.

 Consequently, and despite the fact that Kirchhoff's u(O) still holds everywhere, the
 Maggi-Rubinowicz introduction of the F + Κ boundary introduces a representa

 tional discontinuity, though one that neither of the two explored since their interests

 lay elsewhere. Neither did they ask whether the rim integral would vanish if the

 observation point Ο ε lay in the aperture proper, where on the basis of Kirchhoff's

 boundary condition—which is still presumed—the incident wave ue(Oe) should be
 unaltered.

 Although Rubinowicz's (24) was in essence similar to Maggi's transformation,

 Maggi's use of prolate spherical coordinates obscured a startling result upon which

 Rubinowicz placed considerable emphasis (and which Maggi himself likely did not
 perceive). Namely, that (24) amounted to a partial vindication of Thomas Young's

 original method of calculating diffraction by finding the interference between a direct

 wave from the source and waves presumptively engendered by the direct wave at the

 edges of the aperture—as Rubinowicz remarked at the very beginning of his article.76

 This amounted to a considerable alteration in the original sense of the Huygens-Fresnel

 principle from one in which the observed wave is governed entirely by wavelets that

 are distributed over the aperture's surface, to one in which the efficacious wavelets

 that alter the incident wave are located on the aperture's rim.

 Rubinowicz's article appeared in 1917, over three decades after Kirchhoff's original

 and Maggi's own transformation, and neither he nor Maggi had concerned themselves

 with the problem of Kirchhoff's boundary conditions (which Maggi may not have
 been aware of in 1888). Each of them had a different purpose in mind, Maggi to

 avoid Kirchhoff's function F, which led him to his line-integral transformation, and

 Rubinowicz to retrieve a simulacrum of Young's original theory of diffraction. Does

 the Poincaré paradox carry over as well to the Maggi-Rubinowicz transformation?

 Like Maggi, but with greater geometric clarity since he had not introduced the com
 plexity of prolate spherical coordinates, Rubinowicz had altered the way in which

 76 Partial only because Young had assumed that the wave emanating from the aperture's rim would be the

 same as the source wave but shifted in phase by half a wavelength. Rubinowicz's rim integral is considerably
 different.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 503

 Kirchhoff's boundary conditions had been applied by both Kirchhoff and by Poincaré

 by introducing two distinct regions across which the expression for the wave function

 is discontinuous. Neither of these regions had a boundary coincident with the entire

 surface of the diffractor proper since the one was capped by the aperture and the

 other by the surface outside the geometric shadow. For that reason Poincaré's proof
 of inconsistency, which required no discontinuities as well as the enclosing surface

 of the diffractor (within which Poincaré placed his point L to generate the paradox),

 could not be so directly applied. The question accordingly arises as to whether the new

 representation might capitalize on discontinuity to evade the Poincaré paradox. To do

 so in a way that preserved the Green theorem structure in some form would certainly

 require altering Kirchhoff's boundary conditions.

 8 A form of consistency achieved

 Work continued in the twentieth century through at least two alternatives which, though

 not always aimed principally at that purpose, could avoid the Poincaré paradox. In 1923

 Friedrich Kottler (1886-1965), physics professor at the University of Vienna proposed

 formulating the integral as a solution to a "saltus" problem—one in which the field

 undergoes a discontinuous jump across a boundary, requiring the specification of its
 values on either immediate side, much as, in electrostatics, a fictitious distribution of

 charge at the boundary across which dielectric capacity changes produces a discon

 tinuity in the potential.77 Kottler proposed to treat Kirchhoff's conditions as though

 they were the result of a similar kind of discontinuity, thereby obviating the Poincaré

 paradox but at the cost of introducing an assumption without physical justification.78

 In 1933 Max Born (1882-1970), thinking in terms of his characteristic recursive

 method, suggested that the Kirchhoff integral might be the first-order approximation

 in a sequence of iterative solutions that converged to the exact solution represented by

 his boundary conditions.79

 In 1964 Marchand and Wolf remarked that "the difference between the consistent

 solution of Rayleigh and Sommerfeld and the inconsistent solution of Kirchhoff may

 be regarded as due to the superposition of plane waves whose amplitude distribution
 has a very sharp maximum for ... waves propagated along the plane of the screen.

 Such waves do not contribute to the far field."80 Two years later they followed with

 an analysis that enabled a direct calculation of precisely such a series of waves by

 means of a reworking of the boundary conditions through a clever use of the Maggi

 Rabinowicz transformation, thereby rescuing the essence of Kirchhoff's formulation

 and, with it, the meaning of an expression akin to Huygens principle.

 Rubinowicz's form of the transformation, recall, could be expressed in terms of

 the source as follows (cf (23)) invoking a discontinuity for points past the screen as

 77 Kottler (1923) and, decades later, Kottler 1965.

 78 By contrast, in electro- and magneto-statics dielectric and para- or dia-magnetic substances yield the

 discontinuity as a result of the jump in permeability at a boundary.

 79 Born (1933), p. 152.

 80 Marchand and Wolf (1964).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 504

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 one moves from within to without the geometric shadow since the denominator in the

 formula vanishes for points on the shadow proper:

 u(0E) = ue(Oe) + — £ dI {«£■(#)

 4π J
 Β

 Rubinowciz's transformation ofKirchhoff's integral within the geometrically-illumin

 ated region

 Kirchhoff's surface-integral involves no such discontinuity of the kind for it leads

 to the following expression (cf above, note 41):

 Marchand and Wolf considered that the inconsistency built into Kirchhoff's theory

 by his boundary conditions could be shown in a different manner from Poincaré

 by noting a related consequence. Take a point in the diffracted region (not, as with

 Poincaré, within the geometrically-defined body of the diffractor itself) and move

 it indefinitely close to the open aperture. Calculate the value of the wave function

 at that point using the expression that results from Kirchhoff's theory. It should by

 hypothesis be effectively the same as the unaltered source wave, but in fact it is

 not.81 Why, one might ask, did they turn to this way to show the inconsistency? It

 is quite direct and perhaps more revealing than Poincaré's route, but, more to the

 point, it is precisely this consequence of the full set of Kirchhoff's conditions that can

 be avoided by exploiting the discontinuity at the geometric shadow inherent in the

 Maggi-Rubinowicz transformation.82

 To that end, Marchand and Wolf began not with the transformation but with an

 explicit alteration of the boundary conditions, something that neither Maggi nor Rubi

 nowicz had proposed. Consider with Marchand and Wolf a luminous point L whose

 distance from a given point of the aperture rim is so. Consider a point P' with coor

 dinate (x,y) on the shadowed part of the screen itself, including any aperture(s), and

 express the presumptive value U (Ρ') of the wave at such a point of the screen by a

 sum of the source wave added to an integral over the aperture's rim B, of the following

 form, with points Q' lying on the rim:

 81 The expression given immediately above is not applicable to a point close to the aperture because of

 the assumption that the aperture point to observation point distance is vastly larger than a wavelength. If

 however we take as an example of the problem what occurs in the case of a circular disk as screen and make

 no approximations, then two problems arise using the full Kirchhoff integral. The solution along the axis

 produces two terms, the second of which is infinite and obviously unphysical. Moreover—and this is the

 sort of problem that Marchand and Wolf had in mind—even the first term does not vanish at the disk itself,

 where by hypothesis no wave at all should exist. In other words, the boundary condition presupposed cannot

 be recovered (see Lucke 2004, pp. 3-4). A similar situation arises for diffraction by a circular aperture, in

 which the incident wave is not recovered at the aperture.

 82 Marchand and Wolf (1966).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 505

 U(/>') = f0(x, y) = ε0Ο, y)uinc(x, y) +  i/""  z(Q')

 . exp(ikQ'P')
 Q'P'

 Κ ■ dl

 where

 1 SQ' χ Q'P'

 Κ =

 4π IsjQ! 0Ί>' - Sfi' · ~Q!P'

 and where

 eo = 0 for points on the screen but outside the aperture

 «0 = 1 for points in the aperture proper

 S is the location of a point light source outside the aperture

 This expression for the field intensity U(?') on both the screen's shadowed surface

 and on the aperture constitute new boundary conditions for Kirchhoff's problem of

 diffraction. Where Kirchhoff had set the value at the aperture to the incident wave,

 Marchand and Wolf add to that wave the rim integral. And where Kirchhoff had set

 the wave on the screen but outside the aperture to zero, they now add the rim integral.

 Neither Maggi nor Rubinowicz had suggested that the rim integral might be extended

 to points of the screen outside the aperture, and neither had they considered what

 takes place if the observation point were to lie in the aperture proper, where, again, on

 Kirchhoff's boundary condition the rim integral should vanish to retrieve the unaltered
 incident wave.

 In a critical next step, Marchand and Wolf note that their expression for Κ is iden

 tical to the one that appears in the Maggi-Rubinowicz transformation of Kirchhoff's

 diffraction integral, i.e. in the factor of jn Rubinowicz's rim integral
 (24). From here, they claim that the diffracted wave field at a point Ρ = (x,y,z) on

 the side of the aperture opposite to the light source (z > 0) can be expressed as

 Uk(x, y, ζ) = εο(χ, y, z)uinc(x, y, ζ) + — <j> u\ac{Q ) — Κ ■ dl

 Β

 1 / . exp(ikQ'P) - -

 Although the Marchand-Wolf integral appears to differ from the term that appears

 in Rubinowicz's expression of Kirchhoff's formula (24), they are nevertheless essen

 tially equivalent and so both exhibit precisely the same discontinuity: at the geometric

 shadow proper, i.e. if P' lies on K, SQ' parallels Q'P', and consequently the expres

 sion for Κ is discontinuous there. Now, they continued, the rim integral alone should

 be extended to any point outside the geometrically-illuminated region. How so, when

 Rubinowicz's derivation apparently concerned only the latter? Though Marchand and

 Wolf did not explicitly provide the reason, it is not at all hard to see: if Kirchhoff's

 boundary condition outside the geometric region but on the screen is replaced by

 Marchand-Wolf's (with «ο = 0). then on the conical sides delimiting the region the

 normal derivative of the wave function again vanishes, while the aperture rim still

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 506

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 delimits the region, leaving, via the Maggi-Rubinowicz transformation, only the rim

 integral over the closed part of the screen since the latter is bounded by the aperture.

 Consequently the Marchand-Wolf expression for U (Ρ') now holds throughout the

 diffraction region (in the form of Uk(x, y, z) above) provided that sq is unity every

 where within the geometrically-illuminated region but vanishes outside it. Moreover,

 because of the new condition at the aperture, the Marchand-Wolf integral for a point

 in the diffraction region that is indefinitely close to the aperture now does reproduce

 the presumed value there (i.e., Uk(x, y, ζ = 0) -*■ fo(x, >'))■ This is precisely what

 does not happen when using Kirchhoff's original with his condition that the wave at

 the aperture is unaltered from what it would be in the screen's absence. And this is

 all obtained from the transformation of Kirchhoff's original integral combined with

 Marchand and Wolf's alteration of the boundary conditions. The Kirchhoff inconsis

 tency is thereby avoided altogether since the new boundary conditions involve only

 the value of the wave function proper and not its normal gradient, whether over the

 screen proper or over the aperture—at the expense of discontinuity at the geometric

 shadow edge.

 That is not the only cost, for the transformation to a line integral also implicates a sig

 nificant amendment to the deployment of Fresnel's integrals, which had (and continue

 to this day) to permeate practical computations of diffraction since the 1830s. Within

 the approximation regime that governed the Fresnel (and so Kirchhoff) expressions,

 namely small wavelengths and loci far from the screen but not too far from the edge

 of the geometric shadow, these original expressions work well despite the boundary

 inconsistencies necessary to their derivation. But, one might ask, does the Marchand

 Wolf replacement do any better? Indeed, their 'consistent' version of the Kirchhoff

 integral does, they showed, produce good agreement with an experiment in which

 the behavior of 3.2cm microwaves was examined across the aperture in a conducting

 screen. The experiment indicated that the wave pattern across it varies nearly sinu

 soidally, which is well predicted by Marchand-Wolf but not of course by Kirchhoff's

 theory, which requires the unaltered value of the source wave.83 The Marchand-Wolf

 expression explains the results as due to the interference of the source wave with the

 wave scattered at the aperture's edge. But the sinusoidal behavior in the aperture nev

 ertheless does imply that the Kirchhoff assumption of an unaltered incident wave at

 the aperture works quite well for points in the diffraction regime that are not too close.

 This retrieves and justifies the Kirchhoff integral within an approximation regime with

 its longstanding, and persuasive, interpretation in terms of Huygensian wavelets.

 9 Conclusion

 We have examined a diffraction theory that, for nearly two centuries (including Fres

 nel's original) continued in use even though, a century in, its only derivation from

 a wave equation had nevertheless proved to be fundamentally inconsistent with the

 83 Neither are these results accommodated by the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld alternative in which the waveform

 at the aperture is assumed to be the same as that of the incident disturbance. The second alternative, in

 which the waveform's normal derivative is specified, fares somewhat better but still misses the mark. Ibid.,
 pp. 1715-1717.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor.

 507

 very conditions that yielded the expression that, so far as was then known, worked
 extremely well. One major reason for that resilience was the theory's instantiation

 within a mathematical framework of the principle, due to Huygens, on which Fresnel

 had originally grounded wave optics. Whereas Fresnel's wave optics had deployed

 assumptions concerning point-source radiators that presumptively constitute a wave

 front, Kirchhoff's theory was formulated as a solution to a partial differential equation

 based on Green's theorem. Critically, so far as was known the resulting formula for

 diffraction worked extremely well.

 Empirical adequacy and pragmatic tractability certainly were—and remain—
 central factors for the tenacity of Kirchhoff's theory. Scientists have, and continue

 to this day, used the expression provided by Kirchhoff's theory—or even Young's

 much simpler structure involving two-ray interference—in astronomical observations

 and optical experiments. In for example Albert Michelson and his colleague F.G.

 Pease's interferometric measurements at Mt. Wilson Observatory as late as 1920, the

 wave-optical method they employed to estimate a star's diameter did not go beyond

 the Fresnel integrals proper.84 Throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries,

 Kirchhoff's theory continued to appear in major textbooks and monographs, continued

 to be used and discussed in physics and engineering periodicals, and was generally

 considered to be a reasonable expression for the effect of diffraction by an aperture.

 The problem of consistency, to the extent—and it was apparently not a very great

 extent—that it was recognized seemed principally to concern a defect in the manner

 in which the Huygens principle or some variant thereof could be represented within a
 consistent mathematical context.

 The principal alternative to Kirchhoff's theory involved dropping one or the other of

 the two mutually-inconsistent boundary conditions. Rayleigh, who was not concerned

 with the Kirchhoff problem perse, had produced both in 1896 by choosing particular

 wave functions, while Sommerfeld elaborated the two alternatives using novel Green's

 functions, with the consequent result that Kirchhoff's solution proved to be the mean

 of the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld duo, though without any clear reason as to why that
 might be so. When Marchand and Wolf compared newly-produced microwave data

 with predictions from Kirchhoff's and the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld expressions in 1966,

 they found that Kirchhoff's, inconsistent mathematically though it certainly is, better

 matched measurements at the aperture.85 To a certain extent such a result was not alto

 gether surprising since Sommerfeld did not regard the boundary conditions that he had

 himself used to be physically reasonable, even if mathematically unexceptionable.86
 By contrast, Sommerfeld's own analytical solution in 1896, based on electromag

 netic relationships, though limited to diffraction by the edge of a half-infinite plane,

 did not require any a priori assumptions concerning boundary conditions. Yet the

 extreme complexity and intractability of this approach significantly restricted its prac

 tical applicability, whereas Kirchhoff's integral easily produced an expression under

 the approximation to small wavelengths in relation to aperture size and distance from

 84 Michelson and Pease (1920).

 85 Marchand and Wolf (1966), pp. 1715-1717.

 86 Sommerfeld (1954), p. 200.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 508

 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 the screen for both source and observation point that easily facilitated computations

 and was widely used in optical research. In that approximation Kirchhoff's theory was

 essentially a differential-equation-based reformulation of Fresnel's formula, a major

 theoretical result in early wave optics that had enjoyed significant empirical success.

 The inconsistency problem was never, in one sense, truly resolved because it follows

 directly from the requirements of Green's theorem. And yet in the absence of Green's

 theorem a comparatively direct reading in terms of anything like Huygens' principle,

 with its persuasive physical significance, evaporated. Kottler's recommendation to

 reformulate the theory as a saltus problem amounted to introducing a fundamental

 discontinuity in applying Green's theorem in a manner that could retain the meaning

 of Huygens' principle. Born's suggestion to interpret the Kirchhoff expression in terms

 of a first-order expansion of whatever the actual solution might be was not directly

 aimed at preserving the physical significance of the principle. It was nevertheless also

 an effort to reconstrue Kirchhoff's mathematical structure in a manner that separated

 his solution, which certainly did grant meaning to the principle, from its grounding in

 a mathematical inconsistency.

 In 1964 Marchand and Wolf employed the long-available Maggi-Rubinowicz trans

 formation to replace Kirchhoff's single surface scheme with one in which the solution

 is applied separately to two contiguous regions across which the expression for the
 wave function is discontinuous. That breaks the inconsistency otherwise demanded by

 Dirichlet-Neumann solution requirements and accordingly breaches the proof of the

 Poincaré paradox. The resulting expression aligned well with Young's theory in the

 early nineteenth century, in which light rays from an optical source reach points within

 the geometrically-illuminated region directly and from the aperture's rim, and outside

 the region solely from the rim. This new physical meaning, gained through discontinu

 ity and transformation to a line-integral, made the scheme particularly appealing—but

 not for computational purposes under the usual approximation to vanishingly small

 wavelength, for there the Fresnel integrals work well for reasons that, in light of
 Marchand-Wolf, have become clear. The price to be paid was the abandonment of

 Kirchhoff's original, and extremely simple, boundary condition over the surface of

 the screen via the introduction of discontinuity.

 The history of Kirchhoff's solution illustrates that mathematical consistency is not

 inevitably a necessary condition for success in physics. While logical compatibil

 ity, mathematical rigor, and conceptual coherence are important epistemic virtues for

 theory choice and development, they are not inexorably requisite. Empiricist and prag

 matic attitudes prompted optical scientists significantly to downplay the mathematical

 inconsistency of Kirchhoff's theory, a theory that exemplifies a long research program

 that dominated optics for two centuries. Rather than abandoning altogether such a

 useful scheme because of mathematical requirements, researchers instead preferred

 to use it and eventually to reconstruct the mathematics on a different, if doubtfully

 rigorous (because involving discontinuity) basis, and thereby to grant it continued life.

 Acknowledgments We thank Diana Kormos Buchwald for her assistance in correcting errors.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor... 509

 References

 Anonymous. 2015. Maggi, Gian Antonio. Treccani Enciclopedia Italiana. http://www.treccani.it/

 enciclopedia/gian-antonio-raaggi/. Accessed 15 July 2015.

 Babich, V.M., M.A. Lyalinov, and V.E. Grikurov. 2007. Diffraction theory: The Sommerfeld-Malyuzhinets

 technique. UK: Alpha Science Intl. Ltd.

 Baker, B., and E.T. Copson. 1939. The mathematical theory of Huygens' principle. Oxford: Clarendon

 Bloor, D. 2011. The enigma of the aerofoil: Rival theories in aerodynamics, 1909-1930. Chicago: University

 Bom, M. 1933. Optik. Berlin: Julius Springer-Verlag.

 Born, M., and E. Wolf. 2002. Principles of optics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Buchwald, J. 1980. Optics and the theory of the punctiform ether. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 21 :

 Press.

 of Chicago Press.

 245-278.

 Buchwald, J. 1981. The quantitative ether in the first half of the nineteenth century. In Conceptions of

 ether: Studies in the history of ether theories, 1740-1900, ed. G. Cantor, and M.J.S. Hodge, 215-237.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Buchwald, J. 1985. From Maxwell to microphysics: Aspects of electromagnetic theory in the last quarter

 of the nineteenth century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Buchwald, J. 1989. The rise of the wave theory of light: Optical theory and experiment in the early nineteenth

 century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Buchwald, J. 1994. The creation of scientific effects: Heinrich Hertz and electric waves. Chicago: University

 of Chicago Press.

 Buchwald, J. 2012. Cauchy's theory of dispersion anticipated by Fresnel. In A master of science history,

 ed. J. Buchwald, 399-416. Dordrecht: Springer.

 Buchwald, J. 2013. Optics in the Nineteenth Century. In The Oxford handbook of the history of physics, ed.

 J. Buchwald, and R. Fox, 445-472. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Charpentier, Ε., Ε. Ghys, and A. Lesne (eds.). 2010. The scientific legacy of Poincaré. Providence, RI:

 American Mathematical Society.

 Cheng, A.H.D., and D.T. Cheng. 2005. Heritage and early history of the boundary element method. Engi

 neering Analysis with Boundary Elements 29: 268-302.

 Cisotti, U. 1938. Gli scritti scientific! di Gian Antonio Maggi. Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico e

 Fisico di Milano 12: 167-189.

 Cross, J.J. 1985. Integral theorems in Cambridge mathematical physics, 1830-55. In Wranglers and

 physicists: Studies on Cambridge mathematical physics in the nineteenth century, ed. P.M. Harman,
 112-148. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

 Darrigol, O. 2012. A history of optics from Greek antiquity to the nineteenth century. Oxford: Oxford

 Darrigol, O. 2015. Poincaré's Light. In Henri Poincaré, 1912-2012: Poincaré Seminar 2012, ed. B.

 Duplantier, and V. Rivasseau, 1-50. Basel: Springer.

 Dieudonné, J. 2008. Jules Hernri Poincaré: Complete dictionary of scientific biography. Detroit: Charles

 Eckert, M. 2013. Arnold Sommetfeld: Science, life and turbulent times, 1868-1951. New York: Springer.

 Goodman, J.W. 1988. Introduction to fourier optics. New York: McGraw Hill.
 Gouy, L.G. 1886. Recherches expérimentales sur la diffraction. Annales de chimie et de physique 52:

 Gray, J. 2013. Henri Poincaré: A scientific biography. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Green, G. 1828. An essay on the application of mathematical analysis to the theories of electricity and

 magnetism: Mathematical papers of the late George Green. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Hentschel, K„ and N. Zhu. Gustav Robert Kirchhoff's treatise On the theory of light rays (1882) -

 English Translation, Analysis and Commentary. Stuttgarter Beitrage zur Wissenschafts- und Tech

 nikgeschichte. Berlin: Logos-Verlag (forthcoming).

 Herschel, J. 1827. Light. Encyclopedia Metropolitana, 341-586.

 Jungnickel, C., and R. McCormmach. 1986. Intellectual mastery of nature: Theoretical physics from Ohm

 to Einstein. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Kipnis, N. 1991. History of the principle of interference of light. Basel: Birkhâuser.

 Kirchhoff, G. 1876. Vorlesungen iïber mathematische Physik, Bd 1: Mechanik. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.

 University Press.

 Scribner's Sons.

 145-192.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 510 J. Ζ. Buchwald, C.-P. Yeang

 Kirchhoff, G. 1882. Zur Theorie der Lichtstrahlen. Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie

 der Wissenschaften zu Berlin part 2: 641-669.

 Kirchhoff, G. 1883. Zur Theorie der Lichtstrahlen. Annalen der Physik 255: 663-695.

 Kirchhoff, G. 1891a. Gesammelte Abhandlungen von G. Kirchhoff. Leipzig: J. A. Barth.

 Kirchhoff, G. 1891b. Vorlesungen iiber mathematische Physik, Optik. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.

 Kline, M. 1972. Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times. New York: Oxford University Press.

 Kong, J.A. 1986. Electromagnetic wave theory. New York: Wiley.

 Kottler, F. 1923. Zur Theorie der Beugung an schwarzen Schirmen. Annalen der Physik 375: 405^56.
 Kottler, F. 1965. Diffraction at a black screen: Part I: Kirchhoff's Theory. Progress in Optics 4: 283-314.

 Kuhn, T. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Lorentz, H.A. 1887. De l'influence du mouvement de la terre sur les phénomènes lumineux. Archives

 Néerlandaises 21: 103-176.

 Lucke, R.L. 2004. Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction v.s Fresnel-Kirchhoff, Fourier propagation, and Pois

 son's spot. NRL/FR/7218-04-10,101. Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory.

 Maggi, G.A. 1888. Sulla propagazione libera e perturbata delle onde luminose in un mezzo isotropo. Annali

 Maggi, G.A. 1914. Sul teorema di Kirchhoff traducente il principio di Huygens. Annali di Matematica Pura

 di Matematica Pura edApplicata 16: 21-48.

 ed Applicata 22: 171-177.

 Marchand, E.W., and E. Wolf. 1964. Comparison of the Kirchhoff and the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld theories

 of diffraction at an aperture. Journal of the Optical Society of America 54: 587-594.

 Marchand, E.W., and E. Wolf. 1966. Consistent formulation of Kirchhoff's diffraction theory. Journal of

 Marx, W. 2016. Bibliometric analysis of Kirchhoff's paper. Gustav Robert Kirchhoff's Treatise On the

 the Optical Society of America 56: 1712-1722.

 Theory of Light Rays (1882) [forthcoming]

 Michelson, Α., and F.G. Pease. 1920. Measurement of the diameter of a Ononis with the interferometer.

 Contributions from the Mount Wilson Observatory 203: 249-260.

 Poincaré, H. 1889. leçons sur la Théorie Mathématique de la Lumière, professés pendant le premier

 semestre 1887-1888. Paris: Georges Carré.

 Poincaré, H. 1892a. Sur la polarisation par diffraction. Acta Mathematica 16: 1-50.
 Poincaré, H. 1892b. Théorie mathématique de la lumière II: Nouvelles études sur la Diffraction - Théorie

 de la dispersion de Helmholtz: Leçons professés pendant le premier semestre 1891-1892. Paris:
 Gauthier-Villars.

 Rayleigh, 1896. Theory of sound. London: Macmillan and Co.
 Rayleigh, 1897. On the passage of waves through apertures in plane screens, and allied problems. Philo

 Rayleigh, 1913. On the passage of waves through fine slits in thin opaque screens. Proceedings of the Royal

 Riemann, B. 1857. Theorie der Abel'schen Functionen. Berlin: Georg Reimer.

 Rubinowicz, A. 1917. Die Beugungswelle in der Kirchhoffschen Theorie der Beugungserscheinungen.

 sophical Magazine 43: 259-272.

 Society of London 89: 194-219.

 Annalen der Physik 53: 257-278.

 Saatsi, J., and P. Vickers. 2011. Miraculous success? Inconsistency and untruth in Kirchhoff's diffraction

 theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 10: 1-18.

 Schweber, S.S. 1994. QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga. Prince

 Seth, S. 2010. Crafting the quantum: Arnold Sommeifeld and the practice of theory, 1890-1926. Cambridge:

 ton University Press: Princeton.

 MIT.

 Shapiro, A. 1973. Kinematic optics: A study of the wave theory of light in the seventeenth century. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 11: 134-266.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1895. Zur mathematischen Theorie der Beugungserscheinungen. Nachrichten von der

 Konig. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen 1: 338-342.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1896. Mathematische Theorie der Diffraction. Mathematische Annalen 47: 317-374.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1954. Optics: Lectures on theoretical physics, vol. IV. New York: Academic Press.
 Sommerfeld, A. (ed.). 2004. Mathematical theory of diffraction. Basel: Birkhauser.

 Stokes, G. 1845a. On the aberration of light. In Mathematical and physical papers, ed. G. Stokes, 134-140.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kirchhoff's theory for optical diffraction, its predecessor... 511

 Stokes, G. 1845b. On the constitution of luminiferous ether, viewed with reference to the phenomenon of

 the aberration of light. In Mathematical and physical papers, ed. G. Stokes, 153-156. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press.

 Stokes, G. 1845c. On the theories of the internal friction of fluid in motion, and of the equilibrium and
 motion of elastic solids. In Mathematical and physical papers, ed. G. Stokes, 243-328. Cambridge:

 Stokes, G. 1856. On the dynamical theory of diffraction. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical

 Cambridge University Press.

 Society 9: 1-62.

 Stokes, G. 1883. Mathematical and physical papers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

