 

 

 

 

Lagrange's theory of analytical functions and his ideal of purity of method
Author(s): Giovanni Ferraro and  Marco Panza
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 2 (March 2012), pp. 95-197
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41472228
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:15 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2012) 66:95-197
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-01 1-0091-4

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions and his ideal
 of purity of method

 Giovanni Ferraro • Marco Panza

 Received: 15 July 201 1 / Published online: 15 December 201 1

 © Springer- Verlag 201 1

 Abstract We reconstruct essential features of Lagrange's theory of analytical func-
 tions by exhibiting its structure and basic assumptions, as well as its main short-
 comings. We explain Lagrange's notions of function and algebraic quantity, and we

 concentrate on power-series expansions, on the algorithm for derivative functions, and

 the remainder theorem - especially on the role this theorem has in solving geometric

 and mechanical problems. We thus aim to provide a better understanding of Enlight-
 enment mathematics and to show that the foundations of mathematics did not, for

 Lagrange, concern the solidity of its ultimate bases, but rather purity of method - the

 generality and internal organization of the discipline.

 1 Preliminaries and proposals

 The foundation of mathematics was a crucial topic for 18th-century mathematicians.

 A pivotal aspect of it was the interpretation of the algorithms of the calculus. This was

 often referred to as the question of the "metaphysics of the calculus"1 (see, Carnot
 1797, as an example).

 1 We use double inverted commas for quotations and simple ones for mentions. We never use inverted
 commas for other purposes, such as emphasizing a term or phrase.

 Communicated by: Niccolö Guicciardini.

 G. Ferraro (El)
 Université del Molise, C. da Fonte Lappone, 86090 Pesche, IS, Italy
 e-mail: giovanni.ferraro@unimol.it

 M. Panza

 CNRS, Institut d'Histoire et de Philosophie des Sciences et des Techniques (UMR 8590 of the CNRS,
 Univ. of Paris 1 , ENS Paris), 1 3 rue du Four, 75006 Paris, France
 e-mail: Marco.Panza@univ-parisl.fr

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 96 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Around 1800 Lagrange devoted two large treatises to the matter, both of which

 went through two editions in Lagrange's lifetime: the Théorie des fonctions analy-
 tiques (Lagrange 1797, 1813; henceforth the Théorie ); and the Leçons sur le calcul
 des fonctions (Lagrange 1797, 1813; henceforth the Leçons). His aim was to provide
 a new and non-infinitesimalist interpretation of these algorithms based on a general

 theory of power series.2 He viewed the direct algorithm as a rule for transforming
 functions, which - applied iteratively to any function y = f(x) - gives, apart from
 numerical factors, the coefficients of the expansion of f(x +Ç) in a power series of the

 indeterminate increment £.3 Lagrange called such coefficients 'derivative functions
 [ fonctions dérivées ]' (Lagrange 1797, art. 17; 1801, p. 5; 1806, p. 5; 1813, Introduc-
 tion, p. 2): a term whose meaning has since changed. In what follows, we shall use
 this term in Lagrange's sense.

 Throughout his theory, Lagrange certainly pursued an ideal of conceptual clarity

 involving the elimination of any sort of infinitesimalist insight. This has been often

 noticed, and was emphasized by Lagrange himself in the very complete title of the

 Théorie : Théorie des fonctions analytiques , contenant les principes du calcul différent-

 iel dégagés de toute considération d'infiniment petits, d'évanouis sans, de limites et de

 fluxions , et réduite à l'analyse algébrique des quantités finies. We shall not dwell on

 this point, then. Rather, we shall argue that this ideal was part of a more general ideal

 of purity of method4: the reduction of all mathematics to an algebraic, purely formal

 theory5 centered on the manipulation of (finite or infinite) polynomials through the
 method of indeterminate coefficients. 6

 This was a sweeping project rooted in a mathematical program going back to the

 early mathematical work of Newton (see Panza 2005), and whose manifesto was the
 first volume of Euler's Introductio in analysin infinitorum (Euler 1748). 7 Its main

 2 A few years earlier, Arbogast had proposed a similar interpretation in an unpublished treatise (Arbogast
 (ESSAI); for a commentary, see: Zimmermann 1934; Panza 1985; Grabiner 1990, pp. 47-59). Accord-
 ing to Grabiner 1981b, p. 316, this treatise was inspired by an even earlier paper by Lagrange himself
 (Lagrange 1772; see footnote 3.2). Lagrange mentioned Arbogast's treatise at the beginning of the Théorie
 (Lagrange 1797, art. 7; 1813, Introduction, p. 5).

 3 Some clearly indicated exceptions apart, we shall use the term 'power-series expansion of f(x + £)' for
 referring to the expansion of f(x + £) in a power series of £. Lagrange used '£' to denote the increment
 of x in his earlier paper mentioned in footnote 2. In the Théorie and the Leçon , he used the Latin letter 7 '

 (as 'incrément') - but we prefer to use '£' in order to avoid any possible confusion with the symbol that is
 now used to denote >/- L Our quotations from Lagrange's treatises are altered accordingly.

 4 On the notion of purity of method, see Arana (2008) and Detlefsen (2008) - which explicitly mentions
 Lagrange's "purification program," in footnote 6, p. 1 82 - , and Hallett (2008). In this article (ibid., p. 199),
 M. Hallett describes as follows the concern for purity of method , by referring to Hilbert's mention of such a

 concern in Hilbert ( 1 899, p. 1 99): "one can inquire of a given proof or of a given mathematical development

 whether or not the means it uses are 'appropriate' to the subject matter, whether one way of doing things is
 'right', whereas another, equivalent way is 'improper'."

 5 The clarification of the exact sense in which the adjectives 'algebraic' and 'formal' have to be understood
 here is one of the main purposes of our article.

 6 The centrality of the method of indeterminate coefficients is the common denominator of Lagrange's
 foundational programs in both pure mathematics and mechanics. For the case of mechanics, see Panza
 (1991-1992) and (2003).

 7 An attempt to reconstruct the sources and evolution of this program up to Lagrange is made in Panza
 (1992). This article is partly based on Chap.III.6.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 97

 purpose was the development of a fairly general and formal theory of abstract quan-
 tities: quantities conceived merely as elements of a net of relations, expressed by

 formulas belonging to an appropriate language and subject to appropriate transforma-
 tion rules.

 The interpretation of the calculus and its algorithms presented a crucial difficulty for

 the complete accomplishment of such a program. The difficulty was not only concerned

 with the conceptual inaccuracy of the current infinitesimalist or pseudo-infinitesimal-
 ist accounts, but also, and above all, with their reliance on suppositions - like the

 negligibility of infinitesimals - that could hardly be explained in purely formal terms.

 The following passage, from a short report by Lagrange himself, clearly illustrates the

 point:

 [. . .] I do not deny that one could rigorously prove the principles of the differen-

 tial calculus through the consideration of limits envisaged in a particular way, as
 Maclaurin , d'Alembert and several others after them did. But the kind of meta-

 physics that has to be applied for this purpose is, if not contrary, at least foreign to

 the spirit of analysis, which should have no metaphysics but that which consists

 in the first principles and in the fundamental operations of calculation.

 [...] je ne disconviens pas qu'on ne puisse, par le considérations des limites envisagées d'une
 manière particulière, démontrer rigouresement les principes du calcul différentiel, comme
 Maclaurin , d'Alembert et plusieurs autres auteurs après eux l'ont fait. Mais l'espèce de métaphy-

 sique qu'on est obligé d'y employer, est sinon contraire, du moins étrangère à l'esprit de l'ana-
 lyse, qui ne doit avoir d'autre métaphysique que celle qui consiste dans les premiers principes
 et dans les opérations fondamentales du calcul.

 (Lagrange 1799, p. 233.)

 Hence, Lagrange wanted not only to provide a conceptually more convenient basis for

 the calculus, his principal ambition was to incorporate it within a unitary conception
 of mathematics based on the "spirit of analysis": a notion we shall try to shed light
 on.8

 To do this, Lagrange had to show that derivative functions could effectively replace
 differential quotients. Essentially, he had to show that, for any function y = f(x),
 there exists an infinity of other functions f^kHx) (k = 1,2,...) that provide, apart
 from numerical factors, the coefficients of the power-series expansion of f(x + Ç),

 and formally coincide with the differential quotients We shall come to this in
 Sect. 3, bearing in mind Lagrange's notion of function, which we shall deal with in
 Sect. 2. For the time being, it is only important to remark that both the Théorie and
 the Leçons begin with an argument that, if correct, would have convinced anybody
 already familiar with the differential calculus that this condition is met (even if it
 cannot really be stated, as such, within Lagrange's theory, since it involves the notion

 ® If Lagrange's program is so understood, it is not surprising that, after 1797, he often relied on infini-
 tesimal devices, for example in the second edition of the Mécanique analytique (Lagrange, 1811-1815).
 Concerning the internal organization of the subject, the Mécanique analytique is indeed quite close to the
 frame of the Théorie , particularly its mechanical part (see Panza 1991-1992). And for Lagrange this was
 certainly more relevant, in establishing the place of mechanics and its mathematical methods within the
 mathematical corpus as a whole, than the local (and non-substantive) use of infinitesimals.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 98 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 of differential quotient, which has no place in this theory). For brevity let us call this
 argument 'Lagrange's fundamental proof'.9

 Mathematicians and historians of mathematics have often discussed this argument

 (the relevant bibliographic references will be given). Still, in our view, the current

 accounts, and, more generally, the usual interpretations of Lagrange's theory, do not

 insist enough on the connections between his technical achievements and his under-

 standing of the crucial notions of quantity, function, and power-series expansion, on
 which his foundational program is based. These achievements are rather often anach-

 ronistically assessed and criticized according to a subsequent understanding of these
 notions. This tendency has been accentuated by the fact that, during the nineteenth
 century, several of Lagrange's technical devices and results were isolated from his
 foundational preoccupations, reinterpreted and used as basic elements of real analy-
 sis. For instance, one can mention the notion of transformed function, the remainder

 theorem, and proof techniques closely resembling the s-8 method (see Sects. 3 and 5,
 and footnote 102).

 A comprehensive account of Lagrange's theory in which technical achievements

 are adequately studied in connection with foundational intents, methodological issues,

 and philosophical perspectives is therefore still wanting.10 The main purpose of our
 article is to offer such an account.

 When the differences between Lagrange's theory and 19th-century real analysis
 are considered and the crucial notions of the former are appropriately explained, La-

 grange's arguments appear in a new light, and many alleged counter-examples no
 longer apply. We shall see why this is so. However, in so doing we do not mean to
 suggest that Lagrange's theory has neither shortcomings nor discrepancies. Many of
 his arguments are, on the contrary, flawed even when considered in the appropriate
 context, and are far from constituting unquestionable proofs of the results they are

 supposed to establish. Furthermore, the actual deployment of the theory is often at

 odds with the ideal of purity that motivates it. We would like to draw attention to such
 defects. They help explain why Lagrange's theory was never really accepted by the
 Continental mathematical community.

 When he wrote and published the first editions of the Théorie and the Leçons , La-

 grange was one of the most influential and respected mathematicians of the large inter-
 national community to which he belonged, possibly the most influential and respected

 one. His analytical reformulation of the mechanics of discrete systems, undertaken in
 the Mécanique analytique (Lagrange 1788), for example, had been welcomed, a few

 years before as a major achievement that significantly influenced the development of
 the subject. The same can be said of the approach to algebraic equations outlined in
 his treatise De la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés (Lagrange

 1798), which came out a year after the first edition of the Théorie. The less significant

 9 We shall use the term 'proof and cognates for referring to arguments used, in the context of Lagrange's
 theory, to establish that something holds, regardless of whether these arguments are actually correct or

 sound. Analogously, we shall use the term 'theorem' for referring to statements that are taken to hold within

 this theory, or to re-formulations of these statements that we consider appropriate, regardless of whether
 these statements actually hold.

 10 Important exceptions are provided by C. Fraser's accounts, especially in Fraser (1987) and (1989). Our
 views derive, in many respects, from a development of points he makes.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 99

 influence his theory of analytical functions had on the Continent1 1 therefore requires
 an explanation.

 On the received view, Lagrange's theory is an algebraic treatment of real numbers,

 both considered as such and as representatives of geometric and mechanical magni-
 tudes. In this picture, the adjective 'algebraic' is intended to evoke two basic features

 of the theory. On the one hand, it points to the understanding of these numbers as quan-

 tities related by operational relations, to the pivotal role assigned to these relations,

 and to the effort to make the theory as independent as possible both of geometric or

 mechanical intuition, and of the respective magnitude of the relevant quantities, espe-

 cially of their being infinitely small or large. On the other hand, it points to the attempt

 to reduce any real function to polynomial form, so as to limit the use not only of tran-
 scendental functions (and numbers), but also of irrational and fractional ones. This

 double use suggests that Lagrange's theory is algebraic insofar as it carries out a reduc-

 tion of analysis (both finite and infinitesimal) to algebra, and depicts the latter as being,

 for Lagrange, an elementary field of study, on which all mathematics should be based.

 On this view, Lagrange's failure to impose his theory is usually explained by observ-

 ing that such a reduction was manifestly impossible, because of the impossibility of
 expanding any function in a power series convergent to it. The failure would thus
 be due to a genuine mathematical mistake: Lagrange's fundamental proof would be
 flawed insofar as it includes, as a lemma, a wrong theorem, according to which any

 function has a power-series expansion.

 This explanation is ineffective. Lagrange's alleged mathematical mistake is actu-
 ally a mistake only if his theorem is judged according to alien notions of function and

 of power-series expansion. Hence, if his failure were to be blamed on this theorem, it

 would depend more on the inappropriateness of the notions he relied on than on his

 flawed generalizations. To account for this failure, one should then explain, first, why
 Lagrange was working with such inappropriate notions, or rather what made other
 mathematicians aware of their inappropriateness and pushed them to develop new and

 more comprehensive notions.

 We prefer then a radically different explanation, more intrinsically connected with

 Lagrange's ideal of purity, and with the general conceptions on which his theory is
 based.

 We do not take Lagrange's theory to be about real numbers, neither as such, nor

 as representatives of geometric and mechanical magnitudes. We rather argue that his

 theory is founded on a peculiar notion of function which provides quantities that differ
 fundamentally from both numbers and from geometric and mechanical magnitudes.
 In our view, numbers and geometric and mechanical magnitudes are, for Lagrange,
 quantities of a particular sort, whereas his theory of analytical functions is intended
 to deal with quantities in general, or better in abstracto. We borrow Lagrange's term

 'algebraic quantity' to refer to quantities of this sort, and we describe them as relata of

 1 1 For an account of the quite limited "Lagrangian tradition" in the foundation of the calculus, see Grattan-
 Guinness (1990), vol. 1, Sect. 4.3, pp. 195-223. As is well known, Lagrange's theory instead had a notable
 influence on R. Woodhouse and his followers gathered around the Cambridge Analytical Society, especially
 C. Babbage, J. Herschel and G. Peacock, who in turn had an important and also well-known influence on the
 development of 1 9th-century British mathematics and on the birth of abstract algebra. On the Cambridge
 Analytical Society, see for instance, Wilkers (1990).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 00 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 a net of operational relations lacking any particular intrinsic feature, and characterized

 only by the sheaf of relations they are involved in (a more precise characterization
 will of course be offered later). We also insist that, in Lagrange's parlance, the term
 'analytical function' - often shortened to 'function' alone - is used with the same

 meaning, though with a different emphasis. In 'algebraic quantity', the emphasis is on

 what makes the entities at issue quantities, in a significant sense of this term, that is,

 on what makes them share some essential features with numbers and geometric and

 mechanical magnitudes. In 'analytical function', or 'function', the emphasis is on what

 connects these entities to one another through operational relations displayed by the
 expressions that denote them, which are of course nothing but the usual expressions

 entering into mathematical analysis, like 'x2', 'logjt -f e* ', etc.

 It follows that, in our view, Lagrange's theory is not algebraic insofar as it carries out

 a reduction to algebra understood as a separate elementary field, considered more prim-

 itive than this theory. Rather, it is algebraic insofar as it deals with algebraic quantities,

 that is, insofar as it is not concerned with particular quantities, but with quantities in

 general. And it is formal, insofar as these quantities are identified through the relations

 they have with each other, which are in turn displayed by appropriate formulas.

 This remains a broad description. It should be clear enough, however, to allow us

 to raise a rather basic problem: what makes algebraic quantities be quantities in an
 appropriately significant sense of the term? In other words, what makes the entities

 denoted by the usual formulas of mathematical analysis behave the way quantities
 are supposed to, namely to be linearly ordered, to stay in certain metric relations, and

 to be subject to certain continuity conditions? In Lagrange's framework (understood
 as we suggest), this cannot be warranted by independent properties ascribed to the

 referent of these formulas, that is, by the features of the intended model in which these

 formulas are interpreted. For this would amount to reducing algebraic quantities to

 particular quantities of some sort, thus, denying the very raison d'être of Lagrange's

 theory.

 The problem is aggravated by the reductionist ambition of Lagrange's program.

 Indeed, he purposed not only to foster a particular branch of mathematics, but even to

 reduce all mathematics to it. But for such a reduction to work, the theory of algebraic

 quantities had to include general results capable of being interpreted in the particular
 quantities that mathematics was taken to be about. So Lagrange could hardly avoid
 requiring that algebraic quantities behave the way particular quantities are supposed
 to, for otherwise his whole program would have been pointless. Still, reduction should

 have gone, for him, together with foundation: his aim was to provide a ground for
 mathematics as a whole, not just a simple framework for a nice reformulation of it.

 Hence, this requirement had not merely to be imposed on algebraic quantities from the

 outside, but met because of the very features possessed by algebraic quantities as such.

 Our basic point in explaining Lagrange's failure is precisely that his notion of alge-
 braic quantity does not guarantee that algebraic quantities meet this crucial require-

 ment, so much so that he cannot but surreptitiously suppose that they do meet it. Hence,

 this notion appeared too weak to bear the weight of Lagrange's reductionist purpose.

 But once reinforced with this surreptitious assumption, it became too strong to play

 the role of a starting point of his foundational program.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 101

 Of course, this basic point has, in our view, different ramifications, capable of
 accounting for a number of different difficulties to which Lagrange's theory was sub-
 ject, which made it quite unattractive. We shall come to the details later; what is
 relevant for the time being is that Lagrange's failure marked, at least on the Conti-

 nent, the end of the program of eighteenth-century algebraic analysis begun by Euler.
 By taking the ideal of purity pervading this program to its extreme consequences,
 Lagrange's theory made it clear that, if conceived as Euler and Lagrange suggested,
 purity was incompatible with reductionism and foundationalism: if algebraic analysis

 had to be pure in this sense, the goal of recovering the whole edifice of mathematics

 within its limits and of grounding this edifice on it could never be reached. This makes

 the historical interest of this failure and of its explanation clear. Such an interest does
 not merely rest on the preeminent role Lagrange had in his time and continues to

 have in the history of mathematics. It is also related to the fact that this failure brings
 with it the end of a way of doing and conceiving mathematics that characterized a
 long season of its history. Reacting to Lagrange's foundational perspective and to his
 ideal of purity was then also a way of promoting a new idea of what mathematics
 should be.

 This being said concerning the general purpose of our article, we can describe its

 plan.

 Before undertaking a detailed examination of Lagrange's theory, we consider it

 necessary to clarify his understanding of the crucial notions of quantity, function, and

 power-series expansion, and, more generally, set out his foundational program and its
 crucial difficulties. This will be done in Sect. 2.

 In our view, Lagrange's theory includes four main components:

 (i) The fundamental proof;
 (//) The reformulation of the edifice of the calculus in terms of derivative functions

 (independently of its geometric and mechanical applications);

 (im) The remainder theorem;

 (iv) The applications of the algorithm of derivative functions to the solution of par-

 ticular geometric and mechanical problems.

 Section 3 is devoted to component (i).

 The other three components are intended to show that the whole corpus of the
 calculus - including all of its applications - can be reformulated in terms of deriv-
 ative functions and their relations, without any appeal to differentials, integrals, or
 variations.12 To carry this purpose out, Lagrange could not limit himself to offer-
 ing his fundamental proof - thus, guaranteeing the formal coincidence between the
 derivative functions /(v)U) (v = 1, 2, . . .) of any function f(x) and the differential

 quotients ^ (for y = f(x)) - and then appeal to an appropriate translation rule for

 12 In its first explicit formulation, due to Euler (1744), the calculus of variations involved a special kind
 of differentials distinguished by usual differentials only for being independent of each other even if the
 relative variables were functionally related. We call them 'variations'. The reformulation of this calculus as
 a formalism involving a new operator 8 distinct from d is an important achievement of Lagrange himself,
 obtained in one of his first scientific memoirs (Lagrange 1761). In the Théorie and the Leçons , he showed
 then how to reformulate this calculus by relying on nothing but appropriate derivative functions, so as to

 eliminate the ¿-operator itself. On this matter, see Fraser (1985).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 102 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 transforming any statement including terms for differentials, integrals or variations

 in a statement where these terms are replaced by terms for derivative and primitive

 functions (the primitive function of a given function being, of course, the function hav-

 ing this given function as its derivative). Much of the corpus of the calculus did not,

 indeed, follow from the algorithm of differential ratios, but rather rested on infinitesi-

 malist arguments, or, more generally, on arguments related to particular interpretations

 of this algorithm. Thus, once he had provided the fundamental proof, Lagrange still

 had to show how to recover anew the totality of this corpus by grounding it solely
 on the place taken by the derivative functions f^v'x) of any function f(x) in the
 power-series expansions of f(x + £).

 Section 4 presents and discusses some examples of component (jï) especially con-

 cerned with the reformulation of the theory of differential equations, which Lagrange

 called 'derivative equations' (Lagrange 1797, arts. 33 and 54; 1801, p. 84; 1806, p. 1 12;
 and 1813, arts. 1. 17 and 1.41). This will allow us to illustrate other, more technical diffi-

 culties associated with Lagrange's program. We shall show in particular that his actual

 treatment of derivative equations involves considerable departures from the ideal of

 purity of method informing this program.

 Section 5 deals with the remainder theorem (component (///)), which is generally

 considered the major mathematical achievement of the Théorie and the Leçons. To
 understand how this theorem fits into Lagrange's theory, we begin by considering
 examples of component (iv) where it applies. We then go through Lagrange's two
 proofs of it.

 Finally, Sect. 6 presents a short conclusion.

 The Théorie and Leçons differ in many ways, of which the absence of component

 (iv) in the Leçons is the most conspicuous. Also the two editions of each treatise

 respectively differ in several details. But since the theory laid out in the four exposi-

 tions is essentially the same, a systematic comparative study is unnecessary for our
 purpose. The annex nonetheless provides information about the different editions and
 the respective contents of both treatises. It includes four tables: the first shows the

 place of components (i)-(iv) in these treatises and their respective editions; the three
 others itemize the different topics included in components (ii) and (iv).

 2 Functions and algebraic quantities

 According to a classical way of thinking, dating back to Greek mathematics and phi-
 losophy (see Aristotle, Metaphysics , A, 13, 1020a, 7-14, and Categories , part 6),
 quantities are objects of a specific sort - numbers, for example, or segments or lapses
 of time - meeting two distinctive requirements: additivity and order comparability.

 The former specifies that the objects of each sort have to be capable of being added up

 to each other, so as to give rise to other objects of the same sort. The latter specifies
 that these objects have to be capable of being compared with respect to their size, to

 the effect that for any two of them either they are equal, or one of them is greater than
 the other (and then the latter smaller then the former).

 In the Discours préliminaire of the Encyclopédie , d' Alembert made the following

 claim:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 103

 [...] though, properly speaking, one could only calculate with numbers and the

 only measurable magnitude is extension (since we could not measure time with-

 out space), by generalizing our ideas we reach such a principal part of mathemat-

 ics and of all natural sciences which is called 'science of magnitudes in general',

 which is the ground of any discovering that might be made about quantity, that

 is, about all what is susceptible of increasing or decreasing.

 [...] quoiqu'il n'y ait proprement de calcul possible que par les nombres, ni de grandeur me-
 surable que l'étendue (car sans l'espace nous ne pourrions mesurer exactement le tems) nous
 parvenons, en généralisant toûjours nos idées, à cette partie principale des Mathématiques, &
 de toutes les Sciences naturelles, qu'on appelle Science des grandeurs en général; elle est le
 fondement de toutes les découvertes qu'on peut faire sur la quantité, c'est-à-dire, sur tout ce qui
 est susceptible d'augmentation ou de diminution.

 (Alembert DIS 1751, pp. V-VI.)

 This is far from providing a clear and unambiguous definition, but it at least sug-

 gests the idea that there is a fundamental part of mathematics concerned with quantity

 conceived in general: not with one or several particular sorts of quantities, but with
 abstract quantities, so to say13. Mutatis mutandis , this is also Lagrange's view. We

 can try to gain a better understanding of it.

 2.1 Lagrange's definition of functions

 The Théorie begins with an explicit definition of functions:

 One calls a 'function' of one or several quantities any expression of calculation

 into which these quantities enter in any way whatsoever combined or not with

 other quantities which are regarded as having same given and invariable values,
 whereas the quantities of the function may receive any possible value.

 On appelle fonction d'une ou de plusieurs quantités toute expression de calcul dans laquelle
 ces quantités entrent d'une manié re quelconque, mêlées ou non avec d'autres quantités qu'on
 regarde comme ayant des valeurs données et invariables, tandis que les quantités de la fonction
 peuvent recevoir toutes les valeurs possibles.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 1; 1801, p. 6; 1806, p.6; 1813, Introduction, p. I.)14

 Lagrange's definition is surprising for us, since, according to it, functions are expres-
 sions and contain quantities. This looks incompatible with our familiar distinction
 between syntactical items and the things some of these items refer to, or, in other
 words (or more generally), between syntax and semantics.Expressions are syntacti-
 cal items, indeed, while, in our view, quantities cannot but be things referred to by

 13 D'alembert also said (DIS, p. XLIX) that "the object of mathematics is quantity" and repeated that
 "one calls 'quantity' or 'magnitude' all that can be increased or diminished." This makes clear that he used
 'quantity' and 'magnitude' as synonyms. We shall be more precise and take all magnitudes to be quantities
 (namely continuous ones), but some quantities (namely discrete ones, such as integer positive numbers) not
 to be magnitudes. This agrees with Lagrange's use of these terms.

 14 Lagrange often left passages largely unchanged, going from the first edition of the Théorie to the Leçons ,

 and from these to the second edition of the Théorie. Where there are some slight changes (as in this case), we

 quote the most recent version, but include bibliographical references to all the occurrences of the relevant

 passages.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 104 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 appropriate expressions, to the effect that an expression might contain terms referring

 to quantities, but it might not contain quantities as such.

 One could blame inadvertence, and take 'quantités' in Lagrange's definition to refer

 not to quantities but to terms referring to quantities, in which case a function would

 be an expression that includes terms like these. But there are at least two reasons for

 discarding such an interpretation.

 The first is straightforward: Lagrange's definition resembles many others offered

 by contemporary mathematicians,15 to the effect that inadvertence would then be a
 quite widespread phenomenon.

 The second reason is more complex. Lagrange could have understood functions

 as expressions including terms referring to quantities only if he had been ready to
 define quantities without relying on the notion of function. But in fact he was not

 ready for that. Against this, one could retort that, following Greek mathematicians,

 he could have taken quantities to be particular objects defined within appropriate the-

 ories, somehow prior to the theory of functions, for example arithmetic, geometry,

 or mechanics. But if that were the case, there would be arithmetical, geometric, or

 mechanical functions according to whether they include terms referring to arithmeti-

 cal, geometric or mechanical quantities. And this openly contradicts the idea that the

 theory of functions is the most general part of mathematics, which includes all others:

 an idea that Lagrange doubtless shared with many other 18th-century mathematicians
 (see: Grabiner 1974, pp. 355-358; Fraser 1987; Fraser 1989; Panza 1992; Panza 1996;
 Ferraro and Panza 2003).

 Lagrange himself suggested an alternative understanding when he remarkeds,

 against Newton's theory of fluxions, that:

 [...] introducing motion in a calculation whose object is nothing but algebraic
 quantities is the same as introducing an extraneous idea [...].

 [...] introduire le mouvement dans un calcul qui n'a que des quantité s algébriques pour objet,
 c'est y introduire une idée étrangère [...].

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 5; 1813, Introduction, p. 3.)

 This criticism suggests that the quantities which Lagrange referred to in his definition

 of functions are algebraic ones. But what are algebraic quantities?

 At first glance, the simplest answer would be that algebraic quantities are what

 algebra deals with. The calculus would then relate to algebraic quantities insofar as it

 is part of algebra. This was certainly Lagrange's idea,16 but it is not enough to appeal

 15 The most notable example is the definition occurring in Euler's Introductio :

 A function of a variable quantity is an analytical expression composed in any way whatever of this
 variable quantity and numbers or constant quantities.

 Functio quantitas variabilis est expressio analytica quomodocunque composita ex ilia quantitate variabili, et
 numeris seu quantitatibus constantibus.

 (Euler 1748, vol. I, art. 4; here and later, we slightly modify Blanton's English translation: Euler
 (BLA), vol. I, p. 3.)

 16 In presenting his course at the École Polytechnique for 1799 (Lagrange 1799, p. 232; see the annex),
 Lagrange explicitly claimed that his aim was to "eliminate the difficulties that one meets in the principles
 of the differential calculus [...] by linking this calculus immediately to algebra

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 105

 to it in order to understand his definition of functions. One should also explain, without

 appealing to the notion of function, what he took algebra to be. One could consider

 algebra to be a mere formalism, and algebraic quantities to be what appropriate for-

 mulas of this formalism refer to, when they are taken to refer to something. If this were

 Lagrange's view, his theory would thus be concerned with two sorts of expressions:

 algebraic formulas and functions. But it is a fact that in Lagrange's treatises there is

 no trace of such a duplication.

 Rather, Lagrange openly admitted that functions are themselves quantities:

 The word 'function' has been employed by the first analysts in order to designate

 in general the powers of a same quantity. Then its meaning has been extended

 to any quantity however formed by another quantity. Leibniz and the Bernoullis

 employed it first in this general sense, and it is today generally adopted.

 Le mot function a été employé par les premiers analystes pour désigner en general les puis-
 sances d'une même quantité. Depuis, on a étendu la signification de ce mot à toute quantité
 formée d'une manière quelconque d'une autre quantité . Leibniz et les Bernoulli l'ont employé

 les premiers dans cette acception générale, et il est aujourd'hui généralement adopté.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 2; 1813, Introduction, pp. 1-2. See also: Lagrange 1801,
 p. 4; 1806, p. 4.)

 Lagrange clearly took his definition to be entirely consistent with this "generally

 adopted" meaning; namely, he took it to be consistent with the idea that a function is

 a "quantity formed in any way from another quantity", as Johann Bernoulli had stated

 in (1718, p. 241). 17 In the second edition of the Théorie , he is explicit:

 17 Here is Bernoulli's definition:

 [. . .] one calls 'function of a variable quantity' a quantity however composed by this variable quantity
 and constants.

 On appelle [...] function d'une grandeur variable, une quantité composée de quelque manière que ce soit de cette
 grandeur variable et de constantes.

 More than fifty years earlier, James Gregory had already advanced a similar definition as being that of

 quantities:

 We say that a quantity is composed by [some] quantities when another quantity results from the
 addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, root extraction of [these] quantities, or from any other

 imaginable operation [on them].

 Quamitatem dicimus à quantitatibus esse compositam; cum à quantitatum additione, subductione, multiplicatione,
 divisione, radicum extractione, vel quacunque alia imaginabili operatione, fit alia quantitas.

 (Gregory 1667, p. 9; see Youschkevitch 1976-1977, p. 58.)

 According to Gregory, quantities so defined are analytically composed when the relevant operations are
 algebraic (in modern sense):

 When a quantity is composed by the addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, [or] root extrac-
 tion of [some] quantities, we say that it is analytically composed.

 Quandö quantitas componitur ex quantitatum additione, subductione, multiplicationr divisione, radicum extracti-
 one; dicimus illam componi analyticè.

 (Gregory 1667, p. 9.)

 This use of the adjective 'analytical' and its cognates is thus more restrictive than Lagrange's: see Sect. 2.3.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 106 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Through the character '/' or 'F' placed before a variable, we shall designate
 in general any function of this variable, that is, any quantity depending on this

 variable and which varies with it according to a given law.

 Nous désignerons en général par la caractéristique / ou F , placée devant une variable, toute
 fonction de cette variable, c'est-à-dire, toute quantité dépendante de cette variable, et qui varie
 avec elle suivant une loi donnée.

 (Lagrange 1813, art. I.l.)18

 It thus seems that in Lagrange's view a function is a quantity, and that it is so insofar

 as it is an expression. But then the quantities contained by a function can, according
 to his definition, in turn be identified with expressions or terms. They are not terms

 that refer to quantities, but terms that are quantities.

 This bring us back to the difficulty raised above, since this understanding is incom-

 patible with our distinction between syntax and semantics. We nonetheless suggest
 that Lagrange's notion of function is foreign to such a distinction and can only be
 understood if this distinction is dispensed with.

 To see how, consider two further quotations, from the Leçons and a short paper

 Lagrange published in 1799 in the Journal de V École Polytechnique :

 [...] one should regard algebra as the science of functions, and it is easy to see

 that the solution of equations does not consist in general but in finding the val-
 ues of unknown quantities as determined functions of known quantities. These

 functions represent, then, the different operations that have to be performed to

 the known quantities in order to get the values of those which are sought, and

 they are properly only the last result of the calculation. But in algebra, one con-

 siders functions only insofar as they result from the operations of arithmetic,
 these operations having been generalized and transferred to letters, whereas in
 the calculus of functions strictu sensu, one considers functions that result from

 the algebraic operation of expansion in series when one assigns indeterminate
 increments to one or several quantities of the function.

 [...] on doit regarder l'Algèbre comme la science des fonctions; et il est aisé de voir que
 la résolution des équations ne consiste, en général, qu'à trouver les valeurs des quantités in-
 connues en fonctions déterminées des quantités connues. Ces fonctions représentent alors les
 différentes opérations qu'il faut faire sur les quantités connues pour obtenir les valeurs de celles

 que l'on cherche, et elles ne sont proprement que le dernier résultat du calcul. Mais, en Algèbre,
 on ne considère les fonctions qu'autant qu'elles résultent des opérations de l'Arithmétique,
 généralisées et transposées aux lettres, au lieu que dans le Calcul des fonctions proprement dit,
 on considère les fonctions qui résultent de l'opération algébrique du développement en série
 lorsqu'on attribue à une ou à plusieurs quantités de la fonction, des accroissements indéterminés.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 4; 1806, p. 4.) 19

 18 Lagrange did not enclose the argument of a function of one variable in parentheses when the argument
 is expressed by an atomic symbol: he wrote '/*' when we would rather write '/(•*) ', but he wrote '/(jc2)',
 '/ (* + £)' and '/ ( x , y)' as we do. He furthermore wrote '/ '(.*)' for the derivative of a function of sev-
 eral variables with respect to x. For simplicity we adhere to modern notational conventions even in our
 quotations from Lagrange.

 ^ This passage is quoted by J. L. Ovaert ( 1 976, p. 1 72) to emphasize the "algebraic character" of Lagrange's
 notion of function.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 107

 Strictly speaking, algebra in general is nothing but the theory of functions. In

 Arithmetic, one looks for numbers according to given conditions between these
 numbers and other numbers; and the numbers that are found meet these condi-

 tions without conserving any trace of the operations that were needed in order to

 form them. In algebra, instead, the sought after quantities have to be functions

 of given quantities, that is, expressions representing the different operations that

 have to be performed on these quantities in order to get the values of the sought

 after quantities. In algebra stricto sensu, one only considers primitive functions

 that result from ordinary algebraic operations; this is the first branch of the the-

 ory of functions. In the second branch, one considers derivative functions, and
 it is this branch that we simply designate with the name 'theory of analytical

 functions', and that encompasses all that which pertains to the new calculi.

 À proprement parler, l'Algèbre n'est en général que la théorie des fonctions. Dans l'Arithmétique,
 on cherche des nombres par des conditions données entre ces nombres et d'autres nombres; et

 les nombres qu'on trouve satisfont à ces conditions sans conserver aucune trace des opérations
 qui ont servi à les former. Dans l'Algèbre, au contraire, les quantités qu'on cherche doivent être
 des fonctions des quantités données, c'est-à-dire, des expressions qui représentent les différen-
 tes opérations qu'il faut faire sur ces quantités pour obtenir les valeurs des quantités cherchées.
 Dans l'Algèbre proprement dite, on ne considère que les fonctions primitives qui résultent des
 opérations algébriques ordinaires; c'est la première branche de la théorie des fonctions. Dans la
 seconde branche on considère les fonctions dérivées, et c'est cette branche que nous désignons

 simplement par le nom de Théorie des fonctions analytiques , et qui comprend tout ce qui a
 rapport aux nouveaux calculs.

 (Lagrange 1799, p. 235. )20

 These two quotations suggest that 'algebra' and 'theory of (analytical) functions' (that
 we take to be synonyms of 'science of functions' and 'calculus of functions') are, for
 Lagrange, two names for the same theory - also known as 'analysis' or better 'alge-
 braic analysis', after the complete title of the Théorie (see 1) - , or at any rate, two

 names of two intimately connected branches of this very theory.

 This theory concerns quantities that, in Lagrange's parlance, are viewed as "expres-

 sions that represent operations" that are to be performed for passing from one quan-
 tity to another.21 More precisely, it deals with the system of relations induced by
 the indefinite composition of certain elementary operations applied to indeterminate

 arguments.22 Though these arguments are indeterminate as such, they can be iden-
 tified by looking at the net of relations in which they occur. Once this is done, they
 become quantities, namely algebraic quantities. Hence, in Lagrange' view, quantities

 20 A similar claim is also made in manuscript 1 323 of the library of Y École des Ponts et Chaussées (see
 the annex):

 Le calcul des fonctions [...] n'a donc rien qui le distingue de l'algèbre proprement dite.

 In the calculus of functions [...] there is then nothing that or which it is distinguished from algebra strictu sensu.

 (Pepe 1986, p. 31.)

 2 1 The idea that an expression "represents operations " seems already implied in Lagrange's use of the term

 'expression of calculation', as opposed to the term 'expression' tout court , in his definition of functions.

 22 According to Grabiner ( 1 990, p. 72): "if Lagrange said he would reduce the calculus to algebra, he meant
 that its subject matter would be systems of operations which are expressible by symbolic formulas." See
 also Fraser (1987), p. 39.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 108 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 and expressions are not distinct because neither operations nor their arguments are

 there before the corresponding symbols. First there are only symbols and the formulas

 they make up, which are subject to rules of composition and transformation. Opera-

 tions and quantities appear next, whenever these symbols and formulas are supposed
 to express something. Thus, expressions do not refer to quantities or operations that

 are there independently of them; they constitute, or rather generate, quantities and

 operations. The universe of Lagrange's theory of functions is a universe of symbols

 governed by rules of composition and transformation, not a universe of objects and
 relations which these symbols refer to.

 In Lagrange's parlance, the verb 'to express' should therefore not be taken to mean

 the same as 'to refer to': an expression does not express a quantity insofar as it refers

 to it, but rather insofar as it can be taken to be this very quantity, or, as Lagrange
 admitted without any reluctance, insofar as it is this quantity. In the same vein, the

 verb 'to represent' should not be taken to evoke a relation linking two items that might

 be given independently of each other: an expression represents an operation insofar as

 it expresses (or, better, is) a quantity which is viewed as the result of performing this

 operation on another quantity. It follows that, in Lagrange's view, a quantity is alge-

 braic insofar as it is a quantity whose identity merely depends on its being expressed by

 an appropriate expression, and is then to be conceived as nothing but a relatum of the

 net of relations corresponding to the operations that this very expression represents.23

 To take a simple example, insofar x is not taken to be a quantity of a certain par-

 ticular sort, x 2 is an algebraic quantity which stays in the two-place relation r(to be
 the) square of n with the other algebraic quantity x. It is then characterized as such

 (that is, as this very quantity rather than any other one) merely by its being expressed

 by the expression ' x2' and is consequently to be conceived as nothing but a relatum

 of this two-place relation (which links it to the other relatum jc, and corresponds to

 the operation of square power). Hence, the expression 'jc2' makes different things at

 once: it expresses the algebraic quantity jc2, in the sense that it is this very quantity;

 it expresses the relation that links this quantity to jc; it furthermore represents the

 operation of square power insofar as it is applied to jc and gets jc2.

 Once this is accepted, Lagrange's definition of functions becomes clear. Insofar

 as expressions are quantities, for him, and quantities are to be taken, in the context
 of (the pure part of) his theory of analytical function, as algebraic (rather than as

 particular) ones, functions are twofold entities: they are expressions insofar as they
 express (algebraic) quantities, and (algebraic) quantities insofar as they are expressed
 by appropriate expressions. The following definition, which Lagrange advanced in his
 treatise on numerical equations, is fairly explicit:

 23 This way of thinking quantities was in no way specific to Lagrange, though Lagrange was certainly the

 mathematician who tried, more than any other, to reform the calculus in conformity with this conception. A

 crystal clear example is offered by Klügel ( 1 800, p. 146). Rather than expressions or functions, he speaks of

 forms, but his basic idea is just the same as Lagrange's: in mathematics, the form is the "modality of compo-
 sition of a quantity by another quantity [Art der Zusammensetzung einer Größe aus andern Größen ]", and
 mathematics as a whole is "the science of the form of quantities [ Wissenschaft der Formen der Grossen]"

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 109

 [...] when a quantity depends on other quantities in such a way that it can be

 expressed by a formula that includes these quantities, one says then that it is a

 function of these same quantities.

 [...] lorsqu'une quantité dépend d'autres quantités, de manière qu'elle peut être exprimée par
 une formule qui contient ces quantités, on dit alors qu'elle est une fonction de ces mêmes
 quantités.

 (Lagrange 1798, p. VII; 1808, pp. 14-15.)24

 All these considerations should be enough in order to clarify the first part of La-

 grange's definition of functions, according to which a "function of one or several
 quantities" is an "expression of calculation into which these quantities enter in any

 way whatsoever combined or not with other quantities." But more is needed for under-

 standing what it means that these last quantities "are regarded as having same given
 and invariable values, whereas the quantities of the function may receive any possible

 value," and, more generally, for explaining how functions enter into Lagrange's theory.

 The following Sects. 2.2-2.7 are devoted to this.

 2.2 Functions and numbers

 nition just outlined.

 We begin by discussing a possible objection to the understanding of Lagrange's defi-

 At the beginning of the Introduction Euler claimeds that "numbers of any sort"

 are constant quantities, and that - "since all determined values" that a variable quan-
 tity "encompasses within itself' can be expressed by numbers - "a variable quantity
 involves all numbers of any sort" (Euler 1748, vol. I, arts. 1-2; Euler (BLA), vol. I,

 p. 2). One could take these claims - together with Euler's practice of assigning numer-
 ical (real or complex) values to variable quantities - to suggest that quantities are just

 numbers for Euler. One could then argue that the same applies to Lagrange. 25 Though

 we do not in fact feel that Euler identified quantities with numbers, we shall stick to

 Lagrange (concerning Euler, see Ferraro 2001, 2004; Panza 2007, Sect. 1.1).

 In the two passages from the Leçons and the 1799 paper of the Journal de V École

 Polytechnique quoted, Lagrange explicitly distinguished algebra or the theory of func-

 tions from arithmetic, and explicitly used the terms 'quantity' and 'number' to speak of

 the entities they deal with, respectively. This explicitly suggests what is also implicitly

 suggested by Lagrange's theory as a whole: that numbers were for him quantities of

 a particular sort, whereas the theory of functions deals with quantities in general, i.e.
 with algebraic quantities.

 The presence of numerals in many formulas occurring in Lagrange's treatises does

 not constitute evidence to the contrary. Numerals admit, indeed, an easy interpretation

 as symbols either for constant quantities characterized by a particular operational role
 or for indices of operations.

 24 This quotation should be enough to show that the opposition proposed by Youschkevitch (1976-1977)
 and Monna (1972) between two notions of function in 18th-century mathematics - according to which a

 function is respectively an expression or a quantity depending on other quantities - is groundless. On this
 matter, see: Panza (1992), Chap.II.2, especially Sect.II.2.r/; Panza (1996); Ferraro (2000).

 25 We thank Jesper Lützen for having attracted our attention on this point.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 110 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 To begin with, symbols like '0', T, can be easily understood as symbols for con-

 stant quantities characterized by a particular operational role. Concerning '0' a similar

 understanding is natural: 'jc -I- y = 0' is, for example, shorthand for 'jc = - y ' Con-

 cerning '1 a similar understanding is explicitly fixed by Descartes in his Géometrie,

 where this symbol is taken to refer to the unity of segments conceived as the neutral

 element for multiplication on them (Descartes 1637, pp. 297-300; Panza 2005, pp.
 23-27). There is no reason to think that Lagrange did not accept and generalize Des-

 cartes 's stipulation on this matter, so as to take '1' to express (in the sense clarified
 above) the neutral element of multiplication on abstract quantities.

 If this is accepted, any numeral usually understood as referring to an algebraic

 number (in modern sense) can be conceived as a symbol either expressing a quantity

 resulting from appropriate operations applied to such a neutral element, or represent-
 ing such operations themselves. To take the simplest example, '2' in 'jc + 2' can be
 viewed as shorthand for '1 + 1'.

 A similar understanding also applies to symbols like 'e' or 'jr' in expressions like

 V or They can also be taken as symbols for constant quantities characterized
 by a certain operational role to be specified by defining the logarithmic, exponential,
 and trigonometric functions.

 On the other hand, expressions like 'jc3' or ''¡T display the use of numerals (the

 numeral '3', in these cases) as symbols for indices of operations. Under this use,

 numerals clearly refer to numbers, but these numbers are not the quantities which
 Lagrange's theory is dealing with, but are rather there to help in designing certain
 operations on these last quantities. Thus, 'jc3' is to be read as the expression of the

 result that is obtained by multiplying the quantity x by itself three times, whereas ' v^2'

 is to be read as the expression of the quantity that, if multiplied three times by itself,

 yields the quantity 2 (or 1 + 1). A similar understanding also applies to '3jc' or 4 j',

 which are then to be viewed as shorthand for 4 jc + jc + jc ' and ' j + j + j ' respectively.

 2.3 Why Lagrange's functions are analytical?

 Another relevant question concerns Lagrange's use of the adjective 'analytical' in the
 term 'analytical functions'.

 In Lagrange's treatises, this adjective is clearly not intended to qualify a particular

 class of functions. Lagrange may have borrowed the term 'analytical functions' from

 Condorcet's unpublished Traité du calcul integral?6 But he used it differently, namely
 to refer to any function whatsoever, understood as we have suggested. This is also
 Dugac's view (2003, p. 71), according to which the adjective 'analytical', in the title
 of the Théorie , has the sense given to it by d' Alembert in the article "Analytique" of

 the Encyclopédie : according to this sense, it merely applies to all that "belongs to the
 analysis , or is of the same nature as analysis , or is done through analysis " (Alembert
 ANA, p. 403).

 26 The manuscript of Condorcet's treatise is conserved at the Library of the Institut , in Paris. On the occur-

 rence and meaning of the term 'functions analytiques' in such a manuscript, see Youschkevitch ( 1 976-1 977),
 pp. 75-76, and Gilain (1988), p. 103.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 1 1

 2.4 In what sense are functions quantities?

 After these two preliminary questions (those addressed in Sects. 2.2 and 2.3, respec-

 tively), we move to a more substantial matter. Our understanding of Lagrange's def-

 inition of functions leaves a problem open: in what sense can algebraic quantities be

 considered quantities? Or rather, what do they have in common with quantities of a

 particular sort, such as numbers, segments or speeds, that allows one to view them as
 quantities too?

 One could think that what is crucial here is that algebraic quantities are arguments

 of operations supposed to have the same formal properties as the usual operations on
 numbers or segments. This is only a partial answer, however.

 Indeed Lagrange assigned to algebraic quantities certain features that do not merely

 depend on their being expressed by appropriate expressions. He attributed to them,

 namely, a linear order and certain metric relations, and assumed that they respect cer-

 tain continuity conditions. In a word, he assumed that algebraic quantities, even if they

 are not numbers, behave in many respects the way real numbers, or better, oriented

 segments (a null segment included) do. For short, we can term 'real' those quantities

 that behave this way. It follows that, in Lagrange's view, algebraic quantities are real.27
 This assumption has a crucial consequence: it implicitly introduces a discrepancy
 between the understanding of functions as expressions and their understanding as
 quantities, and this gives rise to an important discrepancy between Lagrange's ideal

 of purity and the actual deployment of his theory. On the one hand, Lagrange's ideal

 of purity requires functions to be studied merely as expressions; on the other, many

 arguments in his theory rely on properties that functions have insofar as they are real

 quantities.28

 27 At first glance, this claim appears to contradict the argument Lagrange relied on to exclude the possibility

 that "in the series that results from the development of a function / (jc + £ ) there cannot be any fractional
 powers of x" (Lagrange 1797, art. 10; 1801, p. 8; 1806, p. 9; 1813, art. 1.2; see Sect. 3.1). As we shall
 show in Sect. 3.1.3, this argument can be justified, however, without denying that algebraic quantities are

 real. In another case - namely in his treatment of trigonometric functions in both editions of the Théorie
 (Lagrange 1797, arts. 25-29; 1813, arts. 1.14 and 1.18-32) - Lagrange relied on imaginary coefficients and
 exponents (explicitly identified as such through the occurrence of the factor >/^T), but handled them in a

 purely formal way and used them to study the sine and the cosine functions under the implicit assumption

 that their arguments are real quantities.

 28 This discrepancy should not conceal that Lagrange's ideal of purity forces him to treat algebraic quan-
 tities as far as possible as pure relata of the net of relations expressed by the relevant expressions. This
 attitude was famously contrasted by many coeval mathematicians. When this criticism is mentioned, Cau-
 chy's rejection of the "arguments drawn from the generality of algebra", made clear in the preface of his
 Cours d'analyse (Cauchy 1 821 , p. ii; CABS, p. 1 ), is often quoted. A much earlier example of this criticism
 is the following passage included in a memoir by Ampère presented to the Institut des sciences in 1 803 and
 appeared in 1 806:

 That which is termed a fact of analysis has always to be reduced to the metaphysical principles
 of this science, if one wants to have a right idea of it. It is evident, indeed, that one has always to
 find the reasons of all results obtained through calculation in the attentive examination of the con-

 ditions of any question, since the use of algebraic characters can adds nothing to the ideas that they

 represent.

 Ce qu'on appelle un fait d'analyse doit toujours être ramené, si l'on veut s'en faire une idée juste, aux princi-
 pes métaphysiques de cette science. Il est évident, en effet, que l'emploi des caractères algébriques ne pouvant rien

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 112 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 It is a matter of fact that Lagrange took algebraic quantities to be real. But - one

 could wonder - why did he do it? The simple remark that this supposition occurs in

 some of his crucial arguments is not enough to answer the question. The crucial point

 is rather that Lagrange used these arguments because the very purpose of his theory is

 that of reducing the study of any particular sort of quantities to the study of functions.

 Indeed, to do this, he had to do more than just providing a theory of functions. He

 had to show, or at least to suggest, that all the known results concerned with particular

 sorts of quantities may be recovered within this theory. This is precisely what forced
 him to suppose that algebraic quantities are real.

 The double concern of Lagrange's theory for algebraic quantities and for particular

 sorts of quantities is reflected by a separation that is made manifest by the table of

 contents of the Théorie. This is the separation of this theory into two distinct parts:
 a pure part dealing with functions in general, including components among
 the four ones distinguished at p. 101; and an applicative part dealing with particular
 sorts of quantities, including component (;V). Still, on one hand, this separation is

 downplayed by the fact that the first part is greatly influenced by the aim of making
 geometric and mechanical applications possible: these applications do not appear as
 mere corollaries of the fundamental principles of the theory; they are rather built into

 these same principles, especially into the remainder theorem.29 On the other hand, this

 same separation is not only reflected by the very structure of Lagrange's treatises. It is
 also emphasized by Lagrange's effort at keeping formal considerations as detached as

 possible from considerations concerning order, metric and continuity,30 of developing

 the pure part of the theory as far as possible without appealing (at least explicitly) to
 order, metric and continuity for algebraic quantities.

 In this context, the explicit recourse to conditions of order and continuity that
 appears in the proofs of the remainder theorem is striking, since it appears as an
 inevitable deviation from a basic methodological purpose. The same holds for other

 surreptitious recourses to these conditions in other crucial arguments included in the
 pure part of Lagrange's theory, even in some quite crucial ones, as the fundamental
 proof itself.

 The idea that the study of quantities of any particular sort has to be reduced to
 the study of functions has another important consequence. As we have said above,
 in Lagrange's view, algebra coincides with the theory of (analytical) functions or is

 Footnote 28 continued

 (Ampère 1 806, p. 496.)

 ajouter aux idées qu'ils représentent, on doit toujours trouver dans l'examen attentif des conditions de chaque
 question la raison de tous les résultats où l'on est conduit par le calcul.

 29 This is to say that Lagrange's theory satisfies, with respect to its geometric and mechanical applications,
 what today's philosophers of mathematics usually call 'Frege's constraint': see Dummett (1991), p. 274;
 Wright (2000), p. 324.

 30 Ovaert (1976, p. 173) has argued that in the Leçons , though not in the Théorie , Lagrange was striving
 to sever the "formal point of view" from the "numerical point of view". On this point, see also Alvarez-
 Jimenez (1997), pp. 121 and 125, according to which Lagrange's theory presents "two levels," the first
 being given by a "purely formal representation for functions," and the second by the "effective calculation"

 of "numerical value of a function." The adjective 'numerical' seems to us inappropriate, since quantities of

 a particular sorts do not have do be numbers. Still, these remarks seem to us to capture an important feature
 of Lagrange's theory.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 1 3

 at least intimately connected with it, insofar as the latter as well as the former are

 branches of the same more general theory. As the study of quantities is just mathe-

 matics, it follows that this more general theory is not a branch of mathematics, but

 a unitary framework to which all mathematics is to be reduced. Hence, speaking of

 algebra or of the theory of (analytical) functions is not a way of speaking of a portion

 of mathematics, but rather a way of speaking of mathematics as a whole, appropriately

 understood. In fact this use of the term 'algebra' is not surprising: on the one hand, the

 conception of algebra as a well delimited domain within mathematics is quite modern

 and in the eighteenth century it was far from being generally accepted; on the other,

 the possibility of expanding any function in a power series - a possibility that, as we
 shall see in Sect. 3, Lagrange believed he had established - strongly suggests that any
 function can be recast in the form of a polynomial expression.

 2.5 Variables, constants, and indeterminate quantities

 We are now ready to consider Lagrange's distinction between the quantities that "are
 regarded as having same given and invariable values," and those that "may take on
 any possible value," i.e., the distinction between constant and variable quantities.

 There are two points to be clarified in connection with this distinction: how should

 we understand, in the context of Lagrange's theory, the notion of a value of a quantity?

 What does it mean that a quantity may take on not just several values, but rather all
 possible values?

 Let us begin with the first point.

 Lagrange's theory appears, to a modern mathematician, as a (flawed) version of

 real analysis. From this point of view, it is natural to admit that Lagrange's variables
 vary over the real numbers and his constants are real numbers. As said, we do not
 share this understanding (though we recognize, of course, that Lagrange's variables
 and constants can be interpreted as numbers). So we have to suggest an alternative

 understanding of Lagrange's notion of value.

 We suggest that, in Lagrange's view, a value of an algebraic quantity is another
 algebraic quantity entitled to replace the former, and that may be explicitly associ-
 ated with it by means of an appropriate equality. A constant algebraic quantity is thus

 an algebraic quantity that - within a certain argumentative context - does not admit
 arbitrary replacements, that is, either does not admit replacements at all, or admits
 only some suitable replacements. A variable algebraic quantity is instead an algebraic
 quantity that - again, within a certain argumentative context - admits any arbitrary
 replacement compatible with the rules of composition. So conceived, the distinction
 between constant and variable algebraic quantities not only depends on the formal

 treatment of these quantities, it is also relative to argumentative contexts.

 According to Lagrange, some algebraic quantities can also be taken to be inde-

 terminate. This means that, within a certain argumentative context, they are handled

 independently of their having, or their being able to take, a certain value and then, of

 their admitting or not some replacements. Often, indeterminate quantities are supposed

 to be whichever constant quantities, and are then open to take whichever suitable value,

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 114 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 and even to be later considered as variable. This is clearly the case of the increment
 É in /(* + $).

 Let us consider now the second point.
 We have already mentioned what Euler said about quantities and numbers at the

 beginning of the Introductio. Besides this, he also claimed that a variable quantity
 "encompasses within itself, in general, any determined value," and that "a variable
 quantity is the genus in which are contained all determined quantities" (Euler 1748,
 vol. I, art. 2; BLA, vol. I, pp. 2-3). Moreover, he added that a "function of a variable" is

 a variable quantity, in turn, which means that it takes on any determined value. More
 precisely, he argued that, "since it is permitted to substitute all determined values
 for the variable quantity, the function takes on innumerable determined values," and
 added that "no determined value is excluded from those which the function can take

 on, if the variable quantity also involve imaginary values" (Euler 1748, vol. I, art. 5;
 BLA, vol. I, p. 3; on Euler views on this matter, we refer the reader to Panza 2007,
 sect. 1.1).

 Lagrange merely repeated the first of Euler's claims, but he did not try to explain

 it, and did not insist on its consequences relative to the values that a function may
 take on, in turn. On top of that, in expounding his theory, he even seems to have
 made at least two concessions that contradict Euler's second claim. On the one hand,

 he seems to have admitted the possibility of taking a constant as a function of any
 variable. On the other, he seems to have granted that a function might be such that
 its variable be not licensed to take on any value. The first concession occurs quite

 locally in Lagrange's theory, for example in his treatment of singular solutions of

 derivative equations (we shall return to this matter in Sect. 4.2), though it is implied by

 the acknowledgment (that is natural in view of his notion of function) that expressions
 like '2 a2 - ax - a {a - jc)' - in which a variable occurs, as it were, only vacuously

 - are or express functions. The second concession pervades the whole theory, instead,
 and it is much more relevant.

 To see why, consider two simple examples, namely the expressions: '^zj' and
 'Va - ■*' • It seems that, in Lagrange's view, expressions like these are not well-formed

 if x takes some particular values: for '^zj' this is the case if x takes the value a' and

 for 'y/a - jc, this is the case if x takes any value greater than a.

 These two examples are very different. To argue that '^zj' is not well-formed if
 x - a it is enough to maintain that division by 0 (i.e., by the neutral element of addition
 on abstract quantities) is not allowed, or that is meaningless since there is no such

 thing as an infinite quantity. To argue that the expression 'y/a - x ' is not well-formed
 if jc > a, one has to say that no quadratic form is negative, or that Wa - b* is mean-
 ingless if b > a, since there is no quantity whose square is negative. It seems that
 Lagrange implicitly endorsed both these arguments. In a sense, this is natural, since
 they perfectly fit with the assumption that algebraic quantities are real. But, this has

 also strong consequences for the pure part of the theory.

 According to our modern set-theoretic understanding, a function is a mapping
 / : X - ► Y from a certain set X to a certain set Y , and its very nature depends not

 only on the rules the mapping is complying with, but also on the nature of these sets.
 In Lagrange's view, a function is, instead, an expression that expresses a quantity.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 15

 There is thus no way to specify beforehand a certain domain of values of its variable
 (or variables) where it is defined. Still, once it is assumed that algebraic quantities

 are real, and that functions express them, it becomes necessary to assign to functions

 something like a domain of definition.

 We employ this last term for short, but we insist on the fact that what we use it to

 refer to is quite different from what this last term refers to in a set-theoretic context.
 In the context of Lagrange's theory, the domain of definition of a function is given

 by the possible substitutions for its variable (or variables) that preserve its property

 of expressing a real quantity, thus, allowing the function to subsist as such. So under-
 stood, the domain of definition of a function is not established independently of the

 expression that constitutes the function itself, but is imposed by it.

 It follows that, in Lagrange's view, insofar the functions and ja - x are not
 defined for jc - a and x > a, respectively, they have simply no property under the
 condition that x = a and x > a. To claim, for example, that the first of them is dis-

 continuous for x = a is simply nonsensical: this function is neither a mapping from

 R to R, nor a mapping from any set X including the value a to any other appropriate

 set Y' it is just the expression itself insofar as it expresses a real quantity; and this last

 condition is precisely what does not obtain if x - a.

 Strictly speaking, such a conception contradicts Lagrange's claim that a variable
 quantity "may take on all possible values," at least if it is admitted that functions
 like and ja - x are variable quantities, which Lagrange could have not denied.
 But there is a sense in which this conception is entirely consistent with this claim.

 According to the former, the values that a variable occurring in a function can take on
 cannot be established at will. It follows that Lagrange's functions are not only defined

 everywhere on their domain of definition, but also that in Lagrange's theory there is

 no room for piece- wise defined functions like the following:

 /u)=| *2 for < 0 <»

 [ x for jc < 0

 as already observed by Fraser (1987, pp. 40-41).

 2.6 The compositional conception of functions

 It is now time to consider a question we have so far left aside: what sort of expression

 is a function, in Lagrange's view?

 Lagrange added to his definition neither a list of admitted atomic symbols that
 can compose functions, nor a specification of the rules of composition of these sym-
 bols. He merely took it for granted that the readers were familiar with the formalism

 used to provide the relevant expressions, and there was thus no need to make it pre-
 cise.

 The crucial point here is, however, not concerned with the choice and delimita-
 tion of this formalism, but rather with a compositional conception of functions that

 Lagrange seems also to have taken for granted. His endorsement of this concep-
 tion is made clear by the following claim, which he makes after having established

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the power-series expansions of (jc + Ç)m , a{x+^' logfl (jc + £) , sin (jc + £), and
 cos(x+Ç):

 116 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 The functions xm , a* , /jc , 3 1 sin jc , cos x we have just considered can be regarded

 as the simple analytical functions of only one variable. All other functions of

 the same variable are either composed from these ones by addition, subtraction,

 multiplication, or division, or are given in general through some equations into
 which some functions of this same form enter.

 Les fonctions xm,ax , Ix, sin jc, cos x que nous venons de considérer, peuvent être regardées
 comme les fonctions simples analytiques d'une seule variable. Toutes les autres fonctions de
 la même variable se composent de celles-là par addition, soustraction, multiplication ou divi-
 sion; ou sont données en général par des équations dans lesquelles entrent des fonctions de ces
 mêmes formes.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 30; 1813, art. 1.15; see also Lagrange 1801, p. 36; 1806,
 p. 47.)

 Like Euler (1748, vol.1, Chap. VIII), Lagrange seems to have included both the
 sine and the cosine among simple functions, but no inverse trigonometric function.32

 He also neglected to observe that functions can compose by replacing their arguments

 with other functions, though, in his treatises, he makes a great use of such a form of
 composition, of course.

 Leaving aside these harmless flaws, his point is clear: functions are generated by
 finitary algebraic compositions of a handful of elementary (or simple) ones,33 or are

 implicitly defined through equations involving functions generated in this way. This
 point deserves further clarification.

 Lagrange's acceptance of exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions
 is not at odds with his understanding of functions as algebraic quantities, since, as
 we have seen above, for him algebra is not a portion of mathematics, but mathe-
 matics as a whole, appropriately conceived. In the context of Lagrange's (extended)

 algebra, trigonometric functions do, however, have a different role from exponen-

 tial and logarithmic functions. The functions ax and loga jc can be viewed as result-
 ing from a generalization of elementary arithmetical operations, and their presence

 among elementary functions is thus perfectly consistent with the "genetic" (Vuillemin
 1962, p. 64; Gusdorf 1971, pp. 232-249) conception that was shared by many coeval
 mathematicians, according to which mathematics is gradually generated by extension,
 starting from an elementary base.34 This is not so for trigonometric functions, whose

 31 In Lagrange's notation, Ix is the Napierian logarithm of jc.

 But note that in the Leçons (Lagrange 1801, pp. 35-36; 1806, pp. 45-46), he obtained the derivatives

 of arcsin x and arceos x by inverting the power-series expansion of sin (jc + 1) and cos (jc + £).

 Here and below we use the term 'composition' and its cognates in relation with functions in a sense

 broader than that in which this term is habitually used today. In this broad sense, two functions /(jc) and
 g(*) can be composed by going over not only the functions f(g(x)) and gifQ c)), but also the functions

 f(x) + #(•*), fix) - g(x), [/(*)] [g(*)L and that is, as Lagrange says, by addition, subtraction,
 multiplication, or division.

 34 This conception was especially promoted by Condillac in his influential essay La langue des calculs
 (Condillac 1797). For a study of this essay, see Dhombres (1982-1983). The following passage drawn from
 the Leçons provides evidence for Lagrange's acceptance of this conception in the case of the exponential
 function:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 17

 basic properties depend, rather, on their geometric origins. It is true that the sine and

 the cosine can also be defined through imaginary exponentials (see footnote 27). But if

 they are so defined, they are no longer elementary function, and there is no reason for

 assigning to them a relevant role in the theory of functions. The fact that Lagrange's

 elementary functions include the functions sine and cosine is thus another case of dis-

 crepancy between Lagrange's ideal of purity and the actual deployment of his theory

 guided by its reductionist purpose.

 Another relevant question is concerned with the last part of the claim quoted, where

 Lagrange said that functions can be "given" through equations. Later, Lagrange con-

 firmed this claim by remarking that "the function y could be given through any equation
 between x and /' (Lagrange 1797, art. 33; 1801, p. 47; 1806, p. 52; 1813, art. 1.17).
 Right after this second claim, Lagrange proves that if F(x, y) = 0, then the first

 derivative of y is - where Fx(x, y) and F y(x, y) are the first derivatives

 of F(jc, y) taken respectively with respect to x and to y (see equality 21).

 This suggests that here Lagrange was referring only to non-derivative equations.

 He therefore does not seem to have countenanced the possibility that a function can be

 implicitly defined through a derivative equation. What he appears to have in mind was

 that functions are either elementary or derive from a finitary algebraic composition of

 elementary functions, or from the solution of an equation involving elementary func-

 tions of two variables, algebraically composed. For short, call this the 'compositional
 conception' (of functions).

 The trouble with this conception is that it is at odds with a number of arguments
 and results occurring in the Théorie and the Leçons. We shall later consider two of
 them (see Sects. 3 and 4.4, respectively): the first is Lagrange's fundamental proof, no

 less; the second concerns partial derivative equations.

 2.7 Generality

 The last point we want to make about Lagrange's notion of function concerns its rela-

 tion with a typical feature of Lagrange's proofs, namely his efforts to avoid as far as
 possible the assignment of constant values to some variables (Ovaert 1976, p. 173;
 Fraser 1987, p. 44).

 This attitude is quite natural if functions are conceived as expressions. For a func-
 tion so conceived can dramatically alter its nature when a symbol that occurs in it is

 replaced with another. Consider the function x2 + y/x - a. If the variable x takes the
 value a, the radical disappears and the function loses one of its essential features: that

 Footnote 34 continued

 The function xm , in which x is the variable and misa constant, naturally brings to the consideration
 of the function ax , in which the variable is x, and a is a constant.

 La fonction xm , dans laquelle x est la variable et m est une constante, conduit naturellement à la considération
 de la fonction ax , dans laquelle la variable est jc, et où a est une constante.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 20; 1806, p. 25.)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 118 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 of including a fractional power. Hence, Lagrange merely wants to avoid the mistakes

 that could derive from such an alteration, if it happens surreptitiously.

 But that is not all. What is more relevant is that the very possibility of such an

 alteration of the nature of a function goes together with a conception of generality

 concerning functions that is essentially different from the one we are familiar with.

 Lagrange often said that a certain result holds in general, or better that certain functions

 have certain properties in general. This meant, for him, that certain expressions can be

 subjected to certain transformations whenever no particular values are assigned to the

 variables or indeterminate quantities that occur in them, or, to use Lagrange's words,

 whenever these quantities remain indeterminate. For Lagrange, it was thus natural to

 assume that a general result concerning functions could have exceptions for particular
 values of some variables.

 This is an intensional conception of generality, which is quite different from the

 extensional conception we are familiar with. According to the latter, P holds in gen-
 eral for a certain set S of individuals when P(s) holds for any s in 5. According to
 the former, P holds in general for the s's when it holds for an expression S that is

 taken as the typical expression of the s's.35 A clear illustration of such a conception

 is provided by Lagrange's fundamental proof, to which we now turn.

 3 Lagrange's fundamental proof

 We have already observed that in order to achieve his purpose Lagrange had to show
 that derivative functions could effectively replace differential quotients. More pre-
 cisely, he had to prove that the following condition holds:

 [Fundamental condition of the theory of analytic functions]

 - (FC./) For any function y = f(x) there exists an infinity of other func-
 tions f^kHx) (k = 1,2, ...), called 'derivative functions', that are such that

 ^ k'X^k (where f®'x) = /(*) and £ is an indeterminate increment)
 is the (unique) power- series expansion of f(x + £), and that may be uniquely
 determined with the same rules used in going from f(x) to the corresponding

 differential quotients v and therefore formally coincide with these quotients,
 to the effect that they are defined for any x for which the differential quotients

 d* v

 y

 d^are- y

 - (F CM) If xo is an isolated value of x and n a non-negative integer such that

 [s^L=JC0 is defined if 311(1 only if* < ». then Z*=o + YT=n+i Ftâ)

 (where f^k'x) coincides with ^ (k = 0, 1, . . . , n) and F¿(£) (k = n + 1, n +
 2, . . .) are appropriate functions of £ alone) is the (unique) expansion of /(j to +
 $) = fx0($) including n + 1 terms having, respectively the form A^k ( k =
 0, 1 ,...,«), where A ¿ does not depend on £.

 35 Lagrange's view on this matter was shared by most of his contemporaries. In the first volume of his

 Traité du calcul différentiel et intégral , Lacroix observes for example that "though true in general," the form

 of a power series for the expansion of a function of x + $ "is not appropriate for certain particular cases"
 (Lacroix 1797-1798, vol. 1, p. 232).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 1 9

 This condition cannot be stated as such within Lagrange's theory, and indeed it is
 stated neither in the Théorie nor in the Leçons. Still, as we already observed, both
 these treatises open with an argument that, if correct, would have convinced anybody
 already familiar with the differential calculus that such a condition is met. This is,

 Lagrange's fundamental proof. The present section is devoted to a reconstruction and

 evaluation of this argument.

 3.1 Power-series expansion

 The first part of Lagrange's fundamental proof is intended to establishe a result that
 he initially stated as follows:

 Theorem 1 (Power-series expansion theorem)

 Let us consider [...] a function f(x) of whatever variable x. If one replaces
 in it x with x + Ç, where £ is whatever indeterminate quantity, it will become

 f(x + Ç), and, for the theory of series, one will be able to expand it in a series

 of this form

 f(x) + pÇ+qè2 +r£3 + &c., (2)

 in which the quantities p, q, r, &c. - which are the coefficients of the powers of

 § - will be new functions of de x , derived from the primitive function f(x), and

 independent of the indeterminate [quantity] £.

 Considérons [...] une fonction f(x) d'une variable quelconque x. Si à la
 place de x, on y met x + Ç, £ étant une quantité quelconque indéterminée,
 elle deviendra f(x +£), et par la théorie des séries on pourra la développer
 en une série de cette forme

 f(x ) + pÇ + qÇ2 + rÇ3 + &c.,

 dans laquelle les quantités p,q,r, &c., coefficients des puissances de £,
 seront des nouvelles fonctions de jc, dérivées de la fonction primitive f(x),

 et indépendantes de V indéterminée §.

 (Lagrange 1797 , art. 3; 1801, p. 7; 1806, p. 8; 1813, art. I.l.)36

 The reference to the theory of series requires explanation. Lagrange's intention was

 presumably to refer to the corpus of results expounded in the first volume of Euler's In-

 troduction where - by relying on appropriate formal procedures - it is shown that any

 rational or irrational function can be expanded in a power series, and the power-series
 expansions of the exponential, the logarithm, the sine and the cosine are provided.
 One could then think that Lagrange considered these results as a sufficient basis for

 36 We correct an evident misprint of the second edition of the Théorie. In this edition, Lagrange used the
 symbol whenever, in the first edition of the Théorie and in both editions of the Leçon, he had used
 the symbol '&c.' We prefer to use the latter symbol, which was much commoner in the 18th century. The

 term 'theorem of power-series expansion' is not Lagrange's. We use it for brevity and simplicity.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 20 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 proving the theorem. But this is contradicted by what he wrote straight away, which

 rather suggests that, for him, any proof merely relying on Euler's results would have

 been inappropriate:

 But, so as not to go ahead gratuitously, we begin by examining the very form

 of the series that should represent the expansion of any function f(x) when one

 replaces x in it with x + £, and which we have supposed to contain only integer

 positive powers of § . In fact, this supposition holds for the expansion of [all] the

 different functions we know, but, to the best of my knowledge, nobody has tried

 to prove it a priori, which seems to me all more necessary that there are some
 particular cases in which it cannot obtain.37

 Mais pour ne rien avancer gratuitement, nous commencerons par examiner la forme même de la
 série qui doit représenter le développement de toute fonction f(x ) lorsqu'on y substitue x + £
 à la place de jc, et que nous avons supposée ne devoir contenir que des puissances entières et
 positives de £. Cette supposition se vérifie en effet par le développement des différentes fonc-

 tions connues; mais personne, queje sache, n'a cherché à la démontrer a priori, ce qui me paraît
 néanmoins d'autant plus nécessaire, qu'il y a des cas particuliers où elle ne peut pas avoir lieu.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 10, 1801, p. 8, 1806, pp. 8-9, and 1813, art. 1.2)

 Such an a priori proof is precisely what the first part of Lagrange's fundamental proof
 is intended to provide.

 In his treatises, Lagrange made no effort to explain what it meant for him that
 a certain series is an expansion of a certain function. In the second edition of the

 Théorie , after having provided his alleged a priori proof, he referred to the result
 allegedly established by this proof with the phrase 'la formule générale f(x + £) =
 f(x) + pi- + qÇ2 + r§3 + &c.' (Lagrange 1813, art. 1.8; in the first edition - 1797,
 art. 16 - , the adjective 'générale' is absent). This is only one of several occasions
 where Lagrange used the symbol 4 =' to denote the relation between a certain func-

 tion and its power-series expansion (or some other sort of expansions). The mere use

 of this symbol is, however, not enough to clarify the exact nature either of this result or

 of this relation. The best (and possibly only) way to achieve such a clarification is by
 parsing Lagrange's proof. This is what we shall do in Sect. 3.1.2. The discussion made

 in this last section will be based, however, on our understanding of what Lagrange

 meant by requiring that his proof be a priori. Before we turn to the proof it is therefore
 necessary to consider this last matter.

 3.1.1 Why an a priori proof?

 Providing functions comply with the compositional conception (explained in Sect. 2.6),

 Euler's previously mentioned results on the power-series expansion of functions would

 be enough to prove the power-series expansion theorem. To prove that any finitary alge-
 braic composition of the elementary functions has a power-series expansion it would
 be enough, indeed, to show how to obtain a power-series expansion of a composed
 function by composing the power-series expansions of the elementary functions that

 compose it. The method of indeterminate coefficients would, then, be appropriate to

 obtain a power-series expansion of any function implicitly defined through a (finitary)

 37 For an explanation of this last disclaimer, see Theorem 2.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 121

 equation in two variables involving elementary functions algebraically composed.
 For short, call such a proof 'compositional.' It is natural to wonder why Lagrange

 considered it inappropriate.38

 In the Introduction Euler proved his mentioned results by appealing both to infin-

 itesimalist arguments and to an unproved generalization of the binomial theorem to

 any real exponent. This is not, however, a reason that Lagrange could have advanced

 for requiring an alternative proof of these results based on a non-compositional proof

 of the power-series expansion theorem. On the one hand, the argument that he relied

 on in the Leçons (see pp. 44-45, ) to obtain the first coefficient of the power- series

 expansion of (x +£)m is a clever version of a later proof of the binomial theorem due to

 iEpinus and Euler himself, which works for any sort of exponent and relies on no infin-
 itesimalist assumptions (TEpinus 1760-1761; Euler 1787; Dhombres 1987; Dhombres
 and Pensivy 1988; Pensivy 1987-1988.). On the other hand, when he looked for the

 first coefficients of the power-series expansions of a^x^' 'oga (*+£), sin (jc + Ç) ,
 and cos (x -I- £) , both in the Théorie and in the Leçons (Lagrange 1797, arts. 19-23
 and 25-29; 1801, pp. 20-24 and 3 1-35; 1806, pp. 25-3; pp. 40-47; 1813, arts. 1.11-14
 and I.18-I.19; Panza 1992, pp. 749-760), Lagrange offered arguments that are per-

 fectly suitable for providing, independently of all infinitesimalist considerations, the
 power-series expansions of the exponential, the logarithm, the sine and the cosine
 obtained by Euler. Lagrange could thus have easily obtained Euler's results through

 arguments that he would certainly have considered correct, and that are independent

 of the power-series expansion theorem.

 One can wonder, then, why, rather than proceeding accordingly, he sought a non-

 compositional (a priori) proof. Three explanations come to mind.

 The first is as follows. Let F (x, y) = 0 be a (finitary) equation involving Lagrange's

 elementary functions algebraically composed, and / (j t + £) be the function implicitly

 defined through the corresponding equation F (x + Ç, y) = 0. To develop this function

 into a power-series expansion by relying on the method of indeterminate coefficients,
 one has to suppose that / (x + £) = ^kHk > then apply this method to determine
 the coefficients A* in terms of x. It follows that either it is taken for granted that any

 function / (j c -I- £) so defined reduces to a finitary algebraic composition of Lagrange's

 elementary functions, or a compositional proof of the power-series expansion theorem
 is in some way circular, since the equality /(* + £) = Xiu=o could only be
 justified by the assumption that / (x + £) has a power-series expansion. It is thus pos-
 sible that Lagrange required a non-compositional proof of the power-series expansion
 theorem to avoid assuming that any function /(*+£) so defined reduces to a finitary

 algebraic composition of its elementary functions.

 The second explanation is simpler. It could be that Lagrange wanted a non-composi-

 tional proof of the power-series expansion theorem to avoid making another assump-
 tion (that a compositional proof would have required): the assumption that power
 series obtained by appropriately composing the power-series expansions of elementary

 38 Lagrange's phrase 'pour ne rien avancer gratuitement', included in one of the passages quoted, makes
 it hard to argue that Lagrange merely preferred an a priori proof but did not consider a compositional one
 inappropriate.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 22 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 functions is a power-series expansion of the function obtained by analogously com-

 posing these same elementary functions.

 The third explanation is radical. Perhaps Lagrange wanted a non-compositional

 proof of the power-series expansion theorem because he wanted the proof of this
 crucial theorem to work even independently of the adoption of the compositional

 conception of functions. 39

 All these explanations indicate a discrepancy between Lagrange's actual proof
 of the power-series expansion theorem and his ideal of purity, as they suggest that

 Lagrange sought a proof that does not depend on assumptions concerning functions
 that are natural to make if functions are conceived as expressions according to the

 view explained in Sect. 2. They suggest, moreover, that what Lagrange meant by an

 a priori proof of this theorem is a proof that does not rely on formal procedures like

 Euler's: procedures leading to the power-series expansion of certain functions through

 appropriate transformations of the relevant expressions.

 3.1.2 The premises of Lagrange's proof of the power-series expansion theorem and

 the appropriate understanding of this theorem

 We are now ready to consider Lagrange's a priori proof of the power-series expansion
 theorem. This is far from unequivocal, as has often been noticed. We will therefore

 quote it in extenso, before parsing it:

 I shall first prove that, in the series resulting from the extension of the function
 f(x + Ç), there cannot be any fractional power of §, unless one assigns to x
 some particular values.

 It is clear, indeed, that the radicals of £ can only result from some radicals

 included in the primitive function /(j t), and it is also clear that replacing x with
 x + § could neither increase nor decrease the number of these radicals, and it

 could no more change their nature, as far as x et £ are indeterminate quantities.

 Furthermore, from the theory of equations, we know that any radical has as many

 39 In the first edition of the Leçons , Lagrange took his proof to be concerned only with "algebraic functions"
 and made, at the end of it, the following quite peculiar remark:

 If the function /(jc) is not algebraic, one can nevertheless suppose that the expansion of f(x + £)
 be, in general, of this same form, regarding as particular exceptions the cases where this expansion
 would contain some powers of £ other than the integer positive ones. Thus, whatsoever the function

 f(x) might be, we only consider the functions p,q,r,& c. that result from the expansion of / (x + £ )
 according to the powers £, £2, £3, &c.

 Si la fonction f(x) n'est pas algébrique, on peut néanmoins supposer que le développement de f(x + £) soit
 en général de cette même forme, en regardant comme des exceptions particulières les cas où ce développement
 contiendrait d'autres puissances de £ que des puissances positives et entières. Ainsi, quelle que soit la fonction
 /(jc) nous ne considérerons que les fonctions p,q,r, & c. résultant du développement de f(x + $) suivant les
 puissances $, $2, £3, &c.

 (Lagrange 1801 , pp. 9-10.)

 This remark, together with the restriction to algebraic functions, is absent both from the two editions of the
 Théorie and from the second edition of the Leçons. It is not clear what sort of exceptions Lagrange had in
 mind, so it is hard to decide whether this remark should be taken as evidence that Lagrange sought a proof

 of the power-series expansion theorem that worked independently of the adoption of the compositional
 conception of functions.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 123

 different values as there are unities in its exponent, and any irrational function

 has then as many different values as possible combinations of the different values

 of the radicals it includes. Hence, if the expansion of the function fix + £) were
 able to contain a term of the form the function fix ) would necessarily
 be irrational and would then have a certain number of different values, which

 would be the same for the function fix + Ç) as for its expansion. But, since this

 expansion is represented by the series

 fix) + p% + + &c. + «Ç « + &c., (3)

 O M

 each value of f(x) would combine with each one of the n values of the radical

 f/P", to the effect that the function fix + Ç) would have, when it is expanded,
 more different values than this same function when it is not expanded, which is
 absurd.

 This proof is general and rigorous as far as x and Ç remain indeterminate;
 but it would cease to be so if one assigned to x some determinate values, since

 it would be possible that these values destroy some radicals in fix) that could
 nevertheless subsist in /(* + £). [...]

 We have just seen that the expansion of the function f(x + Ç) could not
 include, in general, some fractional powers of £ ; it is also possible to warrant
 that it could no more include some negative powers of Ç.

 Since, if among the terms of this expansion, there were one of the form p,
 where m is a positive number, this term would become infinite; thus, the func-
 tion f{x 4- Ç) should also become infinite when £ = 0; and consequently f(x)
 should become infinite, which could only happen for some particular values
 of x.

 Je vais d' abord démontrer que, dans la série résultante du développement de la function f(x +£ ) ,

 il ne peut se trouver aucune puissance fractionnaire de £ , à moins qu'on ne donne à x des valeurs

 particulières.

 En effet, il est clair que les radicaux de £ ne pourraient venir que des radicaux renfermés

 dans la fonction primitive /(j t), et il est clair en même temps que la substitution de x H- £ au
 lieu de jc ne pourrait ni augmenter ni diminuer le nombre de ces radicaux, ni en changer la
 nature, tant que x et £ sont des quantités indéterminées. D'un autre côté, on sait par la théorie
 des équations que tout radical a autant de valeurs différentes qu'il y a d'unités dans son expo-
 sant, et que toute fonction irrationnelle a, par conséquent, autant de valeurs différentes qu'on
 peut faire de combinaisons des différentes valeurs des radicaux qu'elle renferme. Donc, si le

 m

 développement de la fonction /(jc + £) pouvait contenir un terme de la forme uÇ n , la fonction
 /(jc) serait nécessairement irrationnelle et aurait par conséquent un certain nombre de valeurs
 différentes, qui serait le même pour la fonction f(x + £), ainsi que pour son développement.
 Mais, ce développement étant représenté par la série

 f{x) + pH + qh + &c. + n + Sic.,

 m

 chaque valeur de f(x) se combinerait avec chacune des n valeurs du radical i/f7" , de sorte que
 la fonction f(x + £) développée aurait plus de valeurs différentes que la même fonction non
 développée, ce qui est absurde.

 Cette démonstration est générale et rigoureuse tant que x et £ demeurent indété rminés; mais
 elle cesserait de l'être si l'on donnait à jc des valeurs détérminées, car il serait possible que

 ces valeurs détruisissent quelques radicaux dans /(jc) qui pourraient néanmoins subsister dans
 fix+Ç). [...]

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 124 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Nous venons de voir que le développement de la fonction f(x + £) ne saurait contenir, en géné

 ral, des puissances fractionnaires de £; il est facile de s'assurer aussi qu'il ne pourra contenir
 non plus des puissances négatives de £.

 Car, si parmi les termes de ce développement, il y en avait un de la forme pr , m étant un

 nombre positif, en faisant £ = 0, ce terme deviendrait infini; donc la fonction f(x + Ç) devrait
 devenir infinie lorsque £ = 0; par conséquent, il faudrait que f(x) devînt infinie, ce qui ne peut
 avoir lieu que pour des valeurs particulières de x.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 10; 1801, pp. 8-9; 1806, pp. 9-10; 1813, art. 1.2; the second

 part of the quotation, concerned with negative powers of £, is absent from the
 first edition of the Théorie.)

 If this argument is taken to provide Lagrange's complete proof of the power-series

 expansion theorem, as we suggest,40 then this proof is based (among other things) on

 an unproved premise. For brevity, let us say that a series S (x , £ ) is a generalized power

 series if it is of the form X^=o Pk(x)%ak » where the coefficients pk(x) are functions
 of x and the exponents a ¿ are rational (and, of course, different from each other). 41

 Lagrange's unproved premise can then be stated as follows:

 - [P] Any function f(x + Ç) has a generalized power-series expansion 42

 This is not, of course, the only premise on which Lagrange's proof of the power-

 series expansion theorem rests. Three others premises are the following:

 - [C] For any function f(x + §) and any generalized power series S(j c, §), if the

 latter is an expansion of the former then:

 (/) if S(jc,£) contains a radical of Ç then f(x) is also irrational;
 (ii) f(x + §) and S(x, £) have the same number of values;43
 (iii) if S(x, £) becomes infinite for £ = 0, then /(j t) is also infinite.

 In the proof, we have just quoted, condition [C. /] is justified by the observation

 that "the radicals of £ [in S(x, £)] could only come from radicals contained in the [. . .]

 function /(; t)." In the Leçons , Lagrange also argued that "the form" of the functions
 pk(x) (k = 0, 1, 2, . . .) "depends only on that of the given function /(jc)" and added

 that these functions "can be easily determined, in the particular cases, through the
 rules of ordinary algebra" (Lagrange 1801, p. 7; 1806, p. 8).

 At first glance, these claims suggest that, for Lagrange, to say that a certain gener-

 alized power series is an expansion of a certain function was the same as saying that

 the former results from the latter through the application of an appropriate formal pro-

 cedure. This is consistent with Lagrange's understanding of functions as expressions,

 but neither with the a priori character of the desired proof, nor with conditions [C .ii]
 and [C .iii].

 40 In Sect. 5.2.1, pp. 74-75, we shall consider an alternative understanding of Lagrange's proof of the
 power-series expansion theorem, according to which this argument provides only the first part of this proof.

 41 In what follows, we shall denote with *p'(x)' 'p2 (■*)'» 'P3 (*) ' ...the functions Lagrange denotes
 with ' q' V, ...We also use the modern symbol 'Xfcio - ' t0 denote a series. Lagrange wrote instead
 the first terms of this series followed by the symbols '&c.' or '. . .' (see footnote 36). These last symbols

 clearly indicate, in his treatises, that the sum is indefinitely, rather than infinitely, extended. The reader is
 thus invited to consider the oossibilitv that all terms of a series vanish bevond a certain value of k.

 42 For the case where f(x + £) has an expansion including some powers of log £, see Sect. 3.4

 43 We shall return to this premise, and try to shed light on it, in Sect. 3. 1 .3

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 125

 These two last conditions suggest, rather, an alternative understanding, which is not

 only consistent with the a priori character of the proof and these same conditions, but

 also with Lagrange's understanding of functions as quantities, and the mathematical

 practice concerning expansion of functions that was usual within algebraic analysis
 before Lagrange (Ferraro 2001, 2002; Ferraro and Panza 2003). This understanding
 is a general (or global) one in the following sense: a generalized power series S(j t, £)
 counts as an expansion of a function f(x + Ç) insofar as both this series and this
 function are understood as expressions where x and £ remain indeterminate, that is,
 as expressions taken as such (or expressions where x and £ are not supposed to take
 any particular value).

 Let us fix this understanding through an explicit definition:

 Definition 1 A generalized power series S(x , £) - where x and £ remain indetermi-

 nate - is an expansion of a function f(x + Ç) - where x and £ remain indeterminate as

 well - if and only if, for any value of x for which this series is defined, it converges44

 to such a function whenever the value of f belongs to an appropriate proper interval.45

 The following considerations should be enough to show how this understanding

 works in Lagrange's theory and to explain it better.

 Though general in the previous sense, this definition is such that, according to it, a

 function f(x + £) has a generalized power-series expansion S (jc, £) in virtue of what

 happens under appropriate replacements of x and £ with constant quantities. This is

 just the sort of understanding that is needed both for the power-series expansion theo-
 rem and for premise [P], since - we argue - both of them are supposed to be general
 in this same sense.

 Definition 1 suggests that premise [P] be understood as follows:

 - [P.l] For any function f(x + £) - where x and £ remain indeterminate - there
 is a generalized power series S(jc, §) - where x and Ç remain indeterminate, in
 turn - such that, for any value of x for which it is defined, it converges to f(x + §)

 whenever the value of £ belongs to an appropriate proper interval.

 However, this understanding of premise [P] is too weak for justifying Lagrange's use

 of this premises in his proof of the power-series expansion theorem. Let us see why.

 Having admitted premise [P], Lagrange was satisfied with two reductio ad absur-

 dum purporting to exclude the possibility that a generalized power-series expansion
 of a function f(x + £) contains fractional and negative powers of £, respectively.

 The first reductio, intended to exclude fractional exponents, starts with the suppo-

 sition that this function has a generalized power-series expansion of the form

 f(x) H

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44 As the purpose of Definition 1 is to fix the way Lagrange understood the relation of a function and a
 generalized power-series expansion of it, the convergence of the former to the latter has to be understood
 as Lagrange could have understood it, that is, as a not-better-defined metric equality between the values
 of the function and the values that the series indefinitely approaches. In what follows, we shall always use

 the verb 'to converge' and its cognates in this same quite vague sense, which corresponds, we argue, to the

 understanding of eighteenth-century mathematicians. For further considerations on this matter, see Ferraro
 and Panza (2003).

 45 By 'proper interval' we mean one that includes more than a single value.

 1 26 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 where ¡i is a positive integer greater than 0, and j is a fractional exponent (different
 from every other exponent of £ in this expansion). In Sect. 3.1.3, we shall return to the

 argument that Lagrange developed starting from this supposition. For the time being, it

 is only relevant to remark that, according to such a supposition, this expansion includes

 the function f(x) as one of its terms. This is essential, since the reductio proceeds by

 showing that the generalized power-series expansion of f(x + §) cannot contain both

 f(x ) and Ph(j t)Ç f , and then, as it certainly contains the former, it cannot contain the
 latter. Now, if definition 1 is accepted, f(x ) would enter a generalized power-series

 expansion of /(jc + £) if no exponent of £ in this expansion were negative, since this

 would insure that the proper interval to which £ must belong for this expansion to
 converge to f(x + £) includes the value £ = 0. One could then think that the second
 reductio - which is primarily intended to exclude negative exponents - is also suitable

 for proving that the (or any) generalized power-series expansion of a function f(x +£)
 includes the function f(x) as one of its terms.

 Still, this second reductio proceeds by making the other assumption that, whatever

 x might be, if a generalized power-series expansion of f(x + £) goes to infinity for
 Ç = 0, this also happens for f(x + §) itself. This is the same as assuming that this
 expansion converges to f(x + £) for § = 0, to the effect that S(jc, 0) = f(x). This is
 precisely what happens for power series. Thus, either Lagrange's second reductio is

 circular in some way, or it depends on the assumption that a generalized power-series
 expansion of /(j c + §) converges to f(x + §) around £ = 0. Hence, it can neither
 provide a proof for this last assumption, nor for the assumption that such an expansion
 includes /(j t) as one of its terms.

 It thus appears that Lagrange took this last assumption for granted. In other words,

 he took it for granted that a generalized power series of a function /(jt +£) isa series

 that converges to this function for small enough Ç, and merely proved that this is
 possible only if this expansion is a power series.

 Now, the requirement that a generalized power series of a function f(x +£) con-

 verge to this function for small enough £ and include the function /(j t) as one of its

 terms is certainly relevant for Lagrange's proof to hold, but it is not relevant to the

 content of this last theorem. Indeed, a power series Xju=o PkW%k converges if and
 only if £ belongs to an interval containing zero,46 and it can thus converge to /(jt + §)
 only if it includes f(x) as one of its terms. A natural way to understand this theorem
 is thus the following:

 Theorem 2 For any function %1 f(x + £) - where x and £ remain indeterminate - ,
 there is a power series Pk(x)%k - where x and £ remain indeterminate as well ,
 and the coefficients pk 00 are functions of x - that, for any value of x for which it is

 46 In Lagrange's day, nobody had spotlessly proved that this is the case. In the 1 8th century, this was,
 however, generally taken for granted (though nobody remarked that the interval of convergence could, in

 some cases, reduce to the only value £ = 0), and we can suppose that this was also the case for Lagrange.

 According to Desanti 1973, p. 66, Lagrange's theory includes "a principle of 'normalisation' which

 delimits a priori the class of functions that can be expanded in series." This seems wrong to us. We maintain,

 rather, that Lagrange wanted to prove that any function of x + £ has a power-series expansion, at least if
 this claim is appropriately understood.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 27

 defined, converges to such a function whenever the value of% belongs to an appropriate

 proper interval centered on zero.

 Suppose now that Pk Wf * be a power-series expansion of a certain function

 f(x +£• )• Suppose also that Jto be a value of x for which XIu=o Pk (*o)£* is not defined.
 Insofar as Ç remains indeterminate when x takes the value jco in f(x +£), this function

 reduces to a function of £ alone, namely /(jco + Ç) = fxo( £)• Theorem 2 is clearly
 compatible with the possibility that this last function has a generalized power-series
 expansion Pk(x o)£a* which is not a power series.

 Two simple examples are provided by the functions and *Jx + £ and the respec-

 tive power-series expansions X¡u=o(~~ 1)* anc* X¡u=o ^ | ^ ^ormer
 of these series is not defined for x = 0, the latter is not defined for x < 0. For these
 values of jc, the functions and y/x + £ reduce to and y/a -I- £ (where a is a
 non-positive constant), respectively. The former of these last functions is then its own

 generalized power-series expansion, whereas the latter has ^ | ^ aS *tS
 generalized power-series expansion.48

 Even if Theorem 2 holds, there is thus a sense in which a function /(*+£) can have

 a generalized power-series expansion that is not a power series. This explains what

 Lagrange meant when he remarked (at the end of the passage quoted at page 120, after
 Theorem 1), that "there are some particular cases where [. . .] [the supposition that the

 expansion of f(x + §) contains only integer positive powers of £] cannot hold." As
 Lagrange sayd in his proof, these cases are given by "particular values of jc." The term

 'particular values' suggests that Lagrange was here thinking to isolated values on an
 appropriate domain.

 Plausibly, this domain includes the domain of definition of f(x), but it seems that

 Lagrange also considered as being relevant the limit values of this domain that, though
 not included in it, allow the function f(x + £) to be defined for any non-null value

 of £. In other terms, it seems that he took the relevant "particular values of x " to
 be isolated values in the domain of definition of f(x + Ç) for any non-null value of

 Ç.49 For example, in the case of the function j, the relevant domain seems also to
 include the value x = 0, for which this function is not defined (since is defined

 48 Though the power series ¿ ) jc*~ V* is n0t cle^nec^ ^or * = 0* lhere is a generalized power
 series that provides an expansion of and is defined for any value of jc for which </x is defined, and

 thus, also for jc = 0. This is ££1 0 ^ ^ • But this is a Power series of not of £• 11 does not
 contain the function </x as one of its terms and does thus appear not to count, for Lagrange, as a generalized

 power-series expansion of *Jx + £, insofar as this function results from the function *Jx by replacing x
 with jc + £. It rather counts as a generalized power-series expansion of the function + x, insofar as
 this function results from the function VF by replacing £ with £ + x. Conceived as resulting from *Jx by

 replacing jc with jc + £, the function ■s/x + Ç has thus only a generalized power-series expansions, namely,

 49 This seems to be also Dugac's view: see Dugac (2003), p. 73, where he claims that Lagrange took the

 relevant particular cases to be given by a finite number of points on a closed interval.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 128 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 for x - 0 if the increment £ is non-null), while, in the case of the function «/x, the
 only "particular value" to be considered is x = 0.

 The consideration of the limit values of the domain of definition of /(jc) which

 are not included in this domain is however mathematically inessential for Lagrange's

 theory, and rather depends on rhetorical reasons: to say that the power-series expan-
 sion of f(x + £) is not defined for these values simply reduces to saying, within
 this theory, that the function /(jc) has no derivatives at some values of x for
 which it is not defined. Hence, in what follows, we shall limit ourselves to con-

 sider the "particular values of jc" to be isolated values in the domain of definition of
 /(*)■

 A little reflection clarifies the situation. Let XIu=o Pk(x)%k and Xju=o Pk(x)%k be

 two distinct power-series defined on the same interval of values of jc. Suppose that, on

 this interval, both of them converge to a function /(jc + £) whenever £ belongs to an

 appropriate proper interval centered on zero. Then there would be a proper interval of

 values of £ for which, on this interval of values of x , Pk (*)£* = o Pk (■*)£*•
 For the method of indeterminate coefficients, it would then follow that pk (jc) = pk (jc)

 for any k , which contradicts the assumption that X^=o Pk(*)Hk and X¡u=o Pk(x)%k
 are distinct. Hence, if the method of indeterminate coefficients is accepted, theorem 2

 excludes the possibility that a function f(x + f ) has distinct power-series expansions
 defined on a same interval of values of jc. But it leaves open both the possibility that
 a function /(*+£) have several distinct power-series expansions, each of which is

 defined for different intervals in the domain of definition of / (jc) , and the possibility
 that a function /(*+£) admit no power-series expansion defined for some proper
 interval in this same domain of definition.

 The former possibility would undermine, however, the second part of Lagrange's
 fundamental proof, which we shall discuss in Sect. 3.2. Moreover, his use of the terms

 'determined values' and 'particular values,' and his treatment of the cases correspond-
 ing to these values, suggest that he did not consider the latter.

 Insofar as his proof of the power-series expansion theorem does not eliminate

 these two possibilities, it is natural to think that their exclusion depends on his
 understanding of premise [P]. So, in the end, it seems to us that, to adhere to La-

 grange's views, this premise and this theorem should be, respectively, understood as
 follows:

 - [P.2] For any function f(x + Ç ) - where jc and £ remain indeterminate - there is a
 generalized power series S(x, $) - where jc and $ remain indeterminate as well -

 which includes f(x) as one of its terms, and is defined for any jc in the domain of

 definition of f(x) except for some isolated values, and that, for any value of jc for

 which it is defined, converges to /(jc + $) whenever the value of £ belongs to an
 appropriate proper interval centered on zero.

 Theorem 3 This generalized power series is necessarily a power series and it is thus
 unique. In other words, for any function /(jc + $) - where x and Ç remain indetermi-
 nate - , there is one and only one power series Pk (■*)£* - where x and £ remain

 indeterminate as well , and the coefficients pk (jc) are functions of x - that is defined
 for any x in the domain of definition of f{x) except for some isolated values , and that ,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 129

 for any value of x for which it is defined, converges to such a function whenever the
 value of £ belongs to an appropriate proper interval centered on zero.50

 If the power-series expansion theorem is so understood, there are no easy counter-

 examples to it in the universe of Lagrange's functions,51 at least if his notion of function
 is understood strictu sensu.

 If this is the case, Cauchy's counter-examples - consisting of functions of the form

 e-i /g{x) ^ where g(jt) is defined for any (real) value of jc, is indefinitely derivable at
 the origin, and is such that g(0) =0 and g(x) > 0 for x ^ 0 (Cauchy 1822, p. 277-
 278; 1823, p. 152)52 - do not apply. It is true that, if one is allowed to extend these
 functions and their derivatives continuously to x = 0, the power-series expansions of
 e-i /g(x+ç) are (jefine(j for x = 0, but reduce in this case to 0 + 0 -I- 0 + ... , which is

 obviously not equal to e-1/g(0+^ = e-1/^. Extending a function continuously to a

 point in which it is not defined is however the same as replacing this function with a

 piece-wise defined function, which is not allowed, in agreement Lagrange's notion of
 function understood strictu sensu.

 In the case of functions of the form e-1/^, extending them continuously to x = 0

 is the same as replacing them with piece- wise defined functions of the form f(x) =

 e-l /g(x) x / Q

 _ 0 • Hence, in agreement with Lagrange's notion of function understood

 strictu sensu, the value jc = 0 is such that the power-series series expansion of any
 function e_1/s^ is not defined for it.53

 50 Note that this theorem is equivalent neither to the statement that for any function f(x) and any value

 *o in its domain of definition there is a series Xjtio Pk(a)(x ~ a)k which converges to f(x) whenever
 x belongs to a proper interval centered on jc = a that includes xq, nor to the statement that any value *o
 of the domain of definition of any function /(jc) can be chosen as the centre of an expansion of the form

 Xifcio Pk(x o)(* "" *0)* f°r this function.

 5 1 According to Grabiner ( 1 990, p. 1 5), "it is not true that any function given by an analytic expression can

 be expressed as the sum of a convergent Taylor series about any arbitrary point. (It was not sufficient for

 Lagrange to except a finite number of isolated points at which the function or its derivative cease to exist.)"
 Unfortunately, Grabiner does not illustrate her claim with any particular example, and it is not clear how
 exactly this claim should be understood.

 52 In ( 1 822), Cauchy considered the functions e 1 /*2 , e 1 / S1"2 x , e 1 ^ 'a+bx+x +•••) ^ an(j e 1 /x ^ SUp_

 posing that jc takes only positive values. In (1823), he considered only the function e-1/* .

 53 Dugac (2003, p. 77) has argued that Lagrange "did not believe in the existence" of counter-examples
 like Cauchy's. For Dugac, evidence for this claim is provided by the following quotation:

 One should not fear that the functions f(x),f'(x),f"(x), & c. [...], up to the infinity, could vanish

 all together under the supposition that jc = a, as some geometers seem to suppose.

 Il n'est pas à craindre que les fonctions / ( x ), / '(jc), / "(x), &c. [...] à l'infini puissent devenir nulles en mê me
 temps par la supposition x = a, comme quelques géomètres paraissent le supposer [...].

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 39; 1813, art. 1.28; see also 1801, p. 62; 1806, p. 83.)

 From Lagrange's point of view, this claim seems however not to be relevant for the case of Cauchy's counter-

 examples. For him, derivatives are defined through power-series expansions, so they could all be equal to 0
 for jc = a only if the power-series expansion of /(j c + £) were defined for x = a and, for this value of x,
 would converge to f(a + £) whenever £ belongs to an appropriate proper interval. In the lines that follow
 the previous quotation it is argued, indeed, that if it were the case that f(x) = f'(x) = f"(x) = ••• = 0
 for jc = a, then it would also be the case that f (a + £) = 0 for any which, he says, is impossible.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 30 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 There is no doubt, however, that this point belongs to the domain of definition

 of f(x + Ç) = e_1/^*+^' for any non-null value of £. One could then argue that
 Lagrange should have taken this value to be a particular value of x for which the

 power-series expansion of this last function is not defined. This is all the more likely

 for, when Lagrange dealt with the particular values of jc for which the power-series

 expansion of a function f(x + £) is not defined, he took into account the possibility

 that a function /(j to + £) = fXo( §) have an expansion including some power of log £,
 and, in order to manage this case, he implicitly admitted that a function could be
 extended continuously to a value of its variable for which it is not defined as such.54

 We shall return to this matter in Sect. 3.4. Here, it is only important to observe that, if

 this were admitted, Cauchy's counter-examples would work. This is, however, more a

 case against the appropriateness of Lagrange's notion of function, than a genuine case
 against Theorem 3. 55

 Similar considerations apply to the function resulting from the series (- 0*

 k'çk+ 1 . Though this series only converges for £ = 0, it can be understood as the power-

 series expansion of the function e* Jq <Lj-dt, since the former can be obtained from

 the latter through reiterated integrations by parts (Ovaert 1976, p. 182).56 By replac-
 ing x with x + Ç and expanding the integer powers of this last binomial, one obtains

 the power series l)hh' ^ ^ This series can thus
 be taken to be the power-series expansion of the function ex+s despite

 1 £ _Í

 Note that the behavior of a function of the form /(jc) = | ^ ^ for jc = 0 does not prevent

 us from associating with it a power series which, for any jc different from 0, converges to / (jc +£) whenever

 the value of £ belongs to an appropriate proper interval centered on zero. To take a simple example suppose
 that g(*) = x2. According to the binomial theorem for negative integer exponents and the expansion of
 the exponential function, we have:

 e-(*+?r2 = e-*"2 + 2e-*" V3i + e-'"2 [: lx~ 6 - 3jc" 4] £2 + &c.

 which for non-vanishing jc poses no problem.

 56 Ovaert claims that the series ls a counter-example to Lagrange's remainder the-

 Footnote 53 continued

 Lagrange was thus supposing that /(jc + £) has a power-series expansion that, for jc = a, converges to

 (p 0 jc v - 0 n

 0 jc - 0 WÍth a =

 54 One could also account for the argument Lagrange advanced in this case by admitting that the value
 of a function could be determined through a calculation involving the infinite. If this were licensed, one

 could argue that = e-1/° = e~°° = 0, and j^e-1/^^0^ [g(0)]-u = e-1/°0v = e-00oo = 0
 (v = 1,2,...), which would allow to conclude that both a function of the form q~x/^x) and all its
 derivatives take the value 0 for jc = 0, and are thus defined for this value.

 CC Q-l/gkX) x + 0

 orem. According to him, the proof that this series is the power-series expansion of e^ Jq È ~T was
 given by Lacroix, who would not appear to have remarked, however, that his result is a counter-example
 to Lagrange's theorem. This was later proved by Laguerre. Lacroix (1800, p. 372; 1810-1819, vol. Ill, p.

 1 È ~T

 1 -T

 347) showed, indeed, with quite a complex argument, that e^ J ^-7- -T d t can be taken as the "expression of

 the limit of the series" )kk't-k+] . Laguerre (1878-1879) showed, instead, that the formal equality

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 3 1

 l - -

 the fact that both this series and the function e* *-j-dt are defined for any value of

 x different from zero and the former never converges to e*+î /q ^-j-dt.

 Hence, if one conceded that e* - j-dt and e*+î /q <Lj-dt are functions in

 Lagrange's sense and that X¡u=o(~~ power-series expansion of the
 former, this could be considered as a counter-example to Theorem 3. Still, it is doubt-

 ful that Lagrange would have accepted these as functions. Certainly, they are not
 functions according to the compositional conception.

 This last example not only shows, like Cauchy 's, that Lagrange's notion of function

 is too restricted; it also shows that his notion of a power-series expansion of a function
 is too restricted as well.

 3.1.3 Lagrange's proof of the power-series expansion theorem

 To claim that in the universe of Lagrange's functions there are no easy counter-exam-

 ples to Theorem 3 and that the power-series expansion theorem should be understood
 as being equivalent to this last theorem is not the same as claiming that Lagrange's
 proof of this last theorem is sound. Indeed quite the opposite is true: this proof is not
 only based on premise [P] - which, however, it might be understood, is unproved -

 and on three other premises like [C. /-///], that are at best unclarified. It would remain

 flawed even if these premises were accepted.57

 Let us consider the two reductio that compose it, in turn.
 The first reductio aims at excluding fractional exponents.58 Lagrange began by
 supposing that the generalized power-series expansion of f(x + £) has the form (4).
 According to condition [C.i], the function f(x) would then be irrational, and would

 thus have "a certain number of different values."59 But - as "the replacement of x with

 Footnote 56 continued

 e Jo can be easily obtained by calculating by parts the integral /z°° ^y-dy,
 so as to obtain, for any non-negative integer h,

 roo „-y h- 1 / i roo p.- y

 then supposing that h goes to infinity, and effecting the substitutions y - > } and z - ► j. On Lacroix's and
 Laguerre's results, see Borel (1929), pp. 8 and 55-56.

 57 This seems to have been Galois's opinion too. In a note published in Galois (EMM, pp. 413-421),
 but not dated, he remarked that in order to prove that the generalized power-series expansion of f(x + £)
 cannot contain fractional or negative powers of £, Lagrange "produced an argument that collapses on its
 own" (ibid., p. 413). It is not clear, however, what flaws Galois had in mind.

 58 Grabiner (1990, pp. 98-99 has pointed out a number of flaws relative to this first reductio, some of
 which do not seem valid to us. We do not consider them here.

 59 Woodhouse (1803, p. XIX) alleged that Lagrange's argument are circular, since, to prove that "any
 radical has as many values as there are unities in its exponent," it would be necessary to rely on the Eulerian

 equality cos 0 H- y/^- ' sin 0 = which derives in turn from the expansions of the exponential, the sine
 and the cosine. This last equality is, however, only useful to exhibit explicitly the radicals of the equation
 xn - Ç =0 (where « is a natural exponent and £ is a complex number). The number of them depends, more

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 32 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 jt +£ cannot increase or diminish the number of [...] radicals [in /(; c+§)] and can no

 more change their nature, as long as x and £ are indeterminate quantities" - f(x + £)
 would be irrational too and would have this same number of values.60 The different

 values of f(x) would thus combine with the 'n' values of the term p¡i(x)% ~ñ , and the
 expansion would have a greater number of values than f(x + £), which, according to
 condition [C.m], is impossible.

 This argument relies on the admission that any radical has several values. To us,

 this suggests that Lagrange was working with functions with values in C. Another

 interpretation is possible, however. For Lagrange's argument to work, it is enough to

 hold that an equation like zn - y = 0 (where n is a non-negative integer and y a real
 quantity) can be satisfied by replacing z with n "imaginary values,"61 merely under-
 stood as expressions of the form ' a 4- b^/^ï' (where a and b are real quantities, in

 the sense explained in Sect. 2) to be handled according to the well-known operational
 rules.

 This implicit appeal to imaginary values is unique in Lagrange's treatises, and

 should thus be understood as a special, local device used in a theory that in fact con-

 cerns real quantities.62 The crucial assumption, here, is that - when imaginary values

 for the radicals occurring in /(*+£) and in its generalized power-expansion are con-
 sidered - this expansion has to have the same number of values as f(x + £). This is an

 assumption which Lagrange seems to have drawn, in turn, from the other assumption

 that the relations that subsist between a function f(x + £) and its generalized power
 expansion, when the variables of the relevant functions vary on real quantities, also

 subsist when these variable are supposed to take imaginary values: an assumption that
 remains unjustified, in turn.

 The second reductio aims at excluding negative exponents. It begins by supposing

 that, if a function f(x + §) had a generalized power-series expansion that contains

 a term of the form pß(x)^~m - where ¡jl is a non-negative integer and m a positive
 exponent - then, for Ç = 0, this term, and thus also f(x + £), would become infinite.

 It would follow that f(x) would be infinite for any jc, whereas this is possible only for

 Footnote 59 continued

 generally, on the fundamental theorem of algebra, which is the result Lagrange referred to when speaking
 generally of the theory of equations.

 60 The aforementioned function </x provides an easy example of what happens if jc takes a value - namely,
 the value x = 0 - for which f(x 4- £) and /(jc) do not have the same number of radicals. Another straight-

 forward example is provided by the function ^x~a for jc = a. In this case, the generalized power-series

 expansion of /(a + 1) = ^ is

 61 The term 'imaginary value' was common in Lagrange's time: for an example, see footnote 62.

 62 This was a common practice in 18th-century mathematics that Gauss described quite well in 1811 by
 observing that "imaginary values" were often treated as an "excrescence [ Überbein ]" of "real magnitudes":
 see Gauss (WERKE), vol. 10.1, p. 366 (letter of Gauss to Bessel, December, 18, 1811). The former were

 merely regarded as forming a sort of analogical extension of the latter to be considered in certain particular
 circumstances, without investigating the general consequences of their use: see Ferraro (2007), p. 484.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 33

 "particular values of jc."63 We suggest that Lagrange implicitly assumed, here, that

 /(jc + Ç) becomes infinite if its generalized power-series expansion becomes infinite.

 So his argument implicitly relies on condition [CM], and on the assumption that the
 generalized power-series expansion of /(jc+Ç) converges to this function for Ç = 0,

 according to our interpretation of premise [P].

 Two final remarks about Lagrange's proof are in order. The former is that the

 appeal to condition [ C.i ] in the first reductio is strictly unnecessary. Suppose a func-
 tion f(x + Ç) has a generalized power-series expansion that contains both /(jc) and
 a term having more than one value, and that /(jc) has as many values as f(x + £)

 (which happens, of course, if they both have only one value). It is then obvious that the

 number of values in this expansion is greater than the number of values of f(x + £).

 The latter remark is that, in the second reductio, Lagrange implicitly excludes the pos-

 sibility that a function /(j c + Ç) has a generalized power-series expansion containing

 several terms of the form pß(j c)Ç_m (distinct from each other for the value of m, of
 course), whose sum is not infinite for Ç = 0. This seems to be correct, however, since

 this possibility requires that the values of the coefficients of these terms depend on
 that of §, which is unacceptable.

 3.2 The recursive form of power-series expansions

 Lagrange's fundamental proof is entirely based on the power-series expansion theo-

 rem. This proof is performed in four steps. The first one consists in the proof of this
 last theorem. In the second step, Lagrange proved that the power-series expansion

 of any function /(jc + Ç) has a recursive form. In the third, he relied on this form

 for fixing the algorithm of derivative functions. This is what allowed him to prove
 that conditions [FC./] holds. Finally, in the fourth step, Lagrange wondered what
 shows that, for a particular value xo of x, the function f(x o + Ç) = fx 0(£) has no

 power-series expansion. This is what allowede him to prove that condition [FC.//] also
 holds.

 In the present section we deal with the second step (Lagrange 1797, art. 16; 1801,
 pp. 10-13; 1806, pp. 10-13; 1813, art. 1.8). Sections3.3 and 3.4 will be devoted to the
 third and the fourth ones, respectively.

 This is how Lagrange stated, in the Théorie , the result proved in the second step:

 [. . .] if [. . .] one denotes by / '(jc) the first derivative function of /(x), by / "(x)

 the first derivative function of / '(jc), by ffff(x) the first derivative function of

 / "(jc), and so on, one will get [. . .]

 fix + Ç) = fix) + /'(*)£ + ^-H2 + V + (5)

 63 The aforementioned function j provides an easy example of what happens if x takes a value - namely

 x = 0 - for which / (jc) becomes infinite. Another easy example is provided by the function for * - a.

 Jx

 In this case, the generalized power-series expansion of f(a + £) = is ^ ' ^ .

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 34 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 [...] si [...] on dénote par /'(j c) la première fonction dérivée de f(x), par f"{x) la premi ère
 fonction dérivée de / f(x), par / "'x ) la première fonction dérivée de / "(x), et ainsi de suite,
 on aura [...]

 /(, + « ) = / w + /'c» + q»*2 + ^ + +

 (Lagrange 1797, p. 14; 18 13, p. 18; an analogous claim is also made in the Leçons:
 1801, pp. 12-13: 1806, pp. 12-13.)

 Supposing that g(jc) is any function, the term 'première fonction dérivée de g(x )'
 is clearly used here to refer to the coefficient of Ç in the power-series expansion of
 g(jt + £), whereas the symbol of equality is used to denote the relation between the
 function f(x +§) and its power-series expansion. Lagrange's result can then be stated,

 more clearly, as follows:

 Theorem 4 The power-series expansion of any function f(x -f §) has the form:

 k=0

 where /(0)(j t) = f(x) and, for any positive integer v, f^(x) is the coefficient of%
 in the power-series expansion of f^v~x'x + £).

 This same result had been already advanced by Lagrange himself in his 1772

 memoir on a "new species of calculus" (Lagrange 1772, pp. 186-189; on La-
 grange's 1772 memoir, see Grabiner 1990, pp. 31-39; Panza 1992, pp. 569-593).
 The proof offered in the Théorie and the Leçons is the same as the one offered in this
 memoir.64

 This proof is not only based on the assumption that any function of a binomial has a

 unique expansion in the form of a power series of the second term of such a binomial,

 as stated by Theorem 3, it also requires that the replacement of such a function with

 its power-series expansion is licensed independently of any consideration concerning
 the interval of convergence of the latter. This was a current practice in 1 8th-century
 analysis, and Lagrange followed it unwaveringly.

 The basic idea is close in spirit to the solution of a functional equation. It consists in
 equating the power-series expansions of / ((x + f ) + o) and /(* + (£+ o)) , sup-
 posing that £ and o are two independent indeterminate increments.65

 These expansions are respectively:

 00 00

 k= 0 k= 0

 65 For reasons of clarity, we have permuted $ and o in Lagrange's proof.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 £/>*(* + !)0* and J^[pk(x)]G + o)k. (7)

 64 An alternative proof of Theorem4 is offered by Poisson: see Poisson (1804-1805); Panza (1992),
 pp. 736-741.

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 135

 If in the former, the functions pk (x + § ) are replaced by their power-series expansions,

 and in the latter the powers of the binomial Ç + o are developed, one obtains:

 00 T 00 "I 00 r 00 / '
 ¿ ^qk,h(x)$h ok and ¿ / ' ' ) PhWÇh~k ok. (8)
 k= 0 Lh=0 J k= 0 L h=k ^ '

 Hence, by equating these series and applying the method of indeterminate coefficients

 twice, so as to equate first the coefficients of ok in these same series, and then the
 coefficients of £ in those of ok, one easily gets the equalities:

 PiH-1 W = T4~T k 1 (¿ = 0,1,2,...). (9)

 k H- 1

 Since qk, i (jc) is the coefficient of % in the power-series expansion of Pk(x+Ç) and
 po(x) is nothing but /(; t), it is enough to denote with the coefficient of £
 in the power-series expansion of f^v~]'x + Ç) (v = 1,2,.. .) - by supposing that
 /(0)(jt) be f(x ) - and to admit that the coefficient of £ in the power-series expansion

 of (À = 2, 3, . . .) is obtained by multiplying by ^ the coefficient of £ in the

 power-series expansion of /(A,H x + £), in order to rewrite the equality (9) as follows:

 / ^ f(VHx) ^ 0 ^

 pv(x) / ^ =

 v v!

 as was to be proved.

 Once this theorem proved, the meaning of the term 'derivative function [fonction

 dérivée ]' can be fixed in a more precise way, namely as follows:

 We shall call the function f(x ) 'primitive function' with respect to the functions

 f'(x), f"{x), &c. that derive from it, and we shall call these latter functions
 'derivative functions' with respect to the former one. Furthermore, we shall
 term the first derivative function f'(x) 'prime function', the second derivative

 function f"{x) 'second function', the third derivative function fm(x) 'third
 function', and so on.

 Nous appellerons la fonction f (x), fonction primitive , par rapport aux fonctions f'(x), f"(x),
 &c. qui en dérvent, et nous appellerons celles-ci, fonctions dérivées , par rapport à celle-là. Nous
 nommerons de plus la première fonction dérivée f'(x), fonction prime ; la seconde fonction
 dérivée / "(jt), fonction seconde ; la troisième fonction dérivée / ff'(x), fonction tierce , et ainsi
 de suite.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 17; 1801, p. 13; 1806, p. 13; 1813, art. I.9.)66

 In his proof, Lagrange did not use indices, and wrote many relevant equalities only

 up to the first term of the expansions involved in them, by denoting respectively with
 '/?', V, 'r', '5', &c., the coefficients of Ç, £2, Ç3, £4, & c. in the power-series expan-
 sion of /(jc + Ç), and by '/? ", "q ' ', V ", &c. the coefficients of o in the power-series

 66 In the Leçons , one finds 'première fonction dérivée ou ' fonction dérivée du premier ordre', ou simple-

 ment ' fonction prime ' in place of ' fonction prime', and similarly for the second and third derivatives.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 36 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 expansions of p(x + o), q(x + o), r(x + o), &c.67 This fact, together with his use
 of symbols 4 / ' (jc)' ,' f " (jc)' &c., suggests the idea that the derivative functions result

 from the primitive one by iteratively applying to it an appropriate operator. This idea

 is however neither explicit in Lagrange's argument, not necessary for his argument to

 work. The simple identification of / ' '"(jc) (or / (x)) with the coefficient of £ in the
 power-series expansion of /'• -'(jc+Ç) (or f^v~x'x +£)), and that of p',qf,r', &c.
 with the coefficient of § in the power-series expansion of p(x + o), q(x H-o), r(x + o),

 &c. are enough.

 3.3 The algorithm of the derivatives functions

 We are now ready to consider the third step of Lagrange's fundamental proof.

 At the beginning of the Théorie , Lagrange referred to his 1772 memoirs and claimed

 to have argued there that "the theory of expansion of functions" contains the "true prin-

 ciples of differential calculus freed from any consideration of infinitely small or limits"

 and then to have proved, through this theory, Taylor's theorem, that, he said, had been

 proved before only through the differential calculus (Lagrange 1797, art. 7; 1813,
 Introduction, p. 5).

 This is only partially true. In this memoir, Lagrange argued that "the differential

 calculus, considered in all its generality, consists in finding, by simple and easy proce-

 dures, the functions [...] derived from the function /" which provides the coefficient

 of the power-series expansion of /(jc+£) (Lagrange 1772, p. 187).68 But he justified it

 by relying on the differential formalism and on the practice of neglecting differentials

 of higher orders, so as to get Taylor's theorem in the form

 00 f

 = f h- <io>

 k=0

 Far from being independent of the differential calculus, this result is basically con-

 cerned with it, and is thus essentially different from Theorem 4 (Grabiner 1990, p. 37).
 Hence, Lagrange certainly proved, in his 1772 memoir, the equivalence between the
 derivative functions entering the power-series expansion of a function f(x + £) and

 the differential quotients ( k = 1,2,...). Moreover, his proof undoubtedly pro-
 vides a grounds for asserting that "the differential calculus [...] consists in finding
 [...] the functions [...] derived from the function /." But, this proof depends on

 67 Like the symbol 'p/i ' als° the symbol ' is introduced by us to simplify Lagrange's notation. Here
 is how this notation is introduced in the Théorie :

 [. . .] let fx + f'xo + &c., p + p'o + &c., q+q ro + &c., r + r fo + &c. be that which the functions
 fx, p, q, r, &c. become when x is replaced with jc + o [. . .].

 [. . .] soit fx + f ' xo + &c., p + p' o + &c., q + q' o + &c., r + r' o + &c., ce que deviennent les fonctions
 fx, p, q, r, &c. en y mettant x + o pour jc [. . .].

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 16; 1813, art. 1.8.)

 68 Lagrange used 'm' instead of '/'•

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 37

 essential properties of differentials. In his 1772 memoir, Lagrange was thus still quite

 far from arguing that "the theory of series expansion of functions" contains the "true

 principles of differential calculus freed from any consideration of infinitely small or
 limits."

 This is what he did, instead, in the Théorie and in the Leçons through a completely

 new argument: he first found - relying neither on infinitesimalist considerations nor
 on the formalism of calculus - the first derivatives of his elementary functions; then

 he showed how to compose these derivatives so as to get those of the composed and

 implicit functions; in this way, he implicitly showed that the algorithm to be applied
 for getting the function (. x ) from the function (x) (v = 1 , 2, . . .) is the same

 as that employed for passing from v t0

 d^-i v dvv

 The first elementary function that Lagrange considered is xm , where misa ratio-

 nal exponent. A very simple way of finding its first derivative consists in applying
 the binomial theorem for rational exponents. As this theorem can be easily proved

 relying neither on infinitesimalist considerations nor on the calculus, such a proce-

 dure presents no difficulty. But, it is unnecessarily cumbersome, since we may attain
 the same ends by relying on this same theorem restricted to integer positive expo-
 nents.

 Ifm = ^orm = - ^ (where ¡jl and v are positive integer), it suffices to suppose

 that

 (x + =x + A'% + See. and (x + £)~7 =

 (* + $)*

 (11)

 and apply this theorem so restricted, and then the method of indeterminate coefficients,
 to conclude that:

 1 fljv- 1) n äzJL

 ¡ix v 1 '=yji " A] or A' = ^x »
 vx v B' + fix , - 0 or B' = -^x .. *

 a , .. ß+v ' vAZJ

 It is thus clear why, in the Théorie (Lagrange 1797, art. 18; 1813, art. 1. 10), Lagrange

 merely argued that, insofar as m is rational, "it is easy to prove, either with the simple
 rules of arithmetic, or with the first operations of algebra," that the first derivative of
 xm is mxm~] .

 This result is not strong enough, however, for providing a basis for obtaining the

 first derivatives of the transcendental elementary functions. For that, the binomial the-

 orem extended to exponents given by any sort of algebraic quantity - or, at least, the

 part of this theorem concerning the first two terms of the expansion - is necessary.
 This is certainly the reason why, in the Leçons (Lagrange 1801, pp. 13-17; 1806, p.
 16-21), Lagrange found the coefficient of Ç in the power-series expansion of the func-

 tion (jc + £)m through an argument that also holds if m is not rational. This consists in

 solving the functional equation occurring in the ¿Epinus-Euler proof of the binomial
 theorem (see Sect. 3.1.1).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 38 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Supposing that

 (l+z)m = 1 + F(m)z + Sec., (13)

 where F(m) is an indeterminate function of m , and relying on the equality (1 +z)m+n =

 (1 + z)m( 1 + z)n and the method of indeterminate coefficients, Lagrange got

 F(m +n) = F(m) + F(n), (14)

 which is just the ¿Epinus-Euler equation. Next, he remarked that (1 + z)m^n =

 ( 1 +z) ("*+£)+("-£) and applied again the method of indeterminate coefficients, together
 with Theorem 4, obtaining:

 F(m + n) = F(m + £) + F(n - §)

 = F(m) + F(n) + [F '(m) - F '(«)] % + &c. U '

 He could then compare this equality with the iEpinus-Euler equation and apply the
 method of indeterminate coefficients once more, to obtain F'm) = Fr(n), which
 shows that F'(m) does not depend on m, that is, it is constant.

 To solve the ¿Epinus-Euler equation it is thus enough to find "the value of the
 primitive function F(m) based on the derivative function F'(m) = a , " where a is

 an indeterminate constant (Lagrange 1801, p. 131; 1806, p. 19). To do it, Lagrange
 relied on the condition F(v)(m) = 0 (v = 2, 3, . . . ), to get F(m + §) = F(m) +
 and thus, for £ = - m: F(m) = am + F(0). 69 Having obtained this last equality,
 Lagrange compared it with the equality (13), set m = 0 and m = 1, and obtained,
 once again with the method of indeterminate coefficients, F(0) =0 and a = 1, and

 thus: F(m) = m. It is thus enough to substitute this value in the equality (13) and

 suppose that z = f , to obtain:

 (x+Ç)m=xm =xm+mxm~^+&c. andthus, (. xm)' =mxm (16)

 The possibility of relying on this equality, where m can be supposed to be any

 algebraic quantity, makes the determination of the derivatives of ax and logâ x very
 easy.

 The determination of the derivatives of trigonometric functions is a bit more elab-

 orate because of the intrinsic geometric nature of these functions (see Sect. 2.6).70 To

 obtain these derivatives, Lagrange supposed, in the first edition of the Théorie and in

 the Leçons , that these functions satisfy certain suitable conditions that he did not jus-

 tify, while in the second edition of the Théorie , he defined them in terms of imaginary
 exponentials. There is no need to detail Lagrange's arguments on these matters (the
 references are given at Sect. 3.1.1).

 69 An easy way to prove that the condition F^v'm) = 0 (v = 2, 3, . . . ) holds is to remark that if

 f(x) = a, then also f(x + £) = a, for any £, and thus, the equality f(x + £) = reduces

 to 0 = X¡£i ^ k'X^kj fr°m w^ch' according to the method of indeterminate coefficients, it follows that
 /<*>(*) =0(* = 1,2,...).

 70 According to Ovaert (1976, p. 186), Lagrange was forced here to abandon the purely formal level.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 39

 On the basis of these results, it is then also easy to show how the derivatives
 of f(x ) ± #(.*;), f(x ) • g(x) and are composed from those of f(x ) and g(x).
 Lagrange's arguments for it (Lagrange 1797, art. 30; 1801, pp. 36-38; 1806, pp. 47-

 49; 1813, art. 1.15) are similar in nature to those he relied on for showing how to find

 the first derivatives of functions whose arguments are other functions and of implicit
 functions.

 The former of these last two arguments runs as follows (Lagrange 1797, art. 31;
 1801 p. 38; 1806 p. 49; 1813, art. 1.16). Let g(jt) be a function of x and / (g(jt)) be a
 function of g(x); if o is the increment of g(x) that corresponds to the increment £ of
 jt, then, according to Theorem 4:

 o = V - j |g(/0Cx)l J $h and / (g(x)+ó) = f (g(x)) +f'g(x) ( g(x))o+&c .

 OO j
 txh-V J

 = /(g(*))+g '(*)/'« w (g«)f+&c. (17)

 where / (g(x)) is the coefficient of o in the power-series expansions of
 / (g(x) + o) , i.e., the first derivative of / (g(jc)) with respect to g(x ). Hence, the
 coefficient of $ in the power-series expansions of f (g(x + £)) - i.e., the first deriva-

 tive of / (g(jc)) with respect to x - is g f(x)f 8 ^ (g(x)). If one denotes this derivative
 with '/ * (g(jc))', one obtains, then, the following equality71

 /'(*(*))= S '(*)/'itx) (*(*))• (18)

 in conformity with the chain rule for the differential calculus.

 Lagrange's argument for showing how to find the derivatives of implicit functions

 is nót much trickier (Lagrange 1797, art. 33; 1801 pp. 39-42; 1806 pp. 50-54; 1813,
 art. 1.17).

 Let F (x, y) = 0 be an equation involving elementary functions of two variables
 algebraically composed, and y = f(x) a root of it. The function F (. x , f(x)) = <p(x)
 has then to be null, to the effect that (p'(x) = 0 (see footnote 69). To find the first

 derivative of f(x) , it suffices to write this equality in a convenient form.

 For this purpose, let F (p(x),q(x)) be a function of two variables that are, in
 turn, functions of a unique variable x. The function F ( p(x + £), q(x + £)) can then
 be expanded in a power series of £. Lagrange took it for granted that this power
 series can be obtained by appropriately composing the power-series expansions of
 F (p (x + Ç) , q(x)) and F (p (x) , q(x + £)) , where q(x) and p(x) are respectively
 handled as if they were constant. In this way, he got

 F (pix + Ç), q(x + $)) = F (p(x), q(x)) + P'™ {X) ! } + 1 ? + &C.,

 q'(x)F 4V> (p(x),q(x))

 71 The symbols '/ (g(x))' and '/ x (g(x))' are not Lagrange's. His notation is much less explicit.

 (19)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 140 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 where F (p(x), q(x)) and F'q^ (p(x), q(x)) are, respectively, the first deriva-
 tives of F (p(x), q(x)) with respect to p(x) ( q(x ) being handled as if it were con-
 stant) and with respect to q(x) (p(x) being handled as if it were constant), i.e., the
 coefficients of Ç and o in the power-series expansions of F (p(x) + £, q(x)) and of
 F (p(x), q(x) + o). It follows that, if p(x) = x and q(x) = y = f(x), then

 f'x ( X , f(x)) = <p'(x) = 0 = f'x (X, y) + f{x)F'y {x, y) , (20)

 and thus

 , F'x(x,y)
 ' , M = -F7ÖTJ)' (21)

 where F x (x, y) and F>y (jc, y) are, respectively, of course, the first derivatives of

 F ( x , y) with respect to jc and y, i.e., the coefficients of Ç and o in the power-series
 expansions of F (jc + Ç, y) and F (jc, y + o) , respectively.

 All these arguments show that, once Theorem 4 and the unicity of the power-series
 expansion are accepted, the establishment of the algorithm of derivative functions
 obeys to the compositional conception of function, and depends, essentially, on a
 number of clever applications of the method of indeterminate coefficients.

 3.4 Special cases

 To complete Lagrange's fundamental proof, it is finally necessary to consider the spe-
 cial cases for which the assumption that the generalized power-series expansion of
 f(x + §) contains only integer positive powers of Ç fails, so as to prove that condition
 [FC.//] holds.

 According to Lagrange's official definition of derivatives, the v-th derivative of

 tv

 a function f(x) is the coefficient of ^ in the power-series expansion of /(jc + Ç)
 or, equivalently, the coefficient of Ç in the power-series expansion of f^v~x'x + §).
 Hence, strictly speaking, if some terms of the power-series expansion of a function

 / (x + Ç ) are not defined for a particular value of jc , so that the expansion is not defined

 either, the function f(x) has no derivatives at all for this value of jc. On the basis of this

 definition, there is thus no room for arguing that /(v)(j c) is defined for jc = jco if and

 only if the function that results from /(jc) by v iterative applications of the algorithm
 that leads from it to f' (x) is defined for x - jco. According to this definition, either
 all derivatives of a given primitive /(jc) are defined for a certain value of jc, or none.

 But then how can one account for a case where only a finite number of derivatives of
 a function f(x) are defined for a certain value of jc?

 Lagrange's answer comes from his treatment of the special cases where the gener-
 alized power-series expansion of /(jc + £) is not a power series of £ (Lagrange 1797,
 arts. 34-44; 1801 leçon VIII, pp. 52-65; 1806, leçon VIII, pp. 69-87; 1813, ch. V,
 arts. 1.24 - 1.32.)- The main conclusion he reaches is stated in the Théorie as follows:

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 141

 From there, it follows that the expansion /(jc) + £/'(jc) + ^-/"(jc) + See. can
 become wrong for a given value of x only insofar as, for this value of jc, one
 of the functions /(jc), / '(jc), / "(jc), &c. will become infinite as well as all
 the subsequent ones. Then, if n is the index of the first function that becomes
 infinite, the relevant expansion will have to contain a term of the form
 where m is a number included between n - 1 and n. And if all the functions

 /(*)>/ '(*)» / "(*)» &c- became infinite for the same value of jc, the expansion
 of /(jc + f ) would contain, in this case, some negative powers of Ç.

 On conclura de là que le que le développement /(*)+£/ '(jc)-+- f "(jc)+&c. ne peut deve-

 nir fautif pour une valeur donnée de jc, qu'autant qu'une des fonctions / (;c), / '(jc), / "(jc),
 &c. deviendra infinie ainsi que toutes les suivantes pour cette valeur de jc. Alors si n est
 l'indice de la première fonction qui devient infinie, le développement dont il s'agit devra
 contenir un terme de la forme , m étant un nombre compris entre n - 1 et n. Et si toutes
 les fonctions /(jc), / '(jc), / "(jc), & c. devenaient infinies pour la même valeur de jc, le
 développement de /(jc + £) contiendrait dans ce cas des puissances négatives de £.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 42; 1813, art. I.30.)72

 There are three claims in this passage. If the second were taken to apply when n = 0
 (the case where the functions /(jc), / '(jc), / "(jc), & c. all become infinite), then it

 would immediately imply the third, at least if the requirement that m lie between n - 1

 and n were understood as the requirement that n - 1 < m < n , and 'négatif were taken
 to mean 'less than zero'.73 Still, the mere consideration of a function like /(jc) =
 with a > 1, shows that such an understanding is misleading. This is a case where
 n = 0, indeed, but the generalized power-series expansion of f(xo + Ç) = /c0(£),

 for jco = 0, reduces to p, to the effect that m = -a < n - 1 = - 1.

 It seems, then, that the second and third claims apply, in Lagrange's intended under-

 standing, to two distinct cases: the former to the case where /(jc) does not become

 72 In the Leçons , this passage is broken up into two. Before, Lagrange wrote :

 [. . .] if n is the index of the first function that becomes infinite, the expansion of /(jc + £) will have

 to contain a term of the form Ça , where a is a number included between n - 1 and n. If n =0, that

 is, if the very function / (jc) becomes infinite, this expansion will contain some negative powers of
 f.

 [. . .] si n est l'indice de la première fonction qui devient infinie, le développement de f(x + Ç) devra contenir un
 terme de la forme Ça, a étant un nombre compris entre n - 1 and n. Si n = 0, c'est-à-dire, si la fonction / (^)
 devient elle même infinie, ce développement contiendra des puissances négatives de £.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 55; 1806, pp. 72-73).

 A page later (after having considered the possibility that /(j c + £) has an expansion including powers of
 log£, he added:

 One can then conclude in general that the expansion /(jc) + £/ '(j c) + f "( x ) + &c. of the func-
 tion /(jc + £) can become wrong for a determinate value of jc only insofar as one of the functions

 '(jc), / "(jc), &c. will become infinite if this value is given to jc; and that this expansion will

 only be wrong by starting from the term that becomes infinite.

 On peut donc conclure en général que le développement /(*) + £/'(*)+ f"(x) + &c. de la fonction f(x -1- £ )

 ne peut devenir fautif pour une valeur déterminée de jc, qu'autant qu'une des fonctions / (jc), / f(x), f "(x), &c.
 deviendra infinie en donnant à jc cette valeur; et que ce développement ne sera fautif qu'à commencer du terme
 qui deviendra infini.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 56; 1806, p. 74.)

 We shall return to the meaning Lagrange ascribes to the adjectives 'négatif' and 'positif' in Sect. 5.2.2.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 142 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 infinite for the relevant value of x but some of its derivatives do; the latter to the case

 where both f(x) and all its derivatives become infinite for the relevant value of x.
 This is also confirmed by the way Lagrange argued for his three claims. When

 reduced to its essential part, his argument runs as follows (Lagrange 1797, art. 41;
 1801, pp. 54-55; 1806, pp. 71-73; 1813, art. I.29).74

 Let f(x) be a function such that the power-series expansion of f(x 4- £) is not

 defined for jc = jco- It follows that the generalized power-series expansion of f(x o +£ )

 includes at least one term of the form A£m , where A does not depend on £, and m is

 either a positive fractional or a negative exponent:

 /(•* o + £)= . . . + AÇm -I- &c. (22)

 The generalized power-series expansion of the first derivative of / (j to +£ ) with respect

 to Ç will contain, then, a term of the form mA$m~l , those of the second derivative, a
 term of the form m(m - 1) A£m_2, &c.:

 /'*(* o + §) = ...+mA%m~x + &c.
 /"*(*o + H) = - - • + m (m - 1) AÇm~2 + &c. (23)

 But, according to the equality (18), the derivatives of f(x + $) with respect to x are

 the same functions as its derivatives with respect to £, since both the former and the

 latter coincide with the derivatives of f(x + $) with respect to x + $ . Hence, the values

 of the derivatives of f(x) for x = xo are obtained by setting $ = 0 in the derivatives
 of f(xo + $) with respect to $:

 f{v)* (X + 1) = (* + §) = f(vh+t (X + $)

 and then

 [7(v)(*)l L =[/(v)f L (jco + £)1 , (24)

 L AX-xq L J£=0

 f(x o) = . . . + A0m + 8lc.
 f'x0) = ...+mA0m~] +&C.
 /"(x0) = . . . + m (m - 1) AO"1-2 + &c. '

 74 Lagrange presented this argument discursively, without relying on the equalities (22)- (25); we include
 them to make the presuppositions of the argument clearer.

 75 For consistency with our notation, besides replacing by as usual, we also write 'jcq' instead of 'a'.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where v is any positive integer.

 From these premises, Lagrange inferred that "by setting £ = 0, one will conclude
 that, when x = Jto, the functions /(j t), f'(x), f"(x), &c. will respectively contain
 the terms A0m, mA0m~] , m (m - 1) A0m~ 2, &c." (Lagrange 1797, p. 38; 1801, p. 55;
 1806, p. 72; 1813, p. 50).75

 Lagrange clearly drew this conclusion by setting § = 0 in the equalities (22) and

 (23), to obtain, in agreement with the second of the equalities (24):

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 143

 However, for this inference to be sound, one must assume that it is enough to set
 Ç = 0 in the generalized power-series expansions of the functions /(jco +£), / '* (jco +
 £)> /"* (*0 + £), &c. to obtain the functions /(jco), /'(jco), /"(jc o), & c. themselves.
 Alternatively, one can reach a weaker conclusion by supposing that the generalized
 power-series expansions of the functions /(jco + Ç), /'* (*o + §), f"H*o + £)> &c
 converge to these functions around £ = 0. In this latter case, one would merely infer
 that the values of the functions f(x o), /'(jc o), /"(jco), &c. are provided by these
 generalized power-series expansions for Ç = 0.

 However, Lagrange might have reasoned, he continued by observing that: if m
 is negative, all the terms A0m, mA0m~l , m (m - 1) A0m~2, &c. are infinite, so that
 the functions /(jc), /'(jc), /"(j t), &c. all become infinite for x = jco; and if m is
 positive fractional and n is the positive integer right after m , the same happens for the
 terms m (m - 1) ... (m - n + 1) A0m~n, m (m - 1) ... (m - n) A0m~n~] , & c. and
 the functions f^n'x), /(n+1)(jc), &c.

 With all this in mind, Lagrange's claims become clearer:

 (0 A function f(x +Ç) fails to have a power-series expansion for x = jco - i.e., the

 generalized power-series expansion of the corresponding function /(jco + f ) =

 /*0(£) contains positive fractional or negative powers of £ - only if one of the
 functions /(j c), /'(j c), f"(x ), &c. becomes infinite for jc = jco together with
 all its derivatives.

 (ii) A function f(x + Ç) fails to have a power-series expansion for jc = jco and the

 generalized power-series expansion of the corresponding function /(jco + £) =

 /*0(£) contains positive fractional powers and no negative powers of Ç only if
 one of the functions / '(jc), / "(jc), &c. becomes infinite for jc = jco together
 with all its derivatives, and if this is the case and the first of these functions

 that become infinite is f^nHx), then the generalized power-series expansion of
 /(* o + £) = fx o(£) contains a power of § such that n - ' < m < n.

 (, iii ) A function /(jc + §) fails to have a power- series expansion for = ^co
 and the generalized power-series expansion of the corresponding function

 /(j co + Ç) = /to(£) contains negative powers of $ if and only if the func-
 tions /(jc), / '(jc), / "(jc), &c. all become infinite for jc = jco.

 Strictly speaking, Lagrange's argument provides a proof for the only-if implication

 of claim (iii), which is also part of his proof of the power-series expansion theorem.
 But it does not prove the if implication, though this implication is explicitly stated
 in the third claim included in the passage quoted. To justify it, Lagrange could have

 relied on the following tacit argument: if the generalized power-series expansion of the

 function / (jco + $) = fxo (£) contains no negative powers of §, then it assumes a finite
 value for £ = 0, and this value is precisely /(jco), so that f(x) is finite for x = *o;
 hence, if it is not the case that this expansion contains some negative powers of Ç, it
 is no more the case that all the functions /(jc), / '(jc), / "(jc), &c. become infinite for

 jc = jco; by contraposition, it follows that if the functions /(jc), / '(jc), f"(x), &c. all
 become infinite for jc = jco, the generalized power-series expansion of the function

 /(jco + Ç) = /jcq (I) contains negative powers of Ç.

 The crucial step in this argument amounts to the assumption that the generalized

 power-series expansion of the function /(jco + Ç) = fXQ (§ ) converges to this function

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 around Ç = 0, which merely reproduces, in the case where x = Jto, an assumption
 that also figures in Lagrange's fundamental proof. It is thus quite natural to guess

 that Lagrange had reasoned correspondingly. But making this assumption amounts to

 admitting that if the generalized power-series expansion of the function f(xo + £) =

 fx0(í;) contains no negative powers of £, it can be written in the form

 144 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 f(xo) + ^Pk(x)^ak (26)

 00

 k= 1

 where > 0 for any k.

 Suppose this is so, and also that the generalized power-series expansion of /(j to +

 $) = fx o (£ ) contains no negative powers but some positive fractional power of Ç ,

 and that m is the smallest exponent of these last powers. This expansion could then be
 written in the form

 f(xo) + P' (JC)$ + P2{x)H2 + • • • + Plm' (JC)| LmJ + P'm' + ' (jc)$m + &C., (27)

 where [mj is the integer right before m. But then, reasoning as above, according to
 the second of the equalities (24), one would obtain

 fix o) = P'(x)
 fix o) = 2p2(x)

 /(LmJW = lm''pim'{x)
 /(MW = m LrnJ!/7LmJ+i(A:)Om_rm1, (28)

 where [^1 is the integer right after m , and m - 'm ' is accordingly a negative exponent.
 The first derivative of f(x) to become infinite for x = xq would then be /^mD(jt),
 so that n = 'm ' and n - ' < m < m + I.

 This is likely to be the tacit argument Lagrange relied on to justify the second
 part of claim (//), which, strictly speaking, does not follows from his explicit argu-
 ment. By arguing that, in the case at issue, the generalized power-series expansion of
 f(x o + £) = fx0(Ç) contains a power of § such that n - 1 < m < n , Lagrange
 would then have implied that this power is the smallest of the fractional powers in the
 expansion.

 The difficulties to which Lagrange's arguments (both the explicit and the tacit ones)

 are subject are obvious. We only point out that they are all based on the identification
 of the derivatives of a function f(x) for x = jto with the values that can be deter-

 mined through the application of an appropriate linear algorithms - stemming from
 the consideration of the power-series expansion of the function f(x + £ ) where x and
 £ remain indeterminate - to the equality

 fix 0 + 1) = f(x o) + ^ pk (x)Çak . (29)

 00

 *=i

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 145

 This, then, is the implicit definition of these derivatives at issue in Lagrange's the-

 ory. It is on the basis of this implicit definition that Lagrange was in fact able to prove

 his result, namely that: (/) the v-th derivative of a function /(j t), such that f(x + Ç)

 has no power-series expansion for x = jco, is defined for this same value of x if and
 only if f(x o) is not infinite and the smallest fractional exponent of the powers of Ç

 occurring in the generalized power- series expansion of /(jco + £) = fx0(%) is greater
 £V

 than v; (//) in this case, the value of this derivative for x = xo is the coefficient of

 in this generalized power-series expansion.

 As an example, take the function76 f(x) = ax -x2 + a (. x 2 - a2) Vx2 - a2. The

 associated function /(<z + £) = /fl(£) is (2a + Ç) sjla + £, whose
 generalized power-series expansion is:

 - a% + 2 -£2 + 'ajhii;2 yfíi + ¿ + &c. (30)

 2 16

 If follows that

 f(a) = 0 and f'a) = -a , (31)

 whereas the other derivatives are not defined for x = a.

 In the Leçons (Lagrange 1801 p. 52 and 55-57; 1806 pp. 69-70 and 73-75), La-
 grange also considered the possibility that a function f(x o + §) = /*0(§) has an
 expansion including terms with a factor of the form (log£)M , where X and ¡i are
 rational positive or negative exponents. 77

 A simple case is given by the function f(x) = x logx, whose associated function

 / (jco + $ ) = fxo (£ ) , for jco = 0, is % log % . In this case, the relevant value xo belongs
 to the domain of definition of f(x + £) for any non-null value of £, but not to the

 domain of definition of f(x) (see Definition 1). Lagrange began by proving that this

 is always the case when the exponent of log $ is positive (Lagrange 1801 p. 52; 1806
 pp. 69-70).78

 To this end, he relied on an argument analogous to the one he used for negative
 powers of $: if the generalized power expansion of f(xo + $) = fxo($) includes a
 term with a positive power of log £ as factor, then this expansion becomes infinite for
 $ = 0 (since log£ = - oo for $ = 0); the same happens, then, for f(x o).

 He then remarked (Lagrange 1801 pp. 55 and 27; 1806, pp. 73 and 34-35), more

 generally, that the case of expansions including powers of log $ reduces to that of
 expansions including fractional powers of Ç, since, for any base a ,

 iog":=to^(zí_i)' <32)

 76 This example results from a slight adjustment of an example proposed by Lagrange (1801 p. 56-57;
 1806, pp. 74-75).

 77 Though Lagrange did not explicitly remark upon it, it is clear that, because of the equality loga z = ,

 this case encompasses any analogous case concerning logarithms with any base.

 78 Lagrange considered only the case where the factor £* in £* (log£)^ is unitary, i.e., X = 0, but it is
 clear that the same applies to any value of X.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 146 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 provided r be "infinitely large." Strangely enough, this appeal to an infinitesimalist

 argument does not seem detrimental to him. He probably felt the argument was local

 enough for its infinitesimalist character to be harmless. The fact remains that it is only

 by appealing to this reduction that he could justify that the case where f(x + Ç) has
 an expansion including a power of log £ is not mentioned at all in the proof of the

 power-series expansion theorem, nor, more generally, in the Théorie. Furthermore,

 for the appeal to equality (32) in this proof to involve no circularity, this last equality

 should be obtained though an argument different from the one Lagrange used to obtain
 it (Lagrange 1801 pp. 24-27; 1806, pp. 31-34). This last argument is based, indeed,

 on the power-series expansion of logß (x + §) , which is got, in turn, by relying on the
 power- series expansion theorem itself.79

 In any case, Lagrange continued by observing that in the case where the expansion

 of /(j to +£) = fx o (?) includes terms of the form (log £)M , an argument analogous
 to the one used in the case where this expansion contains fractional powers of £ also ap-
 plies. In this case, Lagrange said, the derivatives /'(j t+£), /"(jt+f), &c.,forjt = Jto,
 respectively contain, in turn, terms of the forms §x_1 (logÇ)^ and £À_1 (log?)^-1 ,
 and of the forms ÇÀ_2 (log£)M , §x~2 (log§)M-1 and %k~2 (log£)M~2 , &c., which,
 for £ = 0, become either null or infinite, depending on whether the exponent of Ç is

 positive or negative, whatever the exponent of log § might be.

 Lagrange's treatment here is rough, but his point is clear: if the expansion of /(j to +

 $) = fx0($) includes terms of the form (log$)ß , the expansions of the functions
 / (jto + £), / (jto + £) , &c., will contain terms like the foregoing, so that the deriv-
 atives /'(*), f"{x), &c., evaluated at x = jto, or rather their expansions, will contain

 terms which become either null or infinite, depending on whether the exponent of f

 is positive or negative. Lagrange also seems to have implied that, if the exponent of %

 is 0 , these terms become either null or infinite depending on whether the exponent of
 log £ is negative or positive.

 This argument not only poses the same problems as the argument used in the

 case where the expansion of f(xo + £) = /*0(£) contains fractional powers of £,
 it also requires the assumption that certain functions vanish, and are then defined,
 for a particular value of their variable, even if certain terms, factors, or denomina-

 tors including in them become infinite for this value. For example, assuming that, for
 £ = 0, (logÇ)^ vanishes when À is positive, whatever ¡x might be, amounts to
 assuming that 0 (±oo) = = 0. In modern parlance, this amounts to assuming
 that a function can be extended continuously to a value of its variable where strictly
 speaking it is not defined. As we have already observed (see Theorem 3 ), this is tan-
 tamount to replacing this function by one defined piecewise, which seems contrary
 Lagrange's notion of function.

 79 In the Théorie and in the Leçons Lagrange presented two alternative deductions of the power-series
 expansion of the logarithm. The first one (Lagrange 1797, art. 21; 1801 pp. 23-24; 1806 pp. 28-3; 1813,
 art. 1.13), explicitly appeals to the equality (5), which is clearly deduced from the power-series expansion
 theorem. The second one (Lagrange 1797, art. 23; 1813, art. 1.19) appealss to the binomial theorem for any
 real exponent, which is proved in turn by appealing to this same equality: see Sect. 3.3.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 147

 To clarify this matter, consider the only example offered by Lagrange (Lagrange

 1801, p. 57; 1806, p. 75). Let f(x) be ^ fx. + (x - a)2 log(;c - a). It follows that:

 (33)

 (34)

 f(x+Ç) = */x + (x- a)2 logt* - a) + + (x-a) (2 log (x - a) + l)j £

 + [- + 2 los l' - ^ + 3] y + + 7^] Ii +

 According to Lagrange, all derivatives of this function from f"(x) become infinite
 for x = 0, so that the expansion of f(a + £) = fa (£) contains the term Ç 2 log $ . Since
 f(a + $) = fa(Ç) = </cT+J + £2log£> this expansion is obtained by expanding
 yja + Ç in a power series, according to the binomial theorem for positive fractional
 exponents, so as to get

 + |2log| = Vä+ - log £ j ? + 3 + &c.

 It seems then that Lagrange took the functions (x - a)2 log(x - a) and (x - a) (2 log
 (jt - a) + 1 ) to be defined for x = a , and indeed to vanish there. Had he denied this, he

 could not have taken the coefficient of Ç in the expansion (34) to be the first derivative

 of *Jx + (x - a)2 log(jc - a) for x = a, and argued that the power-series expansion
 of the associated function f(x + Ç) is undefined only from its third term. He would
 then have been forced to go against his whole analysis of the special cases where a
 function /(*+£) does not admit a power-series expansion.

 Going over to fractional powers according to equality (52) might solve the problem,

 for then:

 f(x +|) = s/x +Ç + ix + £ - a)2 logCr + £ - a)

 - y/ x + Ç + r ix + § - a)2 ((a: + £ - a)' - 1^

 = 4~x + r ix - a)2 ((* - a)f - 1^

 + + ix - a) ((* - a)r (2 r + 1) - 2r) J £

 + [;dyï-2f + <*-a)î(2r + 3 + 0]^ + &c- (35)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 148 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 and

 fia + ? ) = /«(£) = + ? log f + ?2r (l ' - 1) =

 = ^ + 2^ ~ [¿Ä + ^ + r§2+' + 16¿V^3 + &c"

 (36)

 (where r is infinitely large). But, for the values of f(a) and ff{a) calculated using
 the expansions (35) to be equal to those calculated using the expansions (36), and for

 the value of / "(x) calculated using the former of these expansions to become infinite
 for x = a, one has to assume that

 |V (x - a)2 ^(x - ay - l)] _ = [(•* - à) (O - à)r (2 r + 1) - 2r^J

 = [<,-«>; (2r +3 +i)]^ =o,

 (37)

 which is an inescapably infinitesimalist assumption.

 It seems then that, once more, Lagrange's mathematical practice departs here from

 his ideal of purity of method, or, more precisely, from his very notion of function.80

 4 Lagrange's reformulation of the calculus: some examples

 Lagrange's fundamental proof could not have been a sufficient basis for him to argue

 that his theory of analytical functions could (or should) supplant the differential cal-

 culus in all its extension and for all its applications. Many of the results forming
 the corpus of the latter, together with its several applications both geometrical and

 mechanical, had been obtained using arguments based on infinitesimalist interpreta-

 tions of it, namely on the interpretation of a differential as an infinitely small quantity,

 or of an integral as an infinite sum of infinitely small quantities. If Lagrange had simply

 proposed the replacement of the differential calculus by his theory of derivative func-

 tions, by appealing to something like an appropriate translation rule for transforming

 statements using the language of the former in new statements using the language of

 the latter, he would have implicitly admitted the validity of these arguments.

 The theory of derivative functions could thus not be expected to supplant the dif-

 ferential calculus unless the whole corpus of such a calculus might be reformulated

 within the context of this theory, and the application of its algorithm (understood as the

 80 We should add that Lagrange took the opportunity of his treatment of the particular values of jc for
 which a function f(x + £) fails to have a power-series expansion, to consider the cases where the equality
 (21) leads to an expression of the derivative of an implicit function that, for a certain value of the relevant

 variable, reduces to Needless to say, he showed how to deal with this difficulty through l'Hôpital's rule,
 which he proved in the context of his theory (Lagrange 1797, arts. 36 and 39; 1801 pp. 58-59 and 61-62;
 1806 pp. 78-80 and 81-82; 1813, arts. 1.26 and 1.28).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 149

 algorithm of derivative functions) to the solution of the geometrical and mechanical

 problems might be justified within this same theory. Most of both the Théorie and the

 Leçons is devoted to this. Of course, Lagrange did not pursue this task in extenso,
 for doing so would have required much more than a treatise. He confined himself to
 some important examples. In Sects. 4. 1-4.5, we shall consider some of these examples

 from the pure part of Lagrange's theory. In Sect. 5. 1 , we shall consider other examples
 concerned with geometric and mechanical applications.

 4.1 Partial derivatives

 The first example concerns partial derivatives. Lagrange's interpretation of the cal-

 culus is particularly suitable for filling the gap between the differential calculus and

 the calculus of partial differentials. This was emphasized by Lagrange himself in the

 Leçons , where he insisted on the unity and appropriate organization of mathematics:

 [...] the calculus of derivative functions of only one variable naturally leads
 to the calculus of derivative functions of several variables, which [...] is noth-

 ing but a generalization of the former and depends on the same principles. If
 the inventors of the differential calculus had first regarded it as the calculus of

 derivative functions, they would have naturally and immediately been led to the

 calculus of derivative functions of several variables, and a half century would not

 have passed between the discovery of the differential calculus strictly speaking

 and that of the partial differential calculus, which corresponds to the calculus
 of derivative functions of several variables. Furthermore, rather than consider-

 ing this latter calculus as a new calculus, one would have regarded it as a new

 application, or better as an extension, of the differential calculus, and one would
 have, from the very beginning, encompassed under the same point of view and
 the same denomination the different branches of this same calculus that have

 been for a long time separated and, as it were, isolated.

 [. . .] le calcul des fonctions dérivées relatives à une seule variable, conduit naturellement à celui
 des fonctions dérivées relatives à différentes variables, lequel n'est [...] qu'une généralisation

 du premier, et dépend des mêmes principes. Si les inventeurs du Calcul différentiel l'avaient
 regardé d'abord comme le calcul des fonctions dérivées, ils auraient été conduit naturellement
 et immédiatement au calcul des fonctions dérivées relatives à plusieurs variables; et il ne serait

 pas passé un demi-siècle entre la découverte du calcul différentiel proprement dit, et celle du
 calcul aux différences partielles, qui répond au calcul des fonctions dérivées relatives à diffé
 rentes variables. A plus forte raison, au lieu d'envisager ce dernier comme un nouveau calcul, on
 l'aurait seulement regardé comme une nouvelle application ou plutôt comme une extension du
 calcul différentiel, et l'on aurait, dès le commencement, embrassé sous un même point de vue et
 sous une même dénomination, les différentes branches du même calcul, qui ont été longtemps
 séparées et comme isolées.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 264; 1806, pp. 327-328.)

 Lagrange's basic idea is that the power-series expansion of a function of several
 variables - and then its total derivatives - can be obtained step by step: one begins by

 considering this function as a function of only one of these variables, and expands it in

 a power series by dealing with the other ones as if they were constants, then expands

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the derivative functions so obtained as functions of one of the other variables, and

 /(* + É, y + 0) = ¿ f(k)x(x , y + o) 77= ¿ ¿ f(k)Ah)y{x> y)°- - ,

 1 50 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 so on.

 If f(x, y) is a function of two independent variables (Lagrange 1797, arts. 85-86;

 1801, pp. 264-268; 1806, pp. 328-332; 1813, arts. 1.73- 1.74), this procedure gives
 first:

 /(Jt + £,)0 = 2 >077, (38)

 k= 0

 and then

 00 , jç 00 00 /¡a

 k= O ' *=0 A=0 ' *

 (39)

 (where the indices appended to '(/:)' and 'hy specify the variables with respect to
 which the derivatives are taken).

 The same result is obtained by first expanding /(jc, y + o) and then expanding
 the derivatives f^y(x + y) (h = 0, 1, . . .). Hence the method of indeterminate
 coefficients leads to the equality

 f(k)x(h)y = f(h)y(k)X(x< yy (40)

 for any pair of non-negative integers k and /i.xl It follows that the "operations" of der-

 ivations with respect to different variables are "absolutely independent of each other"
 (Lagrange 1797, art. 86; 1801, p. 268; 1806, pp. 331-332; 1813, art. 1.74), which is

 the fundamental principle of partial derivation.

 4.2 Singular primitive equations

 The second example concerns singular solutions of derivative equations (Lagrange
 1797, arts. 72-76; 1801, lectures XV-X VIII; 1806, lectures XI V-X VII; 1813, art. 1.58-

 63; we limit ourselves to the general theory of singular solutions as it is formulated in

 lectures XV and XIV of the first and the second edition of the Leçons , respectively;
 on this topic, see also Fraser 1987, pp. 45^9). 82

 To begin with (Lagrange 1801, pp. 162-165; 1806, pp. 178-184), let /(jc, y, yf) =

 0 be a derivative equation of the first order, where y is a function of jc, and y ' is its first

 derivative. Lagrange conceived this equation as resulting from the elimination of the
 arbitrary constant a between two other equations F(jc, y, a) = 0 and F'(j c, y, a) = 0,

 81 Our notation is different from Lagrange's. He used two different conventions in the Théorie and in the
 Leçons. In the former, he denoted the derivatives of a function of two variables with respect to the first
 variable by '/ and those with respect to the second by '/ in the latter, he denoted the derivatives
 with respect to the first variable with '/ "•••' and those with respect to the second with '/ "•••'. This made

 difficult for him to distinguish notationally between the two functions we have denoted ' f^x(h)y

 and *f^x(k)y ^ respectively, for indeterminate indices k and h . This is probably why he wrote no
 equality like (40).

 82 Lagrange's derivative and partial derivative equations correspond of course, in the language of his theory,
 to differential and partial differential equations in the language of differential calculus.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 5 1

 where F'x , y, a) is the total derivative of F(jc , y, a ), that is, the coefficient of £ in
 the power-series expansion of F(jc + §, y (jc + £) , a), and F(jc, y, a) = 0 is the
 equation to be found that counts as the complete primitive, or the general solution of
 /(*> y*y') = o.83

 It is easy to see that this last equation would also be obtained from the same two

 equations F(jc, y, a) = 0 and F'(jc, y, a) = 0 if a were taken to be a function of x
 such that

 F'a (x ,y,a)a' =0 (41)

 (where the subscript V specifies that the derivative is taken with respect to a). So, if
 g(jc) is a function of x such that this last condition is met for a = g(x), the equation
 Fix, y, g(x)) = 0 is a solution of /(jc, y, y') = 0 not contained in its general solu-
 tion. Lagrange called it 'singular primitive equation'. As from the condition a ' - 0 it

 simply follows that a is constant (see footnote 69), this singular primitive equation is

 the equation in y and x which results from

 F(x , y,a) = 0
 F'a(x,y,a) = 0, K }

 provided its solution a = '¡/(x, y) is not constant. It is thus clear that a singular prim-

 itive equation of a derivative equation of first order contains no arbitrary constant.

 A simple example is the following (Lagrange 1801, p. 164; 1806, p. 182). Let
 /(jc, y, y 0 = y ry/x2 + y2 - b - y y f - x = 0 the derivative equation to be solved.
 Its general solution is F(jt, y, a) = x2 - 2 ay - a2 - b = 0. If a is taken to be a
 function of jc, one gets F'a (x, y,a) = -2 y - 2a, and the system (42) becomes

 Hence a = -y, and x2 + y2 - b = 0 is then the singular primitive equation.

 A similar argument applies to derivative equations of higher orders (Lagrange 1 801 ,

 p. 165-166; Lagrange 1806, pp. 184-185). Supposing that f(x , y, yf, . . . j(n)) = 0
 is such an equation and F(j t, y, yf . . . , y^n~l' a) = 0 one of its primitives of order
 n - 1, its singular primitive is the equation in x, y, y ', . . . , which results from

 { F(x, y,y'..., y(n~]'a) = 0
 [F'a (jc, y, yf ...,yin~]'a) = 0, 1 ;

 provided its solution a = tyix, y) is not constant. Lagrange proved that this singu-
 lar primitive is unique: for any given derivative equation of order n , condition (44)

 83 Note that, according to Lagrange's definition of derivative functions, to claim that a function g(x) is
 the primitive of a function f(x) is the same as claiming that this latter function is such that + £) =

 g GO + £/(*) + 2*^2 Pk(x)Hak (where a* are rational exponents greater that 1). Lagrange should then
 have provided a proof of existence and uniqueness (except for additive constants) of the primitive of any
 function. But he offered no such proof.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 152 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 supplies the same singular primitive, whatever primitive equation of order n - 1 of this

 derivative equation is considered (Lagrange 1801, p. 168-169; 1806, pp. 186-190). 84
 He also established a sufficient and necessary condition for the existence of

 such a singular primitive (Lagrange 1801, pp. 173-174; 1806, pp. 195-196). If
 a = 0(jc, y, y' . . . , is a root of F (x, y, y', . . . , y^n~l' a ) = 0,

 F (x, y,y', /n_1), <D (jc, y,y'

 is an identical equation. It follows that if the variables jc, y, y ', ..., are taken to

 be independent of each of other, all the derivatives of the left-hand side of this equation
 taken with respect to each one of these variables are null. Writing 'F' and 'O' for
 'F ( x , y, y ' ..., y(n~l' a )' and 'O (jc, y, yf , ..., one obtains:

 ; <!>',_ -Í-1 ; = ... ¿S-" =.^1.

 f f a F f a F 'a f f a

 (46)

 But as we have just seen, a necessary condition for an equation /(jc, y,y' ...
 yW) = 0 to have a singular primitive is that F'a =0. The derivative equation
 /(ij,/,.../rt)) =0 then has a singular primitive only if

 <&'* =<z )'y = <& >' = . . . = 4> V1"0 = ±00. (47)

 To obtain a sufficient and necessary condition, it is then sufficient to add the require-
 ment that $ be not a constant.85

 84 This proof also suggests a procedure for finding the singular primitive of a derivative equation of order
 n starting from its complete primitive equation; see Lagrange (1801, pp. 169-173; 1806, pp. 190-195).

 85 In Cauchy ( 1 822, pp. 278-279), after having presented the examples mentioned at text below Theorom 3,

 Cauchy claimed that his previous considerations suggest that certain results "established by means of series"

 are faulty. To offers an example, he considered the differential equation dy = [l + (y - x) log ( y - jc)] dx,
 and claimed that the equation y = x is included in its general solution log(j - jc) = aex , though the differen-

 tial ratio d[1+(>' •^ log^ becomes infinite for y = x. It seems that Cauchy 's aim here was to contradict

 Lagrange's results on singular primitive equations. Bottazzini (1990, pp. XLI-XLII) has, however, rightly
 observed that "for supporting his point Cauchy was forced to 'stretch' the commonly accepted meaning of
 the concepts he used," since the equation y = x is included in log(;y - x) = aex only if the substitution
 a = -00 is licensed. But this is not all. On the one hand, Lagrange's theory of primitive singular equations
 is, as such, independent of the consideration of series, and only depends on the algorithm of derivative
 functions, to the effect that his results concerning singular primitive equations could be established without
 any appeal to series. On the other hand, according to Lagrange's condition, the equation y = x is not a
 singular primitive of the equation y' - 1 - (y - x) log (y - x) =0. This is easy to prove. According to
 this condition, the singular primitive of this equation should result from

 log(;y - x) = aex
 -QX = 0,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 * = ZT-« *íz<" = z <-»' *«"z + zz«-1»* K'z"-*-"] ('o»

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 153

 4.3 Exact derivatives

 The third example concerns the conditions to be met for a certain function of several

 variables to be an exact derivative of another function (Lagrange 1801, lecture XIV;
 1806, pp. 401-409).

 Let ^ be a function of any number of independent variables jc, y, z, . . . and of their

 derivatives up to whatever order m. To begin with the simplest case, let us suppose
 that this function is linear with respect to one of these variables, say z, and to its

 derivatives, so that: *1/ = X/T=o ^kZ^K where are functions of jc, y, . . . and of
 their derivatives up to order m (but not of z and its derivatives). As, for any pair of

 non-negative integers k and h,

 ' = 4>(*+Dz(*-*-1) + 4>(«z(*-«, (48)

 where the derivatives are total, it is easy to obtain, by iterated substitutions,

 <t>kz{k) = (-1)* 4>f + £(- u* [<ï>f )z(*-*-,)] ' , (49)

 h= 0

 and thus:

 m m k- 1

 k= 0 k= 0 h= 0

 (by supposing, of course, that = 0)-

 Hence, vj/ is an exact derivative if and only if JX=o (- 1)* ls ^tse^ an ex~

 act derivative, or vanishes. But X¡T=o (~~)k can an exact derivative only if
 z is linked to x, y, ... through an appropriate relation, which is impossible, since
 x,y,z, ... are supposed to be independent variables. It follows that ^ is an exact
 derivative if and only if

 m

 k= 0

 £(-)* 4»f=0. (51)

 This being proved, Lagrange reduced the general case to such a simpler one.

 Let y be a function of jc , V and U two functions of x , y and the derivatives of y up to

 whatever orders m and m - 1, respectively. Suppose that V = U ', whatever function

 of jc, y might be. If z is also a function of jc and Vy' y+z and Uy'y+Z are the functions

 Footnote 85 continued

 provided its solution a = y) is not a constant. This last condition is not satisfied, however, since,

 in this case, a = 'j/(x,y) = l2£Í^z£l# Hence the given derivative equation has, according to Lagrange's
 condition, no singular primitive.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 154 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 which result from V and U by replacing y with y + z (and hence yf, . . . , y with

 y' + z' . . . , y respectively), it will follow that Vy'y+Z = t/'j +z.

 Let us now view V and U as functions of the variables yf, . . . , and
 y' . . . , respectively, and assume that Vy'y+Z and Uy'y+Z are expanded in

 power series of z' . . . , according to the procedure described in Sect. 4.1. Let V

 of course V = V and U = U). Since X^=o ^ = HjLo u = Z^=o u '» k win be

 j

 and U (j = 0, 1, . . .) be, respectively, the sums of all the terms of order j of the two

 powers series so obtained, so that: Vy'y+Z = Xylo ^ anc* Uy'y+z = Xylo ^ (where

 o o j r jV j

 J J .
 easy to prove that V = U

 r . . i oo

 These last equalities provide the necessary and sufficient condition for V to be an

 exact derivative. It remains to describe this condition in more detail.

 j= o

 j J f

 If j = 0, the equality V = U f holds by hypothesis. Consider the case j - 1. As

 V = 2X=o (where are appropriate functions of jc, y, yf, . . . , V is
 an exact derivative if and only if equality (51) holds. Suppose that this is so. It is easy

 to prove that the difference Vy'y+Z - V is then an exact derivative.

 This is done as follows. From the equalities (50) and (51), it follows that

 I m - 1 m k- 1
 U = X Wyik)z(k) = (52)

 k= 0 k= 0 h= 0

 U>"'= £ (-l/O® +l. (53)

 m-k- 1

 h= 0

 for any k {k = 0, 1, ... m - 1). As the partial derivatives of higher order of U result
 from the first ones, according to the algorithm of derivatives, these equalities allow

 us to determine the expansion of the difference Uy'y+Z - U, which is the primitive of
 Vy'y+z - V.

 Now, if Vy'y+Z - V is an exact derivative, this is also the case of V, since the
 substitution z -> - y reduces Vy'y+Z to a function of the only variable jc, which is
 certainly an exact derivative. The equality (51) supplies thus a necessary and suffi-

 cient condition for V to be an exact derivative, and - as V = 5X=o ^kZ^k) entails

 / ( k )

 $>/< = V y for any k (k = 0, 1 , . . . , m) - it can be written under the form:

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (where u'y(k) is the first derivative of U with respect to y^) and thus, according to
 the method of indeterminate coefficients:

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 155

 Xl-l'IV'"'! =0, (54)

 m

 k= 0

 ' (k)

 where the derivatives of V y are of course total.

 Lagrange has thus proved that if V = V (x, y, y ', . . . , Euler and Condorcet's
 necessary condition of exact integrability (Euler 1744, pp. 71-74; Condorcet 1765,
 Sect. I, pp. 4-35) is also sufficient.

 It is easy to understand that if V = V (x, y, y ', . . . y^m' t, t ', . . . r(m)) his argu-
 ment applies separately to y and its derivatives and to t and its derivatives, so that this
 function is an exact derivative if and only if the equality (54) holds together with an

 analogous equality where y is replaced by t. Lagrange's result is thus general.

 4.4 Partial derivative equations

 The fourth and last example concerns partial derivative equations (Lagrange 1797, arts.
 92-96 and 100-107; 1801, continuation of lecture XX, pp. 284-318; 1806, lecture.
 XX; 1813, arts. 1.81- 1.84 and 1.88- 1.95; with the exception of some details, we shall

 confine ourselves to the account that Lagrange presented in arts. 92-96 and 1.8 1-1.84

 of the two editions of the Théorie , respectively).86

 If z is taken to be a variable independent of x and y (or even a constant), the coef-
 ficients of £ and o in the power-series expansion of F(x + £, y + o, z) - that is, the

 first partial derivatives of F(x,y,z) with respect to x and y, under this condition on
 z - can be easily determined according to the equality (39). They differ, of course,

 from the partial derivatives of F (jc, y, z) under the condition that z is a function of x

 and y implicitly expressed by the equation F (x, y, z) = 0. Let us respectively denote

 the former with 4 F'x(x,y,zY and 4 F fy (jc, y, zY and the latter with 'F'x(x,y, zXtyY

 and 4 Ffy(x , y, zx,yY-S1 Then:

 F'x(x,y,zx,y) = F'x(x,y,z)+ F'z(x, y, z)z'x
 F'y(x,y,zx,y ) = F'y(x, >'z) + F,z(x, y,z)z'y '

 where F'z(x,y,z) is the partial derivative of F(x,y,z) with respect to z under the
 condition that z is independent of x and y , whereas z ' x and z fy are the partial deriva-

 tives of z taken as a function of x and y. But, if z is taken to be a function of x and y

 implicitly expressed by F(x , y , z) = 0, then F(x + £, y + o, z) =0 holds too, and the
 method of indeterminate coefficients leads to F'x{x , y, zx,y ) = F'y(x, y, zx,y ) = 0.
 Hence from the equations (55) it follows that:

 ,, = _F'-(W) >nd (56)

 F'z(x,y,z) F'z(x,y,z)

 which correspond to the equality (21), for the case under consideration.

 86 On Lagrange's terminology, see footnote 82.

 87 Lagrange had in fact no elementary symbol for denoting F'x (x, y, zx,y) and F ' y (x, y, zx,y )•

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 56 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 This is the basic result of Lagrange's reformulation of the part of the calculus dealing

 with partial differential equations. By generalizing his approach to ordinary deriva-

 tive equations, he conceived a partial derivative equation as the equation that results
 if a non-derivative equation F(x, y, . . . , z) = 0, involving three or more variables
 jc, y, . . . , z, is combined with the equations obtained by equating to zero the partial
 derivatives of F(x,y,...,z) with respect to some of these variables. The equalities
 (56) apply to the simplest case where only three variables are involved. The other cases
 are analogous.

 Consider this simplest one. If the primitive equation F (jc, y,z) =0 contains two

 arbitrary constants, they also occur, in general, in the equations Ffjc(x, y, zx,y) = 0
 and F'y(x, y, zx,y) = 0 and can thus be eliminated by composing these three equa-
 tions. Hence, the general solution F(x, y, z) = 0 of a first order partial differential
 equation involving the variables jc, y, z, z' - i.e., in Lagrange's parlance, the "com-
 plete primitive equation"88 of this equation - contains two arbitrary constants.

 But singular solutions exist here too, as Lagrange showed by considering a function

 F(x, y, z, a, b) of five variables x, y,z,a,b, and assuming that z, a, and b are func-

 tions of x and y. In this case (Lagrange 1801 , p. 296; 1806, pp. 367-369), the equations

 F'x(x, y, Zx,y,ax,y,bx,y) = 0 and Ffy(x , y, zx,y , ax,y » bx,y) = 0 have respectively
 the form

 + F'z(-)z'x + F,a(-)af* + F'b(-)b'x = 0

 F'y(-) + F'z{-)z'y + F'a{-)afy + Fr»{-)bfy =0, P ]

 where the dashes stand for the sequence 'jc, y, z, a, b' If F'a{- ) = F'b{-) = 0, the
 composition of these equations with their primitive gives the same partial derivative
 equation obtained by composing the equation F (x , y,z) =0 with the corresponding

 equations F'x(j c, y, zx,y) = 0 and Ffy(x, y, zx,y) = 0. Hence, to obtain the singular
 solution of a partial derivative equation involving the variables x, y, z, z' it suffices

 to take the arbitrary constants a and b occurring in the complete primitive equation as
 two functions of jc and y, and to require that F 'a (- ) - F 'b (- ) = 0. Lagrange called
 such a solution the 'singular primitive equation'.

 Now, let b be a function of a , this last variable being a function of jc and y, again.

 Suppose in particular that b = <p(a). Equations (57) become

 F'x{-) + F'z(-)z'x + [F'a (-) + F V<«> (-)p '(a)] a '" = 0
 F 'y (-) + F (-)Z 'y + [F '«(-) + F V«o (-)«? '(a)]a'y = 0. (58)

 Thus, if a satisfies the condition

 F (-) + F '*<«> (-)y 'a) = 0, (59)

 the composition of the these equations with F(x, y, z, a, b) = 0 produces the
 same partial derivative equation obtained by composing F (x, y,z) = 0 with

 88 For the introduction of this and the following terms, see Lagrange (1801), p. 296-298; (1806), p. 369-
 371.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 57

 F'x(x , y, zx,y) = 0 and F'y(x, y, zx,y ) = 0. As this does not depend on the par-
 ticular nature of the function (p(a ), and a is supposed to be a function of x and y,

 it follows that such a partial derivative equation has a primitive which contains an

 arbitrary function of x and y and no arbitrary constant. Lagrange called it the 'general

 primitive equation'.

 As a simple example consider the equation F (x, y,z) = z - ax - by - c = 0
 where a, b and c are constants and z is taken to be a function of x and y implicitly

 expressed by this equation. The equations F 'X{x, y, zx,y) = OandF'^C*, y, zx,y ) = 0
 are z'x = a and zfy =b, and, by composition, one obtains the partial derivative equa-
 tion z - z'xx - zfyy - c = 0, of which z - ax - by - c - 0 is the complete
 primitive. Suppose that also a and b are functions of x and y . Since, in this case,
 F'a0 c, y, z, a , b) = - jc, and F'b(x, y, z, a , b) = -y, to obtain the singular prim-
 itive, it is enough to impose the condition x = y = 0 on this complete primitive,
 which gives z - c = 0. Suppose now that b = (p(a ), and a is a function of x and
 y. Since, in this case, F'a{x, y, z, a , b) + Ffvw(-)(pf(a) = x + ycpf(a), to obtain
 the general primitive, one also has to impose the condition x + yep' (a) = 0 on this

 same complete primitive. But, from this condition it follows that a = (p'~x anc*

 b = (p {cp'~x Hence, the general primitive is z - yty - c = 0, where

 x/r = y<p/_1 + (p (- f)) an arbitrary function of y.

 4.5 Returning to Lagrange's notion of function

 The previous examples make it clear that, in reformulating the calculus, Lagrange
 was forced to deal with functions in a way that is at odds with the compositional

 conception, and, more generally, with the identification of functions with appropriate
 expressions.

 He did not only identify functions with generic variables depending on other vari-

 ables and merely expressed by generic symbols submitted to an appropriate algebra,
 he was also forced to acknowledge the existence of functions that can only be char-
 acterized as the functions expressed by such symbols. This is manifestly the case

 for the arbitrary functions (p(a ) and V (y) involved in his account of the general
 primitives of a partial derivative equation (see Sect. 4.4). What makes these functions
 arbitrary is not merely that they enter into a general argument that does not depend,
 as such, on their being some particular expressions (or some quantities expressed by

 some particular expressions). These functions are arbitrary also because this argument
 does not require that they be expressions (or quantities expressed by some expres-
 sions). For this argument to work, it is enough to take these functions to be generic

 symbols for quantities that satisfy an appropriate algebra (or quantities denoted by such
 symbols).

 This is a new and fairly clear example of the tensions between Lagrange's ideal of

 purity and the actual deployment of his theory. Though he cautiously avoided, in his
 treatises, the issues raised by Euler's famous 1765 memoir on "discontinuous func-
 tions" (Euler 1765), and the debate generated by it, his efforts to recover the totality

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 158 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 of calculus within this theory were such that the necessity of considering functions

 merely as quantities "somehow determined through some variable" (Euler 1765, p. 3)
 arose naturally.89

 More generally, this same difficulty affects Lagrange's reformulation of the integral

 calculus as such, since his notions of function and derivative seem too strict to allow

 each function to have a primitive. In his view, the passage from a given function to
 his primitive relies on an "operation" which can be regarded as "the inverse" of the

 derivation, and that "can always be performed through series," by appealing to the
 method of indeterminate coefficients.90 But if the operation of derivation is viewed

 as the operation that leads from a given function f(x) to the coefficient of £ in the

 power-series expansion of f(x + Ç), its inverse can only be seen as the operation
 leading from a given function f(x ) to a function g(x) such that f(x) is the coeffi-
 cient of £ in the power-series expansion of g(x + §) (see footnote 83). But how then

 can one determine the primitive of a function f(x) that can only be integrated by
 series?

 Lagrange could have answered this question in different ways, but none of them

 would have been in good order with respect to the principles of his theory. He could

 have admitted that a series is in itself a function, and taken a series to be the primitive

 of f(x). But this is something that he does not seem to have been ready to admit, and

 that is in any case openly at odds with his notion of function. He could have argued that
 the primitive of f(x) is unknown though having a known expansion. But, he should

 then have explained what sort of function this unknown function might have been,

 which would have been hard to do on the base of his notion of function. Finally, he

 could have granted that the primitive of f(x) is not a function in turn, or that f(x) has

 no primitive at all. But in this way, his theory would have departed from a generally
 admitted assumption of the differential calculus.91

 89 On the well-known debate generated by Euler's memoir, see Truesdell (1995), pp. 237-300; Grattan-
 Guinness ( 1 970), 1-21; Dhombres ( 1 988); Bottazzini ( 1 986), pp. 2 1 -33; Panza ( 1 992), 256-264. The issues

 of this debate were hard to reconcile with the structure of algebraic analysis (Grattan-Guinness 1970, pp.
 6-11). This explains why, both in his 1765 memoir and in other memoirs on the same matter - like Euler

 (1749) and (1753) - Euler often and crucially relied on geometric interpretations of his formalism.

 See Lagrange 1797, art. 58; 1813, art. 1.45:

 In the foregoing examples, we looked for the derivative equation and then determined the value of
 the primitive function y through this equation. Since this last operation is [...] the inverse ofthat

 through which one comes down from the primitive function to the derivative ones, it can always been

 performed through series, by employing, as we did, a series with indeterminate coefficients, and by
 drawing a separate equation from any term affected by a power of x. In this way, one determines

 the coefficient one after the others, and one has often the advantage of grasping the general law that
 governs these coefficients.

 Dans les exemples précédents, nous avons cherch é l'équation dérivée et nous avons ensuite déterminé par cette
 équation la valeur de la fonction primitive y. Cette demi ère opération est [...] l'inverse de celle par laquelle on
 descend de la fonction primitive aux fonctions dérivées; elle peut toujours s'exécuter par le moyen des séries,
 en employant, comme nous l'avons fait, une série avec des coefficients indéterminés, et faisant des équations
 séparées des termes affectés de chaque puissance de *. De cette manière, on détermine les coefficients les uns

 par les autres, et l'on a souvent l'avantage d'apercevoir la loi générale qui règne entre ces coefficients.

 91 For other considerations on this matter, see Fraser (1987), p. 40.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 159

 5 The remainder theorem

 No complete appreciation of Lagrange's theory of analytical functions can omit con-
 sideration of his remainder theorem. This is not only generally seen as the major
 mathematical achievement of the Théorie and the Leçons ; it is also the basic result

 that the geometrical and mechanical applications of such a theory depend on.

 Modern calculus treatises often state the theorem as follows:

 Theorem 5 (Modern Remainder theorem) If f(z ) is a function of a real variable z

 differentiable up to order h + 1 in a right neighborhood of x including x itself (but
 possibly not differentiable at order h -f 1 at x) and z belongs to this neighborhood

 and differs from x , then the difference

 k=0

 between this function and the associated Taylor polynomial of order h is equal to

 for some X strictly between x and z.

 Mutatis mutandis , this statement already occured, for example, in Laplace's Théorie
 analytique des probabilités (Laplace 1812, pp. 175-176) and in Lacroix's Traité du
 calcul différentiel et du calcul intégral (Lacroix 1810-1819, vol. Ill, p. 399), where

 it is proved through appropriate integrations by parts.92 Its importance rests on the

 possibility it provides of proving that the Taylor series of a suitable class of functions

 converges to these functions in an appropriate interval.

 Lagrange's result is essentially different: (/) it involves derivative functions in La-

 grange's sense, rather than differential ratios (as in the versions of Laplace and Lacroix)

 92 For a modern version of Laplace's and Lacroix's proof, see Giusti (1983), vol. I, pp. 235-237. Giusti
 obtains the equality

 k=0 x

 Jt X

 M J M- w

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 though induction on h and integration by parts, then observes that, since [ /te)] is supposed to be
 differentiable in the relevant neighborhood of x, it is also continuous, and so:

 for some X strictly between x and z.

 1 60 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 or derivative functions in modern sense (as in the modern version);93 (//) it concerns

 the remainder of the power-series expansion XÍUo ^TF^* = 5^=0 ( z ~ x^k
 of the function f(x + £) = / (x + (z - x)) = /(z), rather than the difference (60);
 (iii) it presupposes the convergence of the relevant series, to the effect that it cannot

 be used to prove that this series converges in appropriate cases.

 In our understanding, Lagrange's result is then the following:

 Theorem 6 (Lagrange's Remainder theorem) If Ç is a positive increment such that

 the series ^~TF^* converges to f(x +£), then, for any order h (h = 0, 1, . . .):

 JL f{k)( v-' th+ 1

 = JL ¿ f{k)( v-' + WTïy.f(h+l)(x th+ 1 + A m

 where j is an appropriate increment such that 0 < j < Ç.

 Lagrange was quite explicit in asserting that equality (62) holds (Lagrange 1797,
 art. 53; 1813, art. 1.40), but he was vague about the conditions under which it does.

 We argue the conditions are those expressed in theorem 6, because of the arguments

 Lagrange used to prove the theorem: namely, it seems these arguments hold only if

 ^ k'X^k converges to f(x + §) around Ç = 0, so that Lagrange's remain-

 der theorem cannot be part of a more general argument intended to prove that the
 power-series expansion of a function f(x +£) converges to this same function around
 É=0.

 We have said that the remainder theorem is the basic result on which the geometric

 and mechanical applications of Lagrange's theory depend, and that its proof depends
 on the convergence of the power-series expansion of f(x + £) to this same function

 around £ = 0. This is clearly inconsistent with claiming that the convergence of the
 power-series expansion of f(x + £) to this same function around £ = 0 is a sufficient

 condition for applying the theory of analytical functions to the solution of geometric
 and mechanical problems. We reject this last claim, indeed.

 According to us, the examination of the arguments Lagrange relied on in the Théorie

 to justify these applications shows that these arguments not only require the conver-
 gence of the power-series expansion of f(x + §) to this same function around $ = 0

 and/or the evaluation of the series ££La+i *F^*' but also Te^ on the admission

 that this series can be expressed in the form of a product like f^h+l) (x + j), as

 the equality (62) prescribes.94

 93 Our use of the differential notation in formulas (60) and (61 ), and in footnote 92 aims to emphasize this
 difference.

 94 In our view, the series Xfci/i+i ls precisely what should count, in Lagrange's theory, as
 the remainder of the power-series expansion of f(x + £). The distinction between the evaluation of such

 a remainder and the way this remainder is expressed is explicitly introduced by Lagrange himself in the
 Leçons :

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 161

 5.1 Tangents, areas, speed and acceleration

 Examples will be useful for clarification.

 5.1.1 Tangents

 Let us begin with Lagrange's treatment of the problem of tangents (Lagrange 1797,
 arts. 109-113; Lagrange 1813, arts. II.2-II.6; Lagrange's argument has been recon-
 structed in Grabiner 1990, pp. 159- 160bis).

 Let u = (p(v ), u = 0( v) and u = ifr{v) be three functions expressing three dif-
 ferent curves that meet each other at a point v = x, so that: cp(x) = <f>(x) = '¡f(x).
 For simplicity, suppose that in a right neighborhood I> of this point, such that the

 power-series expansions of (p(x + Ç), (/>(x + Ç) and 'lr(x 4- £) converge to these func-

 tions if x + Ç e /¿' these curves are all increasing, their ordinates are positive, and
 the ordinate of the first is smaller than or equal to the ordinates of the two others

 (appropriate variants of the following argument apply in other cases).

 Then, let A] and À2 be the (non-negative) differences between 0(jc + £) and
 <p(x + %) and between 'l/(x + t=) and <p(jt+£), respectively. As<p(x) = </>(x) = y¡r(x),
 from Theorems 4 and 6 it follows that:

 Ai = <P(x + £) - <p(x + £) = £ [<p'(x) - <p'(x)'

 A2 = ir(x +f) -<p(x+Ç) = Ç [1 (r'(x)-<p'(x)]

 +y '<t> "(x + j[<p], 2) - <p"(x + jtyi 2)]

 fc2

 fc2

 +y + A#], 2) - <p" (x + ./[»>], 2)], (63)

 where j^i 2, 2 and j[f],2 are three increments depending on x and on the nature
 of functions (p(v ), 0(f), but in any case belonging to [0, £].

 Let us assume that cp'{x) = (/>f(x). Since A2 is non-negative, 'fr '(x) - <p '(.*) is too.

 If it were positive, there would be a positive quantity 8 small enough for

 È2

 Ai - A2 = - [4>"(x + - r¡r"(x + jm 2)] - H [^'(x) - iP '(-*)] < 0, (64)

 Footnote 94 continued

 In the solution I advanced for this problem in [ . . . ] [the Théorie ], I began by searching the exact

 expression of the remainder of the series, then I determined the limits of this expression. But one
 can immediately find these limits in a more elementary and also more rigorous way.

 Dans la solution que j'ai donnée de ce problème dans [...] [la Théorie ], j'ai commencé par chercher l'expres-
 sion exacte du reste de la série, ensuite j'ai déterminé les limites de cette expression. Mais on peut trouver
 immédiatement ces limites d'une manière plus élémentaire, et également rigoureuse.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 66; 1806, p. 86.)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 62 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 whenever 0 < £ < 8. But in I> the curve expressed by the function u = v)
 lies between the curves expressed by the functions u = <p( v) and u = 0(i>) if and

 only if Ai > Ä2. So, in 7/, the former curve lies between the latter ones only if
 Ir'lx) = (p'{x).

 It is thus enough to suppose that the curves expressed by the functions u = 0 (v) and

 u = are two straight lines with equations u = P[<f>]V+q[<j>] and u = P[f]V+q[f],
 respectively, to conclude that, in I> , the latter of these straight lines lies between

 the curve expressed by the function u = <p(v) and the former straight lines only if
 P[4>] = Pif]- ®ut' as ^onê as these straight lines meet each other at the point v = x,

 this means that they coincide. Therefore, there is no straight line passing through the

 point v = x that, in 7^, lies between the curve expressed by the function u = cp( v)
 and the straight line passing through this point whose slope is equal to (p' (x). This
 last line is therefore the tangent to the curve at v = x.

 5.1.2 Areas

 Consider now, Lagrange's treatment of the problem of areas (Lagrange 1797, art.
 134; 1813, art. 11.27; Lagrange's argument has been reconstructed in Grabiner 1981a,
 p. 157; Grabiner 1990, pp. 160bis- 162).

 Let u = <p(v) and u = 0(i>) be two functions expressing respectively a curve
 referred to a system of orthogonal coordinates and the area under this curve (taken

 starting from a certain fixed point). For simplicity, suppose that in a right neighbor-
 hood of a generic point v = x such that the power-series expansions of cp(x + £)

 and 0(x + f) converge to these functions if jc -h Ç € 7/, the ordinates of <p(v) are
 non-negative and increasing (appropriate variants of the following argument apply in
 other cases).95

 The difference (¡>{x + $) - <j>(x) is thus non-negative as well, and

 %<p(x) < (¡>(x + Ç) - 4>(x) < tj(p(x + $), (65)

 whenever x + Ç e . According to theorem 6, this condition reduces to

 o < <t>'x) - <p(x) < Ç ^(p'{x + j[(pl l) - ^ (x +-/[0],2) (66)

 95 Lagrange explicitly supposed that any function is made up of monotonie pieces. After having presented
 his argument, he wrote:

 We supposed [...] that the ordinates increased or diminished from f(x) up to f(x 4- £): this con-
 dition would not obtain if there were a maximum or minimum between these two ordinates. But,

 since one can take the interval £ as small as one likes, it is clear that one will be always able to make
 the second ordinate fall before the maximum or minimum, to the effect that the conclusion we have
 drawn will remain the same.

 Nous avons supposé [. . .] que les ordonnées allaient en augmentant ou en diminuant depuis / (x) jusqu'à /(j t +£):
 cette condition n'aurait pas lieu s'il y avait entre ces deux ordonnées un maximum ou un minimum; mais, comme

 on peut prendre l'intervalle £ assez petit que l'on veut, il est clair qu'on pourra toujours faire tomber la seconde
 ordonnée f(x + £) en deçà du maximum ou du minimum, et que, par consequant, la conclusion que nous avons
 tirée demeurera toujours la même.

 On this matter, see Dugac (2003), p. 76.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (p'(x + j[y), l) - 2<p"(x + 2)

 for condition (66) to not hold. Hence, <j>'{x) = <p(x).

 5.1.3 Speeds and accelerations of rectilinear motions

 Finally, consider Lagrange's treatment of speeds and accelerations of a rectilinear
 motion (Lagrange 1797, art. 188; Lagrange (1813), art. III.4; see also Panza 1991-
 1992, pp. 184-187 of vol. 45).

 Let u = (p{ v) be a function expressing the space u covered in time v by a point

 moving uniformly in a straight line and v = t the initial instant of motion. It fol-
 lows that (p(t ) = 0 and that, starting from this moment, <p(v) is non-negative and
 increasing. Hence, <p(t + 0) - (p{t) = <p{t + 0) is non-negative too, and expresses the
 space covered in a (positive) time 0 starting from this instant. Lagrange claimed that

 0 can be taken small enough for the movement expressed by the two first terms of the

 power-series expansion of (p(t + 0) to "draw nearer the real motion than any other
 [rectilinear] movement composed by a uniform movement and a uniformly acceler-
 ated movement," so that "the term 0(p'{t) expresses all that which can there be of

 uniform [tout ce qu'il peut y avoir d'uniforme ] in the proposed motion considered at

 the beginning of time 6 ," whereas "the term ^-<p"(0 expresses [...] all that which
 could there be of uniformly accelerated [tout ce qu'il peut y avoir d' uniformément
 accéléré ] in this motion." The mechanical implications of his argument do not interest

 us here. Consider only the part of it which is supposed to prove that, for any a and b

 independent of 0 , respectively different from (p 't) and , and such that aO + bO 2
 is non-negative, there is a quantity û small enough for

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 63

 where j^x and are two increments depending on x and on the nature of the
 functions cp(v) and 0(f), but in any case belonging to [0, §]. But this condition holds

 for any non-negative £ only if 0 f(x) = (p(x). Indeed if it were not, it would be enough
 that

 <l>'(x)-<p(x)

 Ç <

 [(pit + 6) - <p{t)] - 'a0 +602]| > [(pit +9) - (pit)] - ^6(p'it) + -

 (68)

 whenever 0 < 0 < û.

 According to theorem 6, this reduces to the claim that, under the above conditions,

 _ „] + . ,] „ + + , m

 where y'[^],3 is an increment depending on t and on the nature of function (p(v ), but
 in any case belonging to [0,0]. According to Lagrange, this "can be easily proved by

 an argument similar" to that used to prove the extension up to the third order of the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 result on which his solution of the problem of tangents is based (Lagrange 1797, art.
 Ill; 1813, art. II.4).

 Suppose that u = <p(v) and u = yjr{ v) are two new functions such that (p(t ) =

 164 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 (j)(t) = and<p"(0 = Suppose also that A i = cp(t+9 ) -
 (¡)(t + 9 ), and A2 = (pit + 9) - *//(t + 9). From theorem 6 one derives:

 A, = e [ <p'(t ) - 0'(O] + y [«¡>"(0 - <t>"(t)]

 92

 + + j[(pi 3) - + j[0], 3)],

 93

 93

 A 2 = [<?'"(* + ./[?>], 3) - + yWl.3)] (70)

 where j[0],3 and y'[^],3 are two increments depending on f and on the nature of the
 functions (p(v) and ^(y), but in any case belonging to [0, 9]. The extension Lagrange

 was clearly referring consists in the claim that there is a quantity û small enough for
 I Ail > I A2I whenever 0 <9 <û.

 Without considering absolute values (that is, assuming Ai and A2 to be both non-

 negative), Lagrange argued that for this to happen, it is enough that

 [<p'{t) -<p'{t)] + [< p''t ) -4>"0)] > Ç + jm< 2) - f"'(t + jlfl 3)],

 (71)

 which, he said, "is obviously possible when <pf(t) - does not vanish," and,
 if (p'{t ) - = 0, "is still manifestly possible, by decreasing the value of 9
 as much as one wishes whenever <p"{t) - <¡>"(t) does not vanish." If this claim is
 applied to the problem of speeds and accelerations of rectilinear motions - for which

 (j)(t + 9) = a9 +b92 and '¡;(t + 9) = 9(p'{t) + y<p"(0 - the inequality (71) reduces
 to

 [<p 't) - a] + e - b j > 0. (72)

 Now, when referred to this inequality, Lagrange's first claim is true: if <p't ) > a, it

 is certainly possible that 9 be taken small enough, though positive, for - a] >

 & ~ ®ut *s not so f°r second claim, since, in this case, cp"(t ) -

 = 0, and nothing insures, in general, that 9 - bj >0. Hence, taken as

 such, Lagrange's argument is flawed, and should be reformulated, by relying on the

 fact that any polynomial P(z ) of a real variable z takes the sign of its first term when
 the absolute value of z becomes small enough (Panza 1991-1992, p. 186 of vol. 45).
 However, insofar as such a reformulation still involves the equality (71), the role of

 the remainder theorem in the argument remains the same.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 65

 5.1.4 Reflecting on the foregoing examples

 The arguments Lagrange used in the three examples we have just seen do not appeal
 explicitly to the convergence of the power- series expansion of f(x + £) to this same

 function around £ = 0, and such convergence is in fact not enough for them to be cor-

 rect.96 The crucial result on which these arguments are based is, rather, the remainder
 theorem.

 For any non-negative integer h, let R[f'h+ 1 (*, £) be the remainder of order h
 (h = 1,2,.. .) of the power-series expansion of a function f(x -I- §), i.e., the series

 Xiu=/i+ 1 ^ k'X^k- ro^e Hörern in the three foregoing arguments is that
 of ensuring, respectively, that, for any pair of functions f(x + £) and g(x + £):

 (/) R[/i 2 (x, £) and R[g'2 (x, £) are such that there is a quantity 8 small enough that,

 if 0 < £ < 8 and g'(x) - f'(x) is positive, then

 I%12 (X, I) - R[gl 2 (X, £)| < £ [g'(;c) - f'x )] ; (73)

 (ii) R[f'2 (x, Ç) and R[g],' ( x , §) are such that

 0 < I [f'(x) - gw] < ÇRlgl] (x, I) - Rim (X, I) , (74)

 for any positive £ belonging to an appropriate right neighborhood of 0 only if
 f'(x)-g(x) = 0;

 {iiï) R[f'3 (x, Ç) is such that there is a quantity 8 small enough that, if 0 < £ <5

 , and a and b are independent of 0 and respectively different from f'x) and

 then

 ![/'«- a] +!2[:Q^-Z>] + %13U,t) >|%i3(*,$)|. (75)

 It thus seems that, in Lagrange's view, the remainder theorem insures that, when Ç

 approaches zero (though remaining positive), R[f'h+' (x,^) behaves as a product like

 96 Lagrange himself claimed that this is so. At the end of the proof of the remainder theorem in the Théorie ,
 he wrote

 The perfection of the methods of approximation in which some series are employed not only depends

 on the convergence of the series, but also on the possibility of estimating the error resulting from the

 terms that are neglected. Concerning this matter, one could say that almost all methods that are used
 in the solution of geometrical and mechanical problems are very imperfect. The foregoing theorem

 will be useful, in many occasions, in order to confer on these methods the perfection of which they
 lack and whiteout which it is often dangerous to use them.

 La perfection des méthodes d'approximation dans lesquelles on emploie les séries dépend non seulement de la
 convergence des séries, mais encore de ce qu'on puisse estimer l'erreur qui résulte des termes qu'on néglige,
 et à cet égard on peut dire que presque toutes les méthodes d'approximation dont on fait usage dans la solution
 des problèmes géométriques et mécaniques sont encore très-imparfaites. Le théorème précédent pourra servir,
 dans beaucoup d'occasions, à donner à ces méthodes la perfection qui leur manque et sans laquelle il est souvent
 dangereux de les employer.

 (Lagrange 1797, art. 53; 1813, art. 1.40)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 66 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 £ä+1A[/].ä+i, where A¿+i is a finite factor independent of §. When § approaches
 zero, the inequalities (73), (74), and (75) would then be equivalent to these:

 |a(/12 - A[g12| < A B

 A-B

 0 - - I

 ^ + y + A[/l3 >|a[/13|, (76)

 where A and B are finite quantities that are independent of £.

 We know that the remainder theorem does not in fact insure this, since the incre-

 ment j[f'h+ 1 is supposed to belong to an interval whose upper bound is Ç and is thus
 actually not independent of this increment. But for our purpose it is more important

 to wonder why Lagrange did not merely base his arguments on the equality

 k=h+ 1 ^ + * +

 <">

 His choice of appealing to the remainder theorem suggests that he was convinced

 that the identification of the series ^~TT^%k a Pro^uct ^^e Çh+l A[/]^+i
 is only guaranteed by the equality

 « f(h+k+])(x) ^ f(h+D(x+J)
 ¿5 (h + h + i)r (h + iy. -

 But, why did Lagrange believe this? We suggest the following answer: to feel

 justified in considering the series 1 ^ *n context °f an argument
 concerned with particular quantities, Lagrange required to have proved that this series

 reduces to a quantity expressed by a suitable, finitary expression, i.e., to an algebraic
 quantity or function (of §). This is precisely the content of the remainder theorem.

 5.2 Lagrange's proofs of the remainder theorem

 Having clarified the role of the remainder theorem in Lagrange's theory, we turn to its
 proofs. We speak of proofs in the plural, since Lagrange proved this theorem in two

 different ways in the Théorie and in the Leçons. Furthermore, in the second edition of

 the Théorie , he adjusted the argument provided in the first.

 5.2.1 The theorem of the sufficiently small increment

 The argument advanced in the first edition of the Théorie explicitly relies on a result

 proved at the beginning of the treatise, right after the proof of the power-series expan-

 sion theorem (Lagrange 1797, arts. 11-15; 1813, arts. 1.3- 1.7); we suggest to term it

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 167

 'theorem of the sufficiently small increment'. Lagrange stated it as follows (Lagrange

 1797, art. 14; 1813, art. 1.6; the same result is stated twice in these articles; we quote

 the first occurrence; a third equivalent statement occurs in articles 15 and. 1.7 of the

 same treatises, respectively):

 Theorem 7 (Theorem of the sufficiently small increment )

 [...] in the series f(x) + /?§ + #£2-fr£3 + &c. resulting from the expansion
 of f(x + £), one can always take £ so small that whatever term be greater than

 the sum of all the following ones , and this also happen for all the values of §
 smaller [than this].

 [...] dans la série f(x) + pÇ + qi ;2 + rÇ3 + &c. qui naît du dévelopment de f(x + £), on
 peut toujours prendre £ assez petit pour qu 'un terme quelconque soit plus grand que la somme
 de tous les termes qui le suivent; et que cela doit avoir lieu aussi pour toutes les valeurs plus
 petites de £.

 The statement is vague. We shall try to clarify the content of the theorem by looking

 at its proof.

 Lagrange began (Lagrange 1797, art. 11; 1813, art. 1.3) by pointing out that f(x)
 is "what is independent of the quantity Ç" in f(x + Ç), that is, "the part of f(x + £)
 that remains when the quantity Ç vanishes." Hence, /(* + £) is "equal to f(x) plus a

 quantity that must disappear if Ç = 0," which could therefore be expressed as a product
 having a positive power of Ç as a factor. But, he argued, since "in the expansion of

 f(x + £) cannot enter any fractional power of £," it follows that this product has to be

 of the form Ç P' (jc, £), where Pi (jc, £) is a function of x and £ that "does not become
 infinite for $ = 0," so that: f(x + $) = f(x) + $ P' (*, £). The same argument can be

 iterated - assuming that Ph(x,i-) = Ph(x, 0) + £ Ph+ 1 (x , £ ) (h = 1 , 2, . . . ) - to prove
 that:97

 f(x+^)=Y,Pk(^k + Ph+'(x,^h+] (A =0,1,...), (79)

 h

 k= 0

 where po(x) = /(jc), Pjç(x, Ç) (ik = 1,2,.. .) are functions of x and $ that do not
 become infinite for $ = 0, and pk(x) = Pk(x, 0).

 If the power-series expansion theorem is accepted, this argument poses no prob-
 lems, since the crucial equalities Ph(x, Ç) = Ph(x, 0) 4- HPh+ 1(*, £) (A = 0, 1,...),
 where Po(x,i-) = /(*+£), immediately follow from this theorem, namely from
 the equality Ph(x, Ç) = pk(x)%k~h , if $ is small enough for the power-series
 expansion of f(x + $) to converge to this function.

 Fraser ( 1 987, pp. 42-43) has suggested a different interpretation, however. For him,

 Lagrange's proof of the equalities (79) is part of his proof of the power-series expan-
 sion theorem. This last proof should thus not be understood in the way we suggested in
 Sect. 3.1. Fraser thinks that in proving the power-series expansion theorem Lagrange

 did not suppose that any function f(x + §) has a generalized power-series expansion:

 97 As pointed out in footnote 41, we use >*(*)' (k = 0, 1, ...) to replace Lagrange's symbols 'fx'
 4 q' &c. In the same vein, we use 'P/j+jU, £)' {h = 0, 1, . . .) for Lagrange's symbols 'P' *ß' &c.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 having proved that "no expansion of f(x +Ç) in powers of Ç can contain any fractional

 or negative powers of §," he instead proved the equalities (79) and used them to obtain

 1 68 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 the equality

 /(* + $) = 2 />*(*)$*• (80)

 00

 k= 0

 According to Fraser, Lagrange's proof of the equalities (79) rests then on an implicit,

 and unjustified lemma he calls 'factor lemma':

 Lemma 1 (Factor lemma) If g (x,i-) is a function of x and £ such that g(x, 0) =0,
 then g(x , £) = %aG(x, £), where a, > 0 and G(j t, £) is a function of x and Ç that
 becomes neither infinite nor null for Ç = 0.

 In our view, this interpretation involves at least three difficulties.
 The first concerns functions like x log(l + §) having log(l + §) as a factor. To
 insure that these functions satisfy the factor lemma - for example, that Jclog(l +
 Ç) = £aG(jt,£), for some appropriate positive exponent a and function G(jc, £) - ,
 Lagrange could have appealed to two arguments. He could either have observed that

 log(l + §) can be expanded in a power series, or he could have relied on the equality
 (32) in order to rewrite this factor under the form

 r (1 + £)' - r = % + + &c. = t (l + + &c.) , (81)

 with r infinitely large. Still, as already observed above (especially footnote 79), both
 in the Théorie and in the Leçons , Lagrange got the power-series expansion of the
 logarithm by appealing to the power-series expansion theorem, and deduced, in the

 Leçons , the equality (81) from this very power-series expansion. Hence, had he actu-

 ally relied on the factor lemma in order to proof the power-series expansion theorem,

 he would have fallen into a circularity. No doubt, the power-series expansion of the

 logarithm could have been obtained by different arguments than Lagrange's. But this
 would hardly have been done without either supposing that log(l + §) has a power-
 series expansion or relying on some geometric arguments involving the quadrature of
 the hyperbola.

 The second difficulty concerns the very nature of a proof of equalities (79) based

 on the factor lemma. This proof would consist, indeed, in a reiteration of the following
 argument:

 (0 Ph (x, £) = ph(x) + (x, I)
 (ii) Phb, Ç) = PhW + t;«Ph+x (x, Ç)
 (iiï) Ph(x,Ç) = ph(x)+ÇPh+' (*,£),

 where P¡¡+1 (x, £) is such that /^*+1 (x, 0) = 0, a is positive, P^+i (*. £) becomes
 neither infinite nor null for Ç = 0, and P0(*» $) = f(x + Ç) , po(x) = f(x). The
 factor lemma would enter into this argument to justify the passage from (i) to (ii),

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 69

 whereas the passage from (//) to (iii) would be justified by the previous conclusion
 that "no expansion of f(x + £) in powers of Ç can contain any fractional or negative

 powers of £ But, neither this lemma, nor this conclusion are suitable for justifying the

 assumption of (/), that is, the supposition that PhQ c, Ç) is equal to Ph(x , 0) = ph (x)

 plus a function of x and £ that vanishes for £ = 0. Now, if the power-series expansion

 theorem is not accepted, this supposition is hard to justify, especially in the general

 case where Ph(x, £) is not merely a function of x + £, but rather a function of x and

 Ç. Hence the factor lemma would not have been the only unjustified strong assump-
 tion entering into such a proof. Lagrange would thus have derived no real advantage

 from proving the power-series expansion theorem this way, rather than the way we
 described in Sect. 3.1.

 The third difficulty relates to a simple remark: neither the equalities (79) nor their

 proof figure in the Leçons. Had Lagrange conceived these equalities as part of his proof

 of the power-series expansion theorem, he would have regarded them as a fundamental

 piece of his theory and would hardly have excluded them from the Leçons.

 These difficulties suggest not adopting Fraser's interpretation and maintaining that

 Lagrange's proof of equalities (79) is not part of his proof of the power-series expansion
 theorem. This is because we discard Fraser's suggestion and consider that Lagrange's

 proof of equalities (79) relies on this very theorem, namely on the identification of the
 functions Ph(x, £) with the series PkM^k~h.

 But then, what role do equalities (79) have in Lagrange's theory? If this question

 had no plausible answer, Fraser's interpretation would gain credence, despite its dif-
 ficulties. Still, a plausible answer does exist: these equalities allow the proof of two
 other results.

 The first consists in the following equalities (Lagrange 1797, art. 1 1; 1813, art. 1.3):

 Ph+ i(x,f) =

 Ph(x,Ç) - ph(x)

 ph+] (x) / = ^

 98 Note however the difference between

 _ = r

 Ph+^) _ = r [

 and

 f<h+ nU) /<*>(« + 6) -/(*'(*)"

 L 1 J?=o

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 / [ Ph(x,i;)- Ph(x) ~|

 These equalities, which follow immediately from equalities (79), are algorithmi-

 cally equivalent to the equality involved in the modern definition of derivatives as
 limits of the incremental ratio. 98 But they provide no operator endowed with an alge-

 bra and specific properties, and allow the (recursive) computation of the derivatives

 170 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 of f(x) only if it is possible to factor out the increment £ from the numerator of the

 relevant ratios." This is not a problem for Lagrange, since, in his view, the derivatives

 of f(x) are not defined by these equalities, which merely provide a procedure for
 computing them in some cases.

 The second result is just the theorem on the sufficiently small increment. To

 prove it (Lagrange 1797, art. 14; 1813, arts. 1.6) , Lagrange identified the remain-
 ders ÇhPh(x,i;) ( h = 1,2...) with the series Pk{*)%k and used the equali-
 ties Ph- i (jc, Ç) = ph- 1 C*) + ÇP/zU, £) to argue that the products ÇPh(x, §) vanish
 for § = 0. Hence, he implicitly used the equality Z£Lo Pk+hWSk = Ph (JC.Ç) =

 Ph-'{x ,%)- Ph-'{x) ^ which makes it clear that he was not proving but rather assuming

 the convergence of Pk(x)Çk to f(x + §) around $ = 0.

 To be more precise, the proof runs as follows.
 Since $P/t(x,$) are functions of $ that vanish for § = 0, they can be taken as
 the expressions of curves referred to a Cartesian system of co-ordinates £, y passing

 through the origin of this system. Moreover, unless such an origin is a singular point

 of these curves - which can be the case only if x takes certain particular values - these

 curves are continuous around it 100 and thus approach the £-axis before cutting it, so

 as to come so close that their distances from it become smaller than any given positive

 quantity. Hence for any given positive quantity, it is always possible to find a positive
 quantity 8 such that the ordinates y = i-Ph(j c, £) of these curves are smaller than this

 quantity in absolute value, if |£| < <5. 101

 99 It follows that these equalities lead to the determination of the derivatives of f{x) only for algebraic
 functions, since in case of transcendental ones, £ can be factored out from the differences Ph(x, $) - Ph (jc)
 only replacing P^(x,$) with their power-series expansions. Moreover - as Lagrange remarked, consider-
 ing the example of the function f(x) = </x (Lagrange 1797, art. 13; 1813, art. 1.5) - even in the case of

 algebraic functions can sometimes be "more expeditious" to compute the derivatives of /(jc) by relying on
 the power-series expansion of f(x + £).

 1 00 Lagrange wrote: "after this point." He thus seems that he tooke £ to be non-negative. The generalization
 of his argument to the case of any £ is easy, however.

 101 To avoid misunderstandings we quote Lagrange:

 [. . .] consider the curve of which £ would be the abscissa and one of the [. . .] functions [£ (x, £)]

 the ordinate. This curve will cut the axis in the origin of the abscissas, and, unless this point is singu-

 lar, which can only happen for some particular values of x [...], the path of the curve will necessarily
 be continuous after this point. Hence, this curve will gradually come near the axis before cutting
 it, to the effect that it will approach it within a quantity smaller than any given quantity. Thus, one

 could always find an abscissa corresponding to an ordinate smaller that any given quantity, and then
 any value of x smaller [than this one] will also correspond to an ordinate smaller than the given
 quantity.

 [...] en considérant la courbe dont £ serait l'abscisse, et l'une de[s][...] fonctions [£/>/,(*> £)] l'ordonnée, cette
 courbe coupera l'axe à l'origine des abscisses; et, à moins que ce point ne soit un point singulier, ce qui ne peut
 avoir lieu que pour des valeurs particulières de x [...], le cours de la courbe sera nécessairement continu depuis
 ce point; donc elle s'approchera peu à peu de l'axe avant de le couper, et s'en approchera par conséquent d'une
 quantité moindre qu'aucune quantité donnée; de sorte qu'on pourra toujours trouver une abscisse £ correspon-
 dant à une ordonn ée moindre qu'une quantité donnée; et alors toute valeur plus petite de £ répondra aussi à des
 ordonnées moindres que la quantité donnée.

 So Lagrange did not explicitly refer to absolute values, but, as it is obvious that he did not restrict his

 arguments to increasing functions, this is implicit.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 171

 It follows that, insofar as ph-'(x) does not vanish - which can only happen if x

 takes certain particular values - it is possible to find a positive quantity 8 such that
 ||A/>A0t,|)| < '^h~xph-'(x)', if III < à. But as §"/>,,(*, I) = /*(*)$*,
 this means that it is possible to find a positive quantity <5 such that p¡,-' ( x ) | >

 This argument holds only if the upper bound 8 of the absolute values of £ depends

 on h and x. Lagrange's language has poor tools for specifying this necessary condition.

 Still, it is clear that his argument can at most prove the following result:

 Theorem 8 For any function f(x + §), any non-negative integer h, and any value
 ofx such that this function has a power-series expansion Pk(x)%k and Ph(x)
 does not vanish , there is a positive quantity 8 such that

 III < <5 => 'çhPh(x)' > X PkWSk ■ (83)

 00

 k=h+'

 But, does Lagrange's argument actually prove this theorem? We claim it does.

 The remainders Ç Ph (jc, Ç) are understood in this argument as geometric quantities,

 namely ordinates of curves. Lagrange thus seems to have followed an old tradition in

 conceiving segments as universal magnitudes, i.e., magnitudes capable of representing

 quantities of any kind. This allowed him to reduce what he tooke to be a property of

 any function to a property of one-piece curves. Insofar as the former is a property of

 any function, there is no need to justify the fact that the functions £P¿(*, £) have it.
 But insofar as one-piece curves can be opposed to multi-piece curves, this property
 can be viewed as a special one.

 Thus, by introducing curves alongside functions, Lagrange managed to transpose a

 property of certain curves - namely one-piece curves - to all functions. Though, muta-
 tis mutandis , this property is what we call 'continuity' (following Cauchy), Lagrange

 did not view it as a property of a class of functions, but rather as a property of one-piece

 curves reflected in a property of any function: in his view, its introduction obeys only

 to a descriptive purpose and not to the purpose of characterizing an appropriate class
 of functions (Grabiner 1990, p. 143; 1981a, p. 95).

 Furthermore, insofar as what is described is the behavior of a one-piece curve in

 the neighborhood of a point where it is defined, this property does not concern this

 point but a neighborhood of it. In other words, Lagrange was not saying that a function
 /(£) is continuous at some point Ç = a if (and only if), for any given positive quantity
 s, there is a positive quantity 8 such that | /(£) - f(a)' < £, if |£ - a' < 8. He was
 rather arguing that any function /(£) which is defined for a certain value § = a -
 which is not a singular one - is such that, for any given positive quantity s , there is a

 positive quantity 8 suchthat/(§) is defined and | /(£) - f(a)' < s, if |£ - a' < 8. 102

 102 Despite such an essential difference, the way Lagrange formulated his property certainly prefigures
 Cauchy's definition and even the Weierstrassian e-8 interpretation of it. This is not an isolated fact: in order
 to prove the remainder theorem, Lagrange used several arguments that are amazingly close to Cauchy's
 and Weierstrass's techniques. The point has been often made (for example by Grabiner 1981a, pp. 56-76,
 and Grabiner 1990, pp. 171-214), and we shall not dwell on it. We shall confine ourselves instead to a

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 72 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Once this last statement is accepted, Lagrange's argument seems to be thoroughly

 correct and actually to prove theorem 8. 103 As we shall see in the next section, this last

 theorem is, however, too weak for correctly playing the role that, in the first edition
 of the Théorie , Lagrange assigned to the theorem of the sufficient small increment

 within his proof of the remainder theorem.

 5.2.2 Two lemmas for the remainder theorem: presuppositions of uniformity

 The theorem of the sufficient small increment enters into this proof as a premise for
 proving a lemma from which the remainder theorem is then deduced. In the second

 edition of the Théorie , Lagrange proved the same lemma by relying on the equality
 f(x +Ç) = f(x) +£ Pi (x , Ç) rather than on the former theorem. 104 Still, the argument

 in the second edition presents difficulties similar to those presented by that of the first
 edition.

 In the Leçons , this lemma is replaced by another lemma whose proof depends nei-

 ther on the theorem of the sufficiently small increment nor on the equality f(x- 1- £) =

 f(x) + § P' (x, $), or, more generally, on the equalities (79). This proof is also flawed,

 however, and for reasons similar to those that undermine the proofs of the lemma of
 the Théorie.

 It therefore seems convenient to consider both lemmas before turning to the proofs

 of the remainder theorem.

 5.2.2.1 The lemma of the Théorie The lemma of the Théorie is the following
 (Lagrange 1797, art. 48; 1813, art. 1.38; the proofs are given in the same articles):

 Lemma 2 (Lemma of the Théorie)

 If a prime function of x like f 'x) is always positive for any value of x from
 x = a up to x = b, supposing that b be > a, the difference of the primitive func-
 tions corresponding to these two values of x, i.e., f(b) - f(a), will necessarily
 be a positive quantity.

 Si une function prime de x, telle que f'{x) , est toujours positive pour
 toutes les valeurs de x , depuis x - a jusqu' à x = b,b étant > a, la
 différence des fonctions primitives qui répondent à ces deux valeurs de jc,
 savoir, f(b) - f (a), sera nécessairement une quantité positive.

 Footnote 102 continued

 reconstruction of these arguments within the context of Lagrange's theory, which is quite different from
 Cauchy's and Weierstrass's versions of the calculus (Fraser 1987, p. 52).

 To prove theorem 8, it is necessary to identify the absolute value of Ph-'0 0 (h = 1,2,...) with

 the positive quantity s. If this identification is left out, Lagrange's argument provides a proof for another

 theorem that he did not state explicitly, and that could be formulated as follows: for any function f(x + $),
 any natural number h, any value of jc such that this function has a power-series expansion Pk(x)Hk »

 and any positive quantity e, there is a positive value 8 such that |£| < 8 => Pk(x)%k I < e-

 104 It follows that - according to our understanding - the only effective role that the equalities (79) for
 h > 0 have in the second edition of the Théorie is that of allowing the equalities (82) to be proved.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 173

 Once more, the statement is vague. In to-day's French, 'positif' often means 'non-
 negative'. But it is unclear whether Lagrange took 'positif' to mean this or rather
 'greater than zero' or 'positive', in current English. Though this is a crucial detail if
 the function fix) is conceived as an algebraic quantity rather than as the expression

 of a curve, Lagrange was apparently uninterested in it. Because he sought generality,

 one could argue. But generality could hardly be a reason for licensing conflating the
 conditions a > 0 and a > 0, when an argument or result turns on their distinction.
 Hence, we find it hard to account for Lagrange's attitude. We shall therefore recon-

 struct his arguments and results by interpreting them as strongly and charitably as
 possible.

 Lagrange's proof can be divided into two parts (a reconstruction of this proof is

 provided by Grabiner 1990, pp. 219-221).

 The first part is different in the two editions of the Théorie .

 In the first edition, he relied on the theorem of the sufficiently small increment to

 state that £ can be taken such that the term £/ '0 c) in the power-series expansion of

 / (x + $) be greater (in absolute value) than X^=2 ^ • Next, he took advantage
 of this possibility to conclude that, if fix) is "positif" £ can be taken small enough,
 while remaining "positif ? for f(x + §) - f(x) = 2*1 1 to t0°-
 In the second edition, he relied on the equality fix + £) = fix) 4- ÇP'(x, Ç)
 and remarked that, insofar as P'(x, 0) = p'(x) = fix), it follows that, if /'(*)
 is "positif " then, "from Ç = 0 up to a certain value of Ç, which one could take as
 small as one wishes [depuis £ = 0 jusqu'à une certaine valeur de Ç, qu'on pourra
 prendre aussi petite qu ' on voudra ]," P' (x, Ç) has to be " positif " too. He then used this
 to conclude that, if fix) is " positif " £ can be taken small enough, while remaining

 " positif " for f(x + £) - fix) to be " positif " too.

 Let us consider these two arguments separately, by supposing - to begin with - that

 /'(*)> 0.

 For the former argument to hold, it is enough to take the theorem of the sufficiently

 small increment to be equivalent to Theorem 8. If fix) > 0, it is indeed enough to

 apply this last theorem for h = 1, together with Theorem 4, to conclude that there is

 a positive quantity 8 such that

 o < f < S =► J 1 V , > 0, (84)

 ^2, J f(kUx) 1 ,

 k='

 from which

 0 < g < S => f(x +|) - f(x) > 0 (85)

 follows, if £21 1 f{k)k'X) Hk is replaced with fix + f ) - fix).

 For the latter argument to hold, it is necessary that the function P' ix , Ç ) possess the

 same property that Lagrange assigned to all the functions l=Phix,Ç) ih = 1, 2, . . .) in
 his proof of the theorem of the sufficiently small increment. If f'ix) = P'ix,Q) >0,
 it follows that P'ix,í=) = fix + $) - fix) > 0 in a right neighborhood of Ç = 0, and

 there is thus a positive quantity S such that the implication (85) holds. The assumption

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 74 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 that Pi (jt, 0) = f'{x) is not trivial, however. Either it is licensed by taking the first

 derivative of a function /(j t) to coincide by definition with j ? which
 is incompatible with Lagrange's theory. Or it depends on the assumption that f(x + Ç)
 has an expansion whose two first terms are f(x) and po(x)i But if this is assumed,

 Lagrange's latter argument - which is, at first glance, independent of the assumption

 that f(x + £) has a power-series expansion - reduces to a merely linguistic variant of
 the former.

 The two arguments also resemble each other if it supposed that ff(x) = 0. Nei-

 ther of them can be used to prove implication (85), or even the weaker implication
 0 < Ç < S =>► f(x + £) - f(x) > 0. This means that either Lagrange excluded the
 case f'(x) = 0 from the range of his lemma - that is, he took the adjective 'positif'
 applied to both f'(x) and f(x + $) - f(x) to mean 'greater than zero' - or he sup-
 posed that / f{x) = 0 only if f(x) reduces to a constant (so that f(x +£ ) - f(x) = 0),
 i.e., he excluded the values of x for which f'(x) = 0, for any function that does not
 reduce to a constant.

 These are not the only difficulties of Lagrange's proofs of the lemma of the Théorie .

 A much more relevant one concerns the second part of these proofs, which is the same

 in the two editions of the Théorie. To see this difficulty some preliminary remarks are

 necessary.

 In both foregoing arguments providing the first part of Lagrange's proof, as well as

 in Lagrange's proof of the theorem of the sufficiently small increment, the functions
 £ Ph(x, £) (h = 1, 2, . . .) are considered as functions of the variable £ alone. The

 variable x is simply supposed to be such that the value Ç = 0 is not a singular value
 of these functions and the function f(x + §) has a power- series expansion. Lagrange
 merely supposed that for any function g(£) defined in § = 0 for which this point is
 not singular, there is a neighborhood of this same point where |g(§) - g(0) | is smaller

 than any given positive quantity e. There is thus no room for any ambiguity concern-
 ing the uniformity of this property. Indeed, if the variable x is not considered, this
 neighborhood can only depend on e .

 When the functions ÇPhQ c, £) are instead considered as functions of two variables

 x and §, the situation changes. Since it is one thing to assert that:

 - [Con.l] A function g(x, £) which is defined for a certain value Ç = a whenever x

 belongs to a certain interval Ix , is such that, for any given positive quantity s and

 for any x in Ix, there is a positive quantity <5 such that, if |£ - a' < 8, then g(jt, £)
 is defined and |^(x, Ç) - g(jc, a)' < s.

 And quite another to assert that:

 - [Con.2] A function g(x, $) which is defined for a certain value $= a whenever
 x belongs to a certain interval Ix, is such that, for any given positive quantity £,

 there is a positive quantity 8 such that, for any x in Ix, if |£ - a' < 8, then g(; t, £)
 is defined and |g(jt, Ç) - g(x , a)' < e.

 In the latter case, the property possessed by g(jt, £) is uniform, since 8 = <$(£); in the
 former case, it is not, since 8 = 8(x, £).

 Suppose now that the functions $ Ph (x, £) be understood, both in Lagrange's proof

 of the theorem of the sufficiently small increment and in the two foregoing arguments,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 175

 as functions of the two variables of x and £ . Nothing would insure that these functions

 enjoy the property [Con.2]. The property that one would be licensed to ascribe to
 them would rather be [Con.l]. In this way, one would obtain linguistic variants of

 Lagrange's proof and arguments, suitable for proving theorem 8 and implication (85)
 respectively, under the assumption that 8 depends on x (and that f'(x) > 0).

 But for the second part of Lagrange's proofs of the lemma of the Théorie to be

 sound, the implication (85) has to enter into it under the assumption that 8 be indepen-
 dent of x. And this assumption would be permitted only if it were possible to assign

 to the functions ÇP/î(jc, Ç) the property [Con.2].

 Look at the details. Lagrange took £ to be equal to . If b > a, for any positive

 quantity 8 there is a non-negative integer n such that <8. By relying on the impli-

 cation (85), he concluded then that if all the derivatives / ' (a + k (fc = 0, 1 ,...,«)

 are "positif? also the differences

 /(« + (*+!> b-^j - f (a + (86)

 and their sum

 ± [/(«+<* + » - / (« + *^)] = m - m m

 are " positif !" Next, he deduced from this that if / ' (x) is " positive " whenever x takes
 all possible values "from x = a up to x = b [depuis x = a jusqu'à x = b'' the
 difference f(b) - f(a) is " positif' too.

 This argument is clearly based on the assumption that the functions %Ph(x,i-) have

 property [Con.2], which is an unproved and hardly acceptable assumption of uni-
 formity. This makes this argument, and then Lagrange's proof of the lemma of the
 Théorie flawed.

 It is implausible to argue that Lagrange saw the problem and deliberately made this

 strong assumption. It is more likely that he could not tell the properties [Con.l] and
 [Con.2] apart.

 Having looked at this crucial difficulty of Lagrange's proof, let us now try to elu-

 cidate the exact content of the lemma.

 Supposing that x take all the possible values "from x = a up to x = &," it seems that
 Lagrange referred unambiguously to the closed interval [a, b'. Lagrange's argument
 requires, however, neither that f'(b)> 0 nor that f'(b) > 0. One could thus concede
 that the antecedent of the lemma reduces to the condition that f'{x) is defined and is

 " positif " in [a, b ), provided of course that f(x) is defined for x - b.

 But how is 'positif' to be understood here? If we took this to mean 'greater than
 zero,' or we took Lagrange to assume that condition f'{x) = 0 may hold only if
 f(x) reduces to a constant, his proof would pose no other problems. However, as we
 shall see later, in proving the remainder theorem in the Théorie , Lagrange applied his
 lemma under the condition that f'(x) > 0 and f(x) is not constant. Is there a way
 to understand this lemma in such a way that it could be applied under this condition?

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 As a matter of fact, there is one, but it depends on assumptions that are far from trivial.
 Let us consider it.

 1 76 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 It is clear that if f'(a) # 0, and the interval [< a , b ) contains only a finite number

 of isolated values of x for which f'(x) = 0, it is always possible to chose n so that
 these values do not include anyone of the values a + ( k = 0, l,...,n).105 In this
 case, equality (85) applies and - apart for the unjustified assumption of uniformity -
 Lagrange's argument holds.

 The requirement that f'{a) ^ 0 is too restrictive, however, since, in proving the
 remainder theorem in the Théorie , Lagrange applied his lemma to two functions whose

 derivatives vanish for the right bound of the relevant interval. To justify Lagrange's
 proof, it would thus be necessary to eliminate this requirement from the previous
 statement. Fortunately, this can be done. The reason is the following.

 Assume that f'(a) = 0 and that the interval [a, b) contains only a finite number of
 isolated values of x for which ff(x ) = 0. For any positive value <5, it is then possible
 to take a value a of x such that 0 < a- ä < 8 and f 'a) 0. Now Lagrange clearly
 supposed that if f'(x) is defined for any x in [a, b), then f(x) is defined there as
 well, and is thus such that, for any positive quantity £, there is a positive quantity 8
 such that 'f(a) - f(ä)' < s if 'a - ä' <8. From this it follows that for any positive
 quantity s it is possible to take a value à of x such that the difference f(b) - f(a)
 differs from the difference f(b) - f(a ) for a quantity that is smaller than s. This is
 enough to eliminate the condition f'(a) ^ 0, and to conclude that, if the interval
 [< a , b) contains only a finite number of isolated values of x for which f'x) = 0, the
 equality (85) applies even if f'(a) = 0.

 All these considerations bring us to suggest the following reformulation of the

 lemma of the Théorie :106

 Lemma 3 If f(x) is not constant and its first derivative ff(x) is defined and is non-
 negative for any x in an interval [a, b) (a < b ) that does not contain infinitely many

 values of x for which ff(x) vanishes , and is such that f(x) is defined for x = b , then
 the difference f(b) - f(a) is non-negative , too.

 5.2.2.2 The lemma of the Leçons The lemma of the Leçons is the following (Lagrange
 1801, p. 66; 1806, p. 86; we quote from the second edition; in the first one, Lagrange
 considers only a right neighborhood of the origin):

 Lemma 4 (Lemma of the Leçons) A function that vanishes when the variable does
 will necessarily have , insofar as the variable increases positively ; some finite values

 having the same sign as those of its derivative function, or the opposite sign , if the

 variable increases negatively ; insofar as the values of the derivative function will con-

 serve the same sign and do not become infinite.

 105 In fact, it suffices that among the isolated values of x belonging to [a, b) for which /'(*) = 0 there
 are not infinitely many such that rational.

 106 Ovaert ( 1 976, pp. 1 87-1 88), and Dugac (2003, p. 74) also take / r(jc) and f(b) - f(a) to be non-neg-
 ative, but Ovaert takes the interval from a to b to be closed.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 177

 Une fonction qui est nulle lorsque la variable est nulle , aura nécessairement,

 pendant que la variable croîtra positivement , des valeurs finies et de même sig-
 ne que celles de sa fonction dérivsée , ou de signe opposé si la variable croît
 négativement , tant que les valeurs de la fonction dérivée conserveront le même

 signe, et ne deviendront pas infinies.

 The statement is vague in this case also. To begin with, the terms 'même signe' and

 'signe opposé' are not clear: for two functions to have the same sign, do they both have

 to be greater or smaller than zero? Or is it enough for them both to be non-negative or

 non-positive? Furthermore, it is not clear on what intervals the variable is supposed to

 be increasing or decreasing, or the function to have the same sign as its first derivative

 or the opposite sign.

 Although these details are crucial if the function is to be viewed as an algebraic

 quantity rather than as the expression of a curve, Lagrange ignored them, just as he
 did in the Théorie for analogous details.107 Here again, we can only confine ourselves

 to a reconstruction of his arguments and results, interpreting them as strongly and
 charitably as possible.

 To prove his lemma (Lagrange 1801, pp. 67-69; 1806, pp. 89-92), 108 Lagrange
 began by remarking that, if the first derivative / f(x) of a function f(x) is not infinite
 for a certain value of jc, then, for this same value of jc, the first two terms of the

 power-series expansion of /(jc + £) are certainly "exact." Hence, he continued, even
 if the whole power-series expansion of /(jc + £) is not defined for this value of x, if

 / '(jc) is not infinite for such a value, /(j c + £) has, for this same value, an expansion

 that begins with /(jc) + / r(jc)Ç, and all whose other terms include powers of £ whose

 exponent is greater that 1 , to the effect that:

 fix + §) = /(jc) + $[/'(*) + V(x, £)], (88)

 where V (jc, f ) is a function of jc and £ such that V(x, 0) = 0.

 These are strange claims within the context of Lagrange's theory. Since, according
 to the basic principles of this theory, f'(x) is not defined for a certain value of x
 if the two first terms of the power- series expansion of /(jc -I- $) are not "exact" for
 this value. It follows that, according to these principles, claiming that f'{x) is not

 1 07 This did not prevent Lagrange from remarking (Lagrange 1 80 1 , pp. 69-70; 1 806, pp. 92-93) that within
 the differential calculus a similar but incorrect statement can be proved. He argued that, according to this

 calculus, if is always " positif " in an appropriate interval, f g^djc should be too, since this is defined

 z .

 0

 as the sum of the ratios Then he remarked that this is contradicted by the function y = a^-x) , s*nce

 ^ js always "positf" whereas f g^djc = a(Qz_z) becomes " négatif ' when z is greater than a.

 This is a strange claim, however: if z > a, according to the principles of the differential calculus correctly

 z

 understood, f d* ^ is not defined, so that the example of the function y = , * ^ contradicts neither

 ¡J (a- xy a{<u x>

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the previous statement nor these principles.

 108 A reconstruction of Lagrange's proof is given in Grabiner ( 1 98 1 a), pp. 122-126, and (1990), pp. 181-

 186. A simplified version of it - with the same shortcomings - is offered by Lacroix (1810-1819), vol. I,
 p. 382.

 178 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 infinite for a certain value of x is the same as claiming that the first two terms of the
 power-series expansion of f(x + Ç) are "exact" for this value. For the former claim

 not to implicitly contain the latter, the function / '(jc) has to be defined independently
 of the first two terms of the power-series expansion of f(x + £), for instance as the

 result of an appropriate algorithm to be applied to /(jc), or as the limit (or the value)

 of the ratio /(•*+£)-/(*) when £ tends (or is equal) to 0. Hence, the way as Lagrange

 expressed himself here seems to implicitly contradict the principles of his theory, and

 tacitly imply that / '(jc) is not defined according to them.

 This could be viewed as no more than a slip of the pen. But then the starting point of

 Lagrange's proof cannot be taken to be the supposition that the first derivative f'(x)

 of a function f(x) is not infinite (as it appears at first glance), but rather the assumption
 that equality (88) holds.

 Be that as it may, Lagrange granted this equality, then applied to the function V (x , § )

 a non-geometrical version of the argument he applied to the functions y = ÇPh(j t, Ç)

 (h = 1, 2, . . .) in his proof of the theorem of the sufficiently small increment: if £

 increases imperceptibly in absolute value starting from 0, the absolute value of V(x, £)

 will increase just as imperceptibly from V(x, 0) =0, so that, for any positive quantity
 e, there is a positive quantity 8 such that109

 'Ç'<8=ï'V(x1i;)'<s. (89)

 Everything said in relation to this last argument holds here too. Lagrange was

 merely describing the behavior of the function V(x, §), understood as a function of

 the single variable £, in the neighborhood of the origin (where it is supposed to be
 defined). Still, if this functions is taken to be a function of x and f, this description

 amounts to taking for granted that it has the property [Con.l], but not necessarily the
 property [Con.2].

 Aside from this, it is far from clear whether Lagrange identified the function V (x , £ )
 with a generalized power series or with the ratio (x' As px(x) =
 f f(x), from the comparison of the equality (88) with the second of the equalities (79),

 one gets that V(x, £) = i;P2(x, §). However, whereas in deriving these last equali-
 ties, Lagrange had apparently assumed that the function f(x + Ç) has a power-series

 expansion and identified the function P2(x,t-) with the power series X)u=o Pk+iW

 109 On this argument, see Grabiner ( 1 974), p. 363. Here is what Lagrange wrote:

 [. . .] since V vanishes when £ does, it is clear that, letting £ insensibly increase gradually after zero,

 the value of V will also insensibly increase after zero, either positively or negatively, up to a certain
 point, after which it will be able to decrease. Hence, one will always be able to assign to £ such a

 value that the corresponding value of V, be, independently of the sign, smaller than a given quantity,
 and that the values of V be smaller [than this quantity] also for the values of £ smaller than this
 value.

 [...] puisque V devient nul lorsque f devient nul, il est clair qu'en faisant croître £ par degrés insensibles depuis
 zéro, la valeur de V croîtra aussi insensiblement depuis zéro, soit en plus ou en moins, jusqu'à un certain point,
 après quoi elle pourra diminuer; que par conséquent on pourra toujours donner à £ une valeur telle que la valeur
 correspondante de V, abstraction faire du signe, soit moindre qu'une quantité donnée, et que par les valeurs
 moindres de £ la valeur de V soit aussi moindre.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 67; 1806, p. 90.)

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 179

 %k - which is supposed to be convergent around £ = 0 - , the language he used in

 the argument we are now considering is elusive enough to suggest that he wanted to
 suppose a priori neither that x is such that fix + Ç) has a power-series expansion,
 nor that its generalized power-series expansion fix) + %f'(x) + X^=2 Pkix)%ak
 converges to this function around £ = 0 and V(x, Ç) = Pkix)%ak. But if this is
 not assumed, nothing allows us to conclude that V(jc, 0) = 0.

 The only way to avoid a petitio principii thus is by openly defining the deriva-

 tive fix) of a function fix) through the equality (88), provided that V(x , 0) = 0.

 According to such a definition, the first derivative of fix) would be the function g(x)
 which, around £ = 0, satisfies the condition

 fix + Ç) = fix) + gix)i; + V(x, §)*, (90)

 where V(jc, 0) = 0.

 gix) such that, around Ç = 0:110

 This resembles to the modern definition of the derivative of fix) as the function

 fix + f ) - fix) = $gix) + $Vix, $) [where lim V(x, $) = 0 ]. (91)

 But, even if many of Lagrange's arguments could be rephrased (and perhaps clarified)

 by adopting such a definition, ascribing it to him does not seem appropriate (Grabiner

 1981a, pp. 1 16 and 120; 1990, pp. 157 and 182). It thus seems that Lagrange - despite

 his proof of the power-series expansion theorem - tried to free his proof of the lemma

 of the Leçons from the assumption that any function fix + §) has, for any x for which
 fix) is not infinite, a generalized power-series expansion that converges to such a
 function around £ = 0. But he failed .

 However, the functions fix) and V(jc, Ç) are defined and conceived, after having

 stated the equality (88) and having argued that, for any positive quantity £, there is
 a positive value 8 for which the implication (89) holds, Lagrange's proof proceeds
 according to an argument that closely resembles the argument used in proving the
 lemma of the Théorie. It can be reconstructed as follows.

 From these premises, Lagrange inferred that for any positive quantity s, there is a

 positive quantity 8 such that:

 h

 f(x) = y''<Y-(x-xo)k'' L J + Fh(x)(x-xo)k [where lim Fh(x) = 0 ].

 L k' J *->-*0

 k= 0

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 i + + if Ç>0
 i IÇI- '¡;Ufix) + e]< f(x + í;)-f(x) <!;[f'ix)-s] if f<0. 1 ;

 1 10 A generalization of this definition to any order h leads, in fact, to a definition resembling that of the
 Peano derivatives (Peano 1891): a real function f(x) is h times Peano differentiate at x = *o if there are
 h + 1 real numbers (k = 0, 1 , . . . , h) such that, in an appropriate neighborhood of xq,

 The real numbers a ¿ are then the Peano derivatives of order h at x = xq.

 He then argued that, as these implications depend on / '(jc) not being infinite, one can
 replace x with x + kÇ (k = 1, 2, . . . , n - 1), so that, if n is such that the derivatives
 f'(x+k%){k = 0,1, - 1 ) are not infinite, for any positive quantity s , there is a
 positive value S such that, if |£| < <5, all the inequalities

 1 80 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 $[/'(*+*$)-*] < /(*+(*+l) £)-/(*+*£) < $[/ '(*+*£)+«] if $ >0
 S[f'(x+kt;)+e] < /(jc+(*+1)$)-/C*+*Ç) < if § < 0

 (93)

 (where the derivatives / f(x + &§) are of course taken with respect to jc) holds at the

 same time. At this point, Lagrange introduced the hypothesis that all the derivatives

 / r(x + k%) "have the same sign"1 1 1 and added up the inequalities, so as to get

 § ^1 -/'(* + *£)] - n$E < f(x + n%) - f(x)

 <*£[/'(* +*$)] + *£* if Ç > 0

 n - 1

 k= 0

 n- 1

 k=0

 n- 1

 k=0

 n - 1

 k- o

 £^[/ '(* + *£)] + "£* < /(* + "£) ~ /(•*)

 < + *£)] -/iÇfi if §<0. (94)

 Then, he took it for granted that s can be taken smaller than J - k=0 [f n
 concluded that there is a positive value 8 such that:

 y ft k=0 ~ 1 [f ' (x+ki-)]'

 0 < f(x + n%) - f(x) < 2%nF if £ > 0 and ff(x+ki;)>0

 |t|<(S=v 151 -2§«F < /(* + n%) - f(x) < 0 if Ç > 0 and f'x + *£)< 0
 |t|<(S=v 151 - < /(jc+/iÇ) - /(jc) <0 if f < 0 and /'(*+*£) > 0
 0 < /(* +nÇ) - /(*) < -2%nF if f < 0 and /'(je + &§) < 0,

 (95)

 where F = max I / '(x + k%) I . Finally, he remarked that, as n increases when £

 k=0,...,n-'

 diminishes, the product in the inequalities (95) can be identified with any variable
 z, so that the difference f(x + n%) - f(x) can be regarded as a function of z that
 vanishes for z = 0 and whose first derivative is the same as the first derivative of

 f(x + «£) (since [f(x + z) - f(x)]'z = f¿(x + z) = f¿(x + z) = fj(x + n$)).

 The argument is flawed. In deriving the implications (92), Lagrange seems to have
 treated the value of x as fixed. If it were, <5 would depend only on e. But the same

 1 1 1 Lagrange specified that this means these derivatives are all " positives " or all " negatives

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 in absolute value, than the positive quantity 8 , which in turn depends on the choice
 of s. This was first pointed out by Bolzano (1817, pp. 19-20), who saw a gap in La-

 grange's proof of the lemma of the Leçons that could only be filled using the theorem
 of intermediate values (Sebestik 1964, pp. 142-143). In fact, this theorem was implic-

 itly used by Lagrange in his proof of the remainder theorem, both in the Théorie and

 in the Leçons (see Sects. 5.2.3.1, 5.2.3.2). But he did not use it to prove his lemma.

 Let us now return to the conclusion of Lagrange's argument. Let (p{z) be the dif-

 ference f(x -h nÇ ) - f(x) regarded as a function of z for «Ç = z. Supposing that
 f'(x + nÇ) = (p'{z ) is not infinite and has "the same sign" as f'(x + k%) (k =
 0, 1, . . . , n - 1), and that z varies on any open interval like (0, t) or (- i, 0), the

 consequent of the implication (95) reduces to

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 8 1

 argument applies for any fixed value of x. Hence, if a (finite) number n of values of x

 were fixed in advance (whatever n may be), for any positive quantity s, there would
 be a positive quantity 8 such that all the implications like (92) relative to these values

 of x would hold at the same time, if |£ | < 8. But in Lagrange's argument, the n values

 of x are not fixed in advance but depend on the increment £, which is in turn supposed
 to be such that |Ç| < 8. So the argument holds only if the value 8 occurring in the
 implications (92) is independent of jc, that is, if the function V(x, Ç) has the property

 [Con.2] (rather than merely the property [Con.l]).

 Also in this case, Lagrange's argument is therefore actually subject to a uniformity

 assumption. Moreover, this assumption closely resembles the ones that figure in the

 second part of Lagrange's proofs of the lemma of the Théorie. 112

 This same assumption of uniformity is also needed to justify the identification of the
 product^ with any variable z and the interpretation of the difference f(x+ni=)-f(x)
 as a function of z.

 But it is still not enough to justify Lagrange's appeal to the condition s <

 |SP¿[/'C*+**)]| c |z¡P¿[/'<*+**)]| 1 ^ J „ u. u . ^ u

 0 < <p(z ) < 2 zO if z > 0 and (p'z) > 0
 -2 z<ï> < cp(z ) <0 if z > 0 and (p'(z ) < 0
 2 z<& < cp(z ) <0 if z < 0 and <pf(z) > 0
 0 < (p(z) < -2 zO if z < 0 and (p'z) < 0,

 where z is supposed to vary on any interval Iz like (0, t] or [-t, 0), the function
 (p'{z) is supposed not to become infinite in the corresponding open intervals like (0, t)
 or (- i,0), and <3> = max |<p'(z)| (since max |<p'(z)| > max l/'Cx: + &£)| >
 zelz,z= 0 zelz k=',...,n

 I f'(x + kÇ)' , and |/'C*)| = |<p'(0)|).

 ratio s one aiso has to maintain that his argument is actually subject to the condition

 that any function is uniformly differentiable in an appropriate interval (Ovaert 1976, p. 190).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 12 Note that if the function V(x, Ç) is identified with the ratio /(■*+?) /W (•*) statement that

 for any positive e the implication (89) holds for a certain positive 8 reduces to the statement that the function

 / (jc) is differentiable. It follows that if one maintains that Lagrange identified the function V(x, £) with the

 1 82 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 In fact, Lagrange explicitly wrote neither the inequalities included in condition (96),

 nor any of the inequalities entering into our reformulation of his proof. He merely
 expressed these inequalities discursively. Instead of explicitly writing the inequal-
 ities included in the implication (95), he claimed, for example, that "the quantity
 f(x + n%) - f(x ) will be [...] included between zero and 2«£P," where P corre-
 sponds, in our notation, to ±F. He therefore did not provide the exact meaning of the

 expression 'same sign', explicitly at any rate.

 It is clear that Lagrange's argument does not require that none the derivatives

 f'(x -I- k%) (k = 0, 1, . . . , n - 1) vanish, but only that their sum does not vanish.
 It follows that, according to this argument, the inequalities included in conditions
 (96) hold even if the derivative cpf(z) is non-negative or non-positive in the inter-
 val Iz, provided it vanishes nowhere on the interval. Moreover, if all the derivatives
 / '(x + k%) (k = 0, 1 , . . . , n - 1) vanished, for any choice of £ such that 0 < |Ç | < á,
 the function f(x) would reduce to a constant. But in this case all the differences
 f(x + (k + 1) £) - f(x + k%) ( k = 0, 1, . . . , n - 1) would then vanish, and the
 function (p(z) = f(x + n%) - f(x) would vanish too for any z on [0, t ] or [- i, 0].
 Hence if (p'(z) vanished everywhere on [0, t) or (-t, 0], then cp(z) would vanish on
 [0, t ] or [- t, 0].

 As <p(0) = 0 by hypothesis, this suggests the following reformulation of Lagrange's

 lemma:

 Lemma 5 Suppose that (p(z) is any function of z such that cp( 0) = 0 and t is a
 positive value of z: if 0 < <p'(z) < oo on the interval [0, t ), then 0 < (p(z ) < oo on
 [0, t]; if -oo < <pf(z) < 0 on the interval [0, t), then - oo < (p(z ) < 0 on [0, t];
 if 0 < (p'{z) < oo on the interval (- f, 0], then - oo < (p(z) < 0 on [- i, 0]; if
 - oo < (p'z) < 0 on the interval (- i, 0], then 0 < <p(z) < oo on [- f, 0].

 5.2.3 From the lemmas to the remainder theorem

 Though Lagrange's proofs of his lemmas are actually flawed, he thought otherwise.

 He was probably also convinced that they hold for the limit-points of the intervals in

 question. Let us now see how they work in his proofs of the remainder theorem.

 5.2.3.1 The proof of the Théorie Let us begin with the proof offered in the Théorie
 (Lagrange 1797, arts. 45-53; 1813, arts. 1.33- 1.40; a reconstruction of Lagrange's
 proof is offered in Alvarez- Jimenez 1997, pp. 121-125).

 From the power-series expansion theorem and Theorem 4, according to the suc-
 cessive substitutions x -+ x - % and £ xz, where z is "any arbitrary quantity"
 (of course a variable one), Lagrange first obtained (Lagrange 1797, art. 45; 1813, art,
 1.33): 113

 00 k k

 k= 0

 1 13 From the equality (97), Lagrange derived en passant the Maclaurin expansion of any function, simply
 by supposing that z = 1 .

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 83

 Then (Lagrange 1797, art. 47; 1813, art. 1.35), 114 by applying to this expansion the

 same argument that leads to the equalities (79), he concluded that:

 f{x ) = y. ^-f(k'x-xz) + xh+] Rh+](x,z) (h = 0,1,...), (98)

 h p k k "I

 k= o L ' -I

 where /?¿+i (jc, z) = zh~*~] Ph+'(x- xz, xz) is a function ofx and z that vanishes for z =

 0 (and that Lagrange apparently identified with the series XÍU/i+i * k' Z f^(x ~
 xz)).

 As this equality follows from the power-series expansion theorem and the Theo-

 rem 4 for appropriate substitutions, the derivatives involved can be taken to be deriv-

 atives with respect to x - xz. To understand Lagrange's argument it is convenient to

 make it explicit (by using the same notational trick used in Sects. 3.3 and 4).

 By deriving both members of the equalities (98) with respect to z, and observing

 that

 - J tz)] 'z = [/<*+»*-«( JC - Jtz)] (99)

 (k = 0, 1, . . .), Lagrange obtained

 0_ o -
 0_ o -

 h f(k)x-xz(x

 +xh+] [Rh+](x,z)]'z (h = 0,1,.'..),

 and by simplification:1 15

 [Rh+'(x,z)]'z = ^f(h+l)x~"(x - xz) (h = 0,1,...). (101)

 Since Rh+' (jc, 0) = 0, it follows that the remainders Rh+ 1 (x, z) are the primitives

 of /<Ä+1)*-*z(jt - xz)jt with respect to z that vanish when z does.116

 To prove the remainder theorem, Lagrange had then to estimate these primitives.
 This is what the lemma of the Théorie is for (Lagrange 1797, arts. 49-53; 1813, art,
 1.39-40).

 1 14 We use the symbols '/?/,+ 1 (jc, £)' (h = 0, 1 , . . .) to replace Lagrange's symbols ' Q' &c.

 1 15 Lagrange detailed his argument leading from the equalities (98) to the equalities (101) only for h = 0.

 1,0 By assuming that jc - jc z = a this allows rewriting the equality (98) as

 /<*) = ¿ [,<*>(«)] + lj(x _,)* [/<*+')(0] A.

 k= 0 a

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange left this implicit, however, probably to avoid the use of a definite integral.

 1 84 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Suppose that <p(z) is any function of z whose first derivative has the form zh(/)(z),

 where h is a non-negative integer and </)(z) is any other function of z. Suppose also
 that a and b (a < b) are two values of z such that <¡>{z) is defined in [ a , b] and
 M = max 0(z) and N = min 0(z).117 Since, for z € [a, b], both the functions

 ze[a,b ] ze[a,b]

 zh [M - 0(z)] and zh [(¡>{z) - N] are non-negative, from Lemma 3 it follows that, if

 the interval [a, b] does not contain an infinity of values of z for which zh [M - <t>(z)] =

 zh [(¡>{z) - N] = 0, the differences between the primitives of these functions evaluated
 for z = b and z = a are non-negative as well:118

 'bh+l - ah+] 1 + <p(a) - <p(b) > 0

 h + 1 L J

 T--T 'ah+] - + <p(b) - <p(a) > 0; (102)
 h- h 1 L J

 <p'(z) = - /t(/,^"U - xz) and 4>(z) = - f^zX)ix ~ xz). (104)

 As Rh+' (x, 0) = (p( 0) = 0, it suffices then to let a = 0 and b = 1 to infer, from the
 inequalities (103):

 that is,

 <p(b)< Y^[bh+l -ah+l]+<p(a) ; <p(b) > <p(a) + [bh+{ - ah+]] .

 Let us now suppose that (p(z ) = Rh+ 1 (x, z). From (101) it follows that:

 Zh 1

 (103)

 (105)

 1 17 Once again, Lagrange's language is rather vague concerning the bounds of the interval he was consid-

 ering:

 Let M be the greatest and N the smaller value of Z [i.e., (f>(z), in our notation] for any value of z
 included between the quantities a et b.

 Soit M la plus grande, et N la plus petite valeur de Z pour toutes les valeurs de z comprises entre les quantities
 a et b.

 (Lagrange 1797, and art. 49; 1813, art. 1.39)

 Still, the nature of his argument makes now it clear that the interval is closed. As remarked by Grabiner
 (1990, p. 155), Lagrange was here supposing that a function has a maximum and a minimum in a closed
 interval where it is defined, which, in modern terms, amounts to the intermediate value theorem. But this

 was not a problem for him, since a later step in the proof (see Sect. 5.2.3.2) relies quite explicitly on the
 intermediate value property.

 Indeed Lagrange took z [M - (f>(z)] and z [(¡>{z) - N ] to be "positif* and used '>' where we use
 '>'. But it is clear, from the definition of M and N, that M - <¡>(z) = 0 and [<¡>(z) - N] = 0 for certain

 values of z in the relevant interval. Thus, we cannot see how to avoid taking Lagrange's adjective 'positif'
 as meaning 'non-negative' here, and his symbol '>' as denoting the relation >.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 85

 where

 Nh = min /(/i+1)(jc - xz) = min f^h+x't)

 Z€[ 0,'] x~xz /g[0,.X]

 Mh = max f^'x x xz - xz) = max/(,1+l)(0- (106)

 ze[0,l] x xz te[0,x]

 At this point Lagrange took it for granted that if Rh+ 1 (jc, 1) lies between two val-
 ues taken by a function in [0, jc] - as insured by the implication (105) - the
 equality

 p i „ _ /(ft+1)(")
 h+ 1 ( h + iy.

 holds for an appropriate u in [0, x]. This is just the theorem of intermediate values,

 which he thus took for granted.

 If so, it suffices to assume that z = 1 in the equality (98) to obtain:

 h Y Yk 1 rh+]

 '<*> = 2,-0 + ïiTw7""1""0" = (107)

 for an appropriate u in [0, x]. The equality (62), and thus, the remainder theorem, are

 finally obtained by generalization, that is, by interpreting the x in f(x) as 0 + jc, then

 replacing 0 with x and x with

 Once Lemma 3 is accepted, much of Lagrange's proof reduces to a formal proce-
 dure. To carry out the proof, Lagrange nonetheless had to assume that the variable
 z occurring in the general equality (98) takes the particular value z = 1, and thus,
 that the function Rh+' (jc, z) is defined for this particular value of z. This reduces the

 generality of such an equality. In modern terms, this is the same as transforming the

 Taylor expansion of the function f(x) centered on the indeterminate difference x -xz

 into the Maclaurin expansion of the same function. Strictly speaking, the functions for

 which this last expansion is not defined should thus be excluded from the remainder

 theorem, given the way it is proved in the Théorie.

 5.2.3.2 The proof from the Leçons This was possibly one of the reasons for which

 Lagrange replaced, in the Leçons , the foregoing proof with a different one. The new
 proof goes as follows (Lagrange 1801, lecture IX; 1806, lecture IX).

 For any function f(x + Ç) in which the value of jc is supposed to be fixed, let ph+ 1

 and &h+' (h = 0, 1, 2, . . .) be the values of jc + § such that

 /<A+1Wl)= max /(Ä+,)(x + $)
 ïe[0,>j]

 and

 /(/,+1)(orA+,)= min /(A+1) (* + §), (108)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 86 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 where r¡ is any given positive quantity.119 It follows that when £ belongs to [0, rj],
 the differences f(h+lHph+') - +§) and + Ç) - f (h+l>} (<Jh+')
 are both non-negative.120 Hence, according to lemma 5, if f^x'x + £) becomes
 infinite for no value of Ç in [0, rj] (so that / (p/*+i ) and / (/l+1) (or/j+i ) are finite,

 and the differences / 1 ^ (P/i+ 1 ) ~~ / 1 ^ C* + £ ) and / 1 > (x + § ) - / 1 > (cr^_|_ i )

 become infinite for no value of £ in [0, rç]), the primitives of these differences (with

 respect to £) are both non-negative when £ belongs to [0, rj].

 By evaluating the constants that enter into these primitives for these same primitives

 to be null for Ç = 0, one obtains

 Sf> ^h+y > (pA+i ) + / 1 {h) (jc) - f {h) {x + 1) > 0

 /w(* +*) -|/(A+IVa) - /(A)(Jf) > 0. (109)

 Insofar as / (jc + £) becomes infinite for no value of § in [0, rç], a further appli-

 cation of lemma 5 leads to

 y/(/,+l)(PA) + HfW(x) + /(A_,)(jc) - /(*-!)(x + |) > 0

 /(*_,)(JC + £) - y/(A+,)(fffc) -|/W(JC) - /(/,_,)W > 0. (110)

 and

 and

 1 19 Lagrange's language is again vague on the bounds of the interval in question. Concerning the case
 h = 0 he wrote:

 First let p and q [i.e., o' and p' in our notation] be the values of jc + £ that make the derivative
 function / '(jc + £) is the smallest and the greatest, regarding jc as given, and letting £ vary from
 zero up to whatever given value of £.

 Soient d'abord p et q [that is, aj and p' in our notation] les valeurs de jc + £ qui rendent la function dérivée
 / '(jc + $) la plus petite et la plus grande, en regardand jc comme donné , et faisant varier $ depuis zéro jusqu'à
 une valeur quelconque donnée de f .

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 70; 1806, pp. 93-94.)

 Here again the argument seems to make it clear that the interval is closed. As jc is supposed to be fixed,
 but indeterminate, the existence of a value like r) such that the function /^( jc + £) is defined when £

 belongs to [0, rj] is not a problem for Lagrange. It follows that he was here supposing, as in his proof of the
 Théorie (see footnote 1 1 7), that a function has a maximum and a minimum in a closed interval where it is

 defined. But even here this poses no problem, since a subsequent step of his proof relies quite explicitly on

 the assumption of the intermediate value property.

 1 zu Lagrange also took the differences f(+)(Ph+')-f( )(x+l;) and / ^ + ' (x +£ ) - / + ' (oft + 1 )
 to be " positives " and wrote '>' where we write '>'. Still, from the definition of Ph+' and cr/j+i it follows
 that these differences vanish for certain values of £ in [0, r¡]. Here again it seems one has to take 'positif'
 to mean 'non-negative' and '>' to denote the relation >.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 87

 It is thus enough to apply lemma 5 h + 1 times to obtain

 th+ 1 /* f(k)(Y' th+ 1

 ömji/"'+'V',+1) th+ 1 + ¿ /* -k!~(k f(k)(Y' - n" + f: ' -

 whenever the derivatives / (jc +£) do not become infinite for £ in [0, rj]. A similar

 argument works for Ç in [- rç, 0], and leads to a similar result:

 hh+ 1 J* th+'
 (h»/"+","+'>+ZL*rtl hh+ 1 J* - f(x+í) - (hv/' th+'

 + ±^, (HI)

 k= 0

 <•»>

 k= 0

 where p¿+ i and a/j+i are the values of jc + Ç such that

 /(A+1)(P/n-i)= max /(/!+1)(*+£) and /(A+1)(or,)= min /(A+1) (*+£),

 ?€[-»;, 0] ?€[-Ï),0]

 (113)

 whenever the derivatives / ('i+ 1 ' (.x + £ ) do not become infinite when f belongs to
 [-»7,0].

 If the theorem of intermediate values is taken for granted, the inequalities (111)

 and (112) taken together are equivalent to the remainder theorem. However, instead

 of formulating the theorem explicitly in full generality, Lagrange merely pointed out

 that the inequalities (111) and (112) provide the limits of the remainder of the power-

 series expansion of any function /(jc + £) prolonged up to any finite order, gives some
 examples (Lagrange 1801, pp. 74-77; 1806, pp. 99-103), and deduced the equality
 (107), which is now understood as a particular consequence of a more general result

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 78; 1806, p. 105).

 By discussing Lagrange's proof of the lemma of the Leçons , we have observed that
 he trieds - unsuccessfully - to free this proof from the assumption that any function

 /(jc -I- £) has, for any jc for which /(jc) is defined and is not infinite, a generalized
 power-series expansion that converges to such a function around § = 0. This is con-
 firmed by the previous argument. To obtain the inequalities (1 1 1) and (112), Lagrange

 constructed step by step the partial sum XÍUo an^ orc*er starting from
 the derivative /(/î+1) (j c + Ç), considering its maximum and minimum in an appropriate
 interval centered on Ç = 0 and applying the algorithm of the primitives. Supposing

 that this algorithm and the derivatives entering into his construction are given indepen-

 dently of the consideration of any expansion of f(x +Ç), this procedure is completely
 independent of any presupposition of convergence and suggests the modern proof

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 88 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 of the remainder theorem, which is based on the definition of the remainder as an

 appropriate finite difference.

 It was Lagrange himself who suggested the possibility of understanding the remain-

 der in such a way, when he applied the inequalities (111) and (1 12) to the example of
 the function xm :

 Through these limits [those of the reminder of the power-series expansion of
 (x + £)"*], one is preserved from the difficulties that can result from the non-

 convergence of the series, since, as whatever n- th term is to the following in the

 ratio of 1 to m~"+1 | , in order for the series to be convergent, it is necessary that

 the quantity m~"+1 1 be, independently of the sign it has to have, smaller than

 the unity. If | < 1 , it is clear that the series will always become convergent,
 since the last value of m~"+1 is -1.

 Par le moyen de ces limites, on est à couvert des difficultés qui peuvent résulter de la non-

 convergence de la série; car, comme un terme quelconque «ème est au suivant dans le rapport de

 1 à w~"+1 I , pour que la série soit convergente, il faut que la quantité m~"+1 | , abstraction

 faite du signe qu'elle doit avoir, soit moindre que l'unité. Si | < 1 , il est clair que la série finira
 toujours par être convergente, puisque la dernière valeur de est - 1 .

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 75; 1806, p. 100.)

 Though Lagrange did not use the remainder theorem to evaluate the convergence of
 his series (he used d'Alembert's test instead: Alembert 1768, p. 171), it is clear that
 he supposed that the equality

 (X + = 2 (7 ) xm~k^k + Ph+' (*• £)^+1 (l14)

 (where Ph+' (*, £) = (x + j)x~h~x , for an appropriate j in [0, £]) holds even

 when the power-series expansion of this (x + £)m is divergent.

 But if this expansion is not taken to converge to the function (jc H- §)m on an appro-

 priate interval, how could Lagrange have defined the derivative of xm! And, more

 generally, how could he have assumed the algorithms of the primitives and the deriv-

 atives to be given without assuming that there is a power-series converging to any
 function f(x + £) around $ = 0?

 No consistent answer seems to be possible. Lagrange was possibly thinking

 that the step-by-step procedure included in the proof of the remainder theorem of-

 fered in the Leçons manages to obtain, as it were, constructively, the partial sum

 zLk= o k' £• This is what the following passage, occurring at the end of this proof,
 suggests:

 The foregoing analysis successively provides again, as one can see, the terms of

 the expansion of /(* + £). But it is has the advantage of expanding this function
 as far as one wishes, and of providing the limits of the remainder.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 89

 L'analyse précédente redonne, comme l'on voit, successivement les termes du développement
 de f(x + £); mais elle a l'avantage de ne développer cette fonction qu'autant que l'on veut, et
 d'offrir des limites du reste.

 (Lagrange 1801, p. 73; Lagrange 1806, p. 98.)

 However, this advantage can at most be operational, since Lagrange's theory col-

 lapses if the existence of a power-series expansion of any function f(x + Ç) is not pre-

 viously assumed. Though many of the shortcomings of Lagrange's theory are reflected

 in this difficulty, his attempt to free his proof of the remainder theorem from a previous

 supposition of convergence also shows his capacity to see beyond the bounds of this

 theory and suggest a possible alternative.

 This explains why the remainder theorem has been one of the few original results

 contained in the Théorie and the Leçons that have survived the theory, and why this

 has been possible only thanks to a dramatic change in the role of this theorem within

 the system of the calculus.

 6 Conclusions

 In a sense, both the Théorie and the Leçons are more philosophical essays than treatises

 intended to obtain particular mathematical results. They are part of a foundationalist

 agenda. The fact that this agenda was never really accepted by Lagrange's contempo-
 raries contrasts with another fact: that it was the most careful attempt to integrate the

 calculus within the program of 18th-century algebraic analysis. Its failure is then also

 the failure of this ambitious program.

 We hope our account not only contribute to a better understanding of Enlighten-
 ment mathematics, but also shows, on a relevant example, that the problem of the

 foundation of mathematics is by no means peculiar to twenty-century mathematics. It
 has been addressed before in different occasions and in different ways. For Lagrange,

 it was not a problem of the certainty of the ultimate bases of mathematics. It was a

 matter of generality and internal organization; it was essentially a question of purity
 of method.

 Appendix

 The first edition of the Théorie (Lagrange 1797) appeared on Prairial and V (May
 20th to June 18th 1797) at the Imprimerie de la République , while the Leçons were

 first published in 1801 (Lagrange 1801), as the tenth volume of the second edition of
 the Leçons de École Normale de Van III. This was an addition to the lectures actually
 delivered at the École Normale de Van III , since Lagrange's five lectures at this school

 were devoted to more elementary subjects.121

 121 See: Ecole Normale III (D), vol. I, pp. 34-55, lecture of 16th Pluviôse (February 4th, 1795); Ecole
 Normale III (L) vol. III, pp. 227-253, 276-310, 463-489, lectures of 6th Ventôse (February 24th, 1795),
 1st Germinal (March 21th, 1795), and 6th Germinal (March 26th, 1795), respectively; and vol. IV, pp.
 401-420, lecture of 22th Germinal (April 1 1th, 1795). The same lectures are also reprinted with the same
 pagination in Ecole Normale III (NE), vol. I, Débats (lecture of 16th Pluviôse ), vol. Ill, Leçons (lectures
 of 6th Ventôse , and 1st and 6th Germinal ); vol. IV, Leçons (lecture of 22th Germinal ). Lagrange also par-

 ticipated in a debate, with Laplace, on 1 1th Pluviôse (January 30th, 1795), and was present when Laplace

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Table 2 Reformulation of the edifice of the Calculus in its pure part

 Théorie , 1797 Leçons , 1801 Leçons, 1806 Théorie , 1813

 1 90 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Table 1 The structure of Lagrange's treatises

 Théorie , 1797 Leçons , 1801 Leçons , 1806 Théorie , 1813

 (0 1-10 I-VI I-VI 1-2, parti
 16-44 VIII VIII 8-32, parti
 (m) 54-107 VII VII 41-95, parti
 170-184 X-XX X-XXII 61-76, part 2

 (HO 11-15 IX IX 3-7, parti

 45-53 33^0, part 1
 (iv) 108-169 ' ' 1-60, part 2

 Introduction

 185-228 1-47, part 3

 77-87, part 2

 Derivative of a function / VII VII /

 with respect to any
 function of its variable

 Derivative equations 54-57 X X 41-44

 Formulas relative to / X-XI X-XI /

 and transformation

 of functions

 to trigonometric
 functions

 occurring in the
 solution of derivative

 equations

 Arbitrary constants 58-61 XII XII 45^8

 Solution of some 62-70 / / 49-57
 derivative equations 79-84 67-72
 Theory of singular 71-76 XV-XVIII XIV-XVII 58-63

 primitives

 Applications to series and 76-78 / / 64-66

 equations of 3rd degree

 Expansion of any function 97-99 / / 85-87

 of a root of the equation
 2 = x + f(z)

 Function of several 85-96 XIV and XX XIX-XXI 73-84
 variables and partial 100-107 88-95
 derivative equations

 Theory of the Multiplier / XIII XIII /
 Finite difference / XIX XVIII /

 equations

 Calculus of variations

 Footnote 121 continued

 â Springer

 read the program of all the mathematical lectures on first Pluviôse (January 20th, 1795): Ecole Normale III
 (D), vol. I (and Ecole Normale III (NE), vol. I, Débats ), pp. 5-23; Ecole Normale III (L), vol. I (and Ecole
 Normale III (NE), vol. I, Leçons ), pp. 16-21. Lagrange's lectures and his and Laplace's interventions in

 the debate of the 1 1th Pluviôse have been more recently published in Dhombres (1992), pp. 193-265, by
 A. Daham-Dalmédico. The program read by Laplace on the first Pluviôse is also published there, pp. 45-47.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 1 9 1

 Table 3 Geometrical

 applications

 Table 4 Mechanical

 applications

 Théorie , 1797 Théorie , 1813

 Tangents and points 1 08-1 30 1-19, part 2

 of contact of curves

 Maxima and minina 1 3 1-1 33 20-26, part 2
 160-169 51-60, part 2
 Quadrature and 134-136 27-29, part 2

 rectification

 and surfaces

 Curves in space 139-159 32-50, part 2

 Volumes and 1 37-1 38 30-3 1 , part 2
 areas of surfaces 77-87, part 2

 Théorie , 1797 Théorie , 1813

 Speed, acceleration, 185-189 1-6, part 3

 Composition of motions 1 90- 1 94 7-1 0, part 3

 and force

 and forces

 Curvilinear motion and 1 95-200 11-16, part 3

 Motion in a 20 1 -205 1 7-24, part 3

 equation of motion

 resistant medium

 Motion on a surface and 206-210 25-30, part 3

 principle of virtual velocity

 Centre of gravity and 211-218 31-38, part 3

 rotation of surfaces

 Vis Viva and 2 1 9-228 39-47, part 3

 conservation of energy

 Many documents attest that Lagrange taught his theory of analytical functions at
 the École Polytechnique between 1795 and 1799. When the École centrale des trav-
 aux publics - which later became the École polytechnique - was created in 1794,
 Lagrange was made president of the Conseil de V École, but he only taught there from
 Spring 1795 (Dahan 1992, 179-180).

 A note contained in the third volume of the Correspondance sur V École Polytech-

 nique (1814, 1, p. 93) attests that the Théorie and the Leçons include the matter taught
 during the years 1795, 1796 and 1799.

 In introducing his course for the an VII (on 7th Pluviôse an VII : January 26th,

 1799) Lagrange presented it as being devoted to "the theory of functions," claiming
 that his aim was to expound this theory "with more detail than in the printed work"

 (Lagrange 1799, p. 232). This suggests that the Théorie includes the matter taught in
 1795 and 1796, and the Leçons the matter taught in 1799.

 This is confirmed by a note included in certain copies of the first edition of the

 Théorie , bound as the ninth cahier of the Journal de V École Polytechnique (see for

 example the copy digitalized by Gallica: FRBNF3 6048706), which first appeared an

 IX (September 23th, 1 800 to September 22th, 1 801 ), where it is explicitly said that "the
 Théorie des fonctions analytiques [...] has been the subject of the lectures delivered

 by Mr. Lagrange at this École in 1795 and 1796," while " in 1799 Mr. Lagrange has

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 taken up the calcul de fonctions as subject of his lectures at the École polytechnique "

 in delivering twenty lectures published in the twelfth cahier of the same Journal .

 This refers to a reprint of the first edition of the Leçons (including some minor

 revisions), which first appeared in Thermidor an XII (July 20th to August 1 8th, 1 804),

 where the Leçons are presented as a "commentary and a supplement" to the Théorie ,

 corresponding to Lagrange's course at the École for 1799 (for further details on the
 publication of the Leçons , see Grattan-Guinness 1990, 1, 195-196).

 Again, a note by de Prony in the second cahier of the Journal de V École Poly-

 technique, which first appeared on Nivôse and IV (December 22th, 1995 to January
 20th, 1996), mentions "an elementary course of analysis" that Lagrange gave at the
 École from the 5th Prairial and IV (May 24th, 1796), where he presented "a matter
 belonging only to himself whose object is the proof of the fundamental principles of

 the differential and integral calculus" (de Prony 1796. p. 208).

 That Lagrange actually presented his theory at the École Polytechnique in 1795-

 1796 is, however, called into question by the manuscript 1323 of the library of the
 École des Ponts et Chausses containing an account of lectures given by Lagrange at
 the École Polytechnique in 1796 and 1797: only one of these lectures has to do with the

 theory of analytical functions; this was delivered between the 5th and the 16th Messi-

 dor an VIII (June 23th to July 4th, 1797), and is nothing but a general presentation of
 the Théorie , whose first edition had appeared about a month before (this lecture has
 been edited in Pepe 1986).

 After 1799, Lagrange only returned to his treatises to make additions and changes in

 style and organization. The most relevant additions concern the calculus of variations.

 The second edition of the Leçons (Lagrange 1806), which came out in 1806, in-

 cludes, among many more local changes, two new lectures on this matter, which had

 received no attention in the first edition (on Lagrange's treatment of the calculus of
 variations in these lectures, see Fraser 1987, pp. 49-50; on his different approaches
 to this subject at different stages of his career see Fraser 1985).

 The second edition of the Théorie (Lagrange 1813), which appeared in 1813 - the
 year of Lagrange's death - only contains local changes, most of which are purely
 stylistic.

 The following four tables show the organization of the various subjects dealt with in
 Lagrange's treatises. The first shows how the four components mentioned on page 101

 are distributed. The three others show how the different topics that components (//)
 and (iv) concern enter into these treatises.

 In all the tables, the Arabic and Roman numerals refer to the articles of the Théorie

 and the lectures of the Leçons , respectively.

 Acknowledgments We are very much indebted to Jean Dhombres and Alexander Afriat who read previ-
 ous drafts of this article and offered many general and particular suggestions. We also thank Carlos Alvarez,
 Andrew Arana, Tom Archibald, Emmanuel Barot, June Barrow-Green, Karine Chemla, Annalisa Coliva,

 Benno van Dalen, Marie-José Durand-Richard, Craig Fraser, Massimo Galuzzi, Christian Gilain, Jeremy
 Gray, Niccolö Guicciardini, Jesper Lützen, Antoni Malet, Paolo Mancosu, Philippe Nabonnand, Eduardo
 Noble, Göran Sundholm, and Jamie Tappenden, for valuable remarks and suggestions.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 193

 References

 yEpinus, F.U.T. 1 760-1761. Demostratio generalis theorematis newtoniani de binomio ad potentiam in-
 definitam elevando. Nov i Commentarii academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitanae 8: 169-180

 (abstract at pp. 27-29 of Summarium Dissertationum). Publ. 1763. French Translation (by J. Dhombres
 and M. Pensivy). In Sciences and Techniques en Perspective , 1 1, 1986-1987, pp. 204-218.

 Alvarez-Jimenez, C. 1997. Mathematical analysis and analytical science. In Analysis and synthesis in math-
 ematics. History and philosophy (Vol. 196 of Boston studies in the philosophy of science), ed. M. Otte
 and M. Panza, 103-145. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press.

 Ampère, A.M. 1806. Recherches sur l'application des formules générales du calcul des variations aux
 problèmes de la mécanique. In Mémoires présentés á l'Institut des sciences, lettres et arts, par divers
 savans, et lus dans ses assemblées. Sciences mathématiques et Physiques , tome I, January 1 806, 493-523.
 Presented on 26th Floréal an XI, May 16th, 1803.

 Arana, A. 2008. Logical and semantic purity. Protosociology 25: 36-48.
 Arbogast, L.F.A. (ESSAI). Essai sur des nouveaus principes de calcul difféérentiel et de calcul intégral.
 Manuscript conserved at the Biblioteca Medicea-Laurenziana in Florence (Cod. Laur. Ashb. App. 1 840)
 and at the Bibliothèque de Y École des Ponts et Chaussées in Paris (Ms. 2809).

 Bernoulli, Johann. 1718. Remarques sur ce qu'on a donné jusqu'ici de solutions des problèmes sur les
 isoperimétres. Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences [de Paris], Mémoires de Mathématiques et
 Physique , 1, 1718 (2 tomes published in 1719 and 1720), pp. 100-138 of tome I.

 Bolzano, B.P.J.N. 1817. Rein analytischer Beweis des Lehrsatzes [...]. G. Haase, Prag, 1817 (Abhandlungen

 der König l. Böhmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften 5: 1-60).

 Borel, E. 1929. Leçons sur les séries devergentes. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.
 Bottazzini, U. 1986. The higher calculus. A history of real and complex analysis from Euler to Weierstrass.

 New York: Springer.

 Bottazzini, U. 1990. Geometrical rigour and 'modern analysis'. An introduction to Cauchy's Cours d'ana-
 lyse. In Cauchy, A.L. (CAB). 1990. Cours d'analyse de l'école royale polytechique. Première partie.
 Analyse algébrique , ed. U. Bottazzini, XI-CLVII. Bologna: CLUEB.

 Carnot, L. 1797. Reflexions sur la métaphysique du calcul infinitesimal. Pans: Duprat, an V (1797). 2nd

 edn: Paris: M. V. Courcier, 1813.

 Cauchy, A.L. 1821. Cours d'analyse de l'École royale polytechnique [...], Ire partie. Analyse algébrique.

 Debure frères, Paris, 1821. Also in Cauchy, A. L. (ŒUVRES). 1882-1903. Œuvres Complètes , ser. 2,
 Vol. III. Paris: Gauthier- Villars et fils.

 Cauchy, A.L. 1 822. Sur le développement des fonctions en séries, et sur l'intégration des équations différenti-

 elles, ou aux différences partielles. Bull, des Sei. par la Soc. Philomatique de Paris , pp. 49-54. Also
 in Cauchy, A. L. (ŒUVRES). 1882-1903. Œuvres Complètes , ser. 2, Vol. II, 276-282. Paris: Gauthier-
 Villars et fils. References are relative to this last edition.

 Cauchy, A.L. 1823. Résumé des leçons données à l'École royale polytechnique sur le calcul infinitési-
 mal. Impr. Royale, chez Debure, Paris, 1823. Also in Cauchy, A. L. (ŒUVRES). 1882-1903. Œuvres
 Complètes , ser. 2, Vol. IV. Paris: Gauthier- Villars et fils.

 Cauchy, A. L. (ŒUVRES). 1882-1903. Œuvres Complètes. Paris: Gauthier- Villars et fils, 27 volumes in 2

 series.

 Cauchy, A.L. (CAB). 1990. Cours d'analyse de l'école royale polytechique. Première partie. Analyse

 algébrique , ed. U. Bottazzini. Bologna: CLUEB.

 Cauchy, A. L. (CABS). 2009. Cauchy's Cours d'analyse. An annotated translation. Dordrecht: Springer.

 Translation and notes bv R.E. Bradlev and C.E. Sandifer.

 Condillac, E.B. 1797. La langue des calculs. Paris: Imp. de Ch. Houel, an VI.
 Condorcet, M.J.A.C. 1765. Du calcul intégral. Paris: Didot.
 Dahan Dalmédico, A. 1992. La méthode critique du "mathématicien-philosophe". In L'École Normale de
 l 'an III. Leçons de mathématiques. Laplace-Lagrange-Monge, ed. J. Dhombres, 1 7 1 -1 92. Paris: Dunod.
 d'Alembert, J.B. le R. (DIS). 1751. Discours préliminaire des éditeurs. In Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire
 raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers , ed. Briasson, David l'aîné, and le Breton. Paris: Durand,
 17S1-17R0 volumes. Vol 1. 1-XLV.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 d'Alembert, J.B. le R. (ANA). 1751. Analytique. In Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences,
 des arts et des métiers , ed. Briasson, David l'aîné, and Breton. Paris: Durand, 1751-1780, 35 volumes,
 Vol. 1,403-404.

 1 94 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 d'Alembert, J.B. le R. 1768. Refléxion sur les suites et sur les racine imaginaires. In Opuscles mathéma-

 tiques , ed. David, Briasson, and C. A. Jombert, 171-215. Paris, 1761-1780 (8 tomes), tome 5.

 de Prony, G.R. 1796. Notice sur un cours élémentaire d'analyse fait par Lagrange. Journal de l'Ecole

 Polytechnique 1 : 206-208.

 Desanti, J.-T. 1973. Notes sur l'épistémologie égélienne; l' intériorisation du concept. Dialectique 1-2: 55-

 87. Re-published in Desanti, J.-T. 1975. La philosophie silencieuse ou critique de la philosophie de la
 science , 22-66. Paris: Seuil.

 Descartes, R. 1637. Discours de la méthode [...]. Plus la Dioptrique. Les météores. Et la Géométrie qui

 sont des essaies de cette Méthode. I. Maire, Leyde, 1637. Re-edited in Descartes, R. (AT). 1897-1910.
 Œuvres de Descartes, ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery, Vol. VI, 367-485. Paris: Vrin.

 Descartes, R. (AT). 1 897-1 9 1 0. Œuvres de Descartes , ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery, 1 2 volumes. Paris: Vrin.

 Detlefsen, M. 2008. Purity as an ideal of proof. In The philosophy of mathematical practice , ed. P. Mancosu,

 Dhombres, J. 1 982-1 983. La langue des calculs de Condillac (ou comment propager les lumières?). Sciences

 Dhombres, J. 1987. Sur un texte d'Euler relatif à une équation fonctionnelle. Archaïsme, pédagogie et style

 179-197. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 et techniques en perspective 2: 197-230.

 d'écriture. Historia Scientiarum 33: 77-123.

 Dhombres, J. 1988. Un texte d'Euler sur les fonctions continues et le fonctions discontinues, véritable

 programme d'organisation de l'analyse au 18e siècle. Cahiers du Séminaire d'Histoire des Mathéma-
 tiques 9: 23-97. Including a French translation of Euler, L. 1765. De usu functionum discontinarum in

 analysi. Nov i Commentarii academiae scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanœ 1 1 : 3-27 (abstract at pp. 3-
 7 of Summarium Disse rtationum). Also in Euler, L. (OPERA). 1911-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera
 omnia , ser. 1, Vol. 23, 74-91. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat. Helveticae.

 Dhombres, J. ed. 1 992. L'École Normale de l'an III. Leçons de mathématiques. Laplace-Lagrange-Monge.

 Paris: Dunod.

 Dhombres, J., and M. Pensivy. 1988. Ésprit de rigueur et présentation mathématique au XVIIIème siècle :

 le cas d'une démonstration d'^Epinus. Historia Mathematica 15: 9-31.

 Dugac, P. 2003. Histoire de l'analyse. Autour de la notion de limite et de ses voisinages. Paris: Vuibert.
 Dummett, M. 1991. Frege. Philosophy of mathematics. London: Duckworth.
 Ecole Normale III (L). Séances des écoles normales, recueillies par des sténographes et revues par les

 professeurs. Première partie. Leçons. Paris: L. Reynier, s.d., 6 volumes.

 Ecole Normale III (D). Séances des écoles normales, recueillies par des sténographes et revues par les

 professeurs. Seconde partie. Débats. Paris: Impr. du Cercle Social, s.d., 3 volumes.

 Ecole Normale III (NE). 1800-1801. Séances des écoles normales, recueillies par des sténographes et
 revues par les professeurs , nouvelle édition. Paris: Impr. du Cercle Social, 13 volumes (1-10, Leçons +
 1-3, Débats).

 Euler, L. 1744. Methodus inveniendi lineas curvas [. . .]. Lausanne: M.-M. Bousquet & Soc. Also in Euler,
 L. (OPERA). 1911-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 1, Vol. XXIV. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat.
 Helveticae.

 Euler, L. 1748. Introductio in analysisn infinitorum. Lausanne: M.-M. Bousquet & Soc, 2 volumes. Also
 in Euler, L. (OPERA). 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 1, volumes VIII et IX. Leipzig:
 Soc. Sei. Nat. Helveticae.

 Euler, L. 1749. De vibratione chordarum exercitatio. Nova Acta Eruditorum 512-527. Also in Euler, L.
 (OPERA). 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 2, Vol. 10, 50-62. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat.
 Helveticae.

 Euler, L. 1753. Remarques sur les mémoires précédens de M. Bernoulli. Histoire de l'Académie Royale des

 Sciences [de Paris], Mémoires de Mathématiques et Physique 9: 196-222. Also in Euler, L. (OPERA).
 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 2, Vol. 10, 233-254. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat. Helveticae.
 Euler, L. 1765. De usu functionum discontinarum in analysi. Novi Commentarii academiae scientiarum
 Imperialis Petropolitanœ 1 1 : 3-27 (abstract at pp. 3-7 of Summarium Dissertationum). Also in Euler,
 L. (OPERA). 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 1, Vol. 23, 74-91. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat.
 Helveticae.

 Euler, L. 1787. Nova demonstratio quod evolutio potestatum binomii neutoniana etiam pro exponentibus

 fracti valeat. Nova acta academiae scientiarum imperialis Petropolitanœ 5: 52-58; Also in Euler, L.
 (OPERA). 1911-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia , ser. 1, Vol. 16/1, 112-121. Leipzig: Soc. Sei.
 Nat. Helveticae.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Euler, L. (OPERA). 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat. Helveticae, volumes

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 195

 Euler, L. (BLA). 1988-1990. Introduction to the analysis of the infinite (trans: Blanton, J. D.). New York:

 Ferraro, G. 2000. Functions, functional relations and the laws of continuity in Euler. Historia Mathematica

 Dublished to date.

 Springer, 2 volumes.

 27: 107-132.

 Ferraro, G. 2001. Analytical symbols and geometrical figures in eighteenth century calculus. Studies in

 History and Philosophy of Science Part A 32:535-555.

 Ferraro, G. 2002. Convergence and formal manipulation of series in the first decades of the eighteenth

 Ferraro, G. 2004. Differentials and differential coefficients in the Eulerian foundations of the calculus.

 century. Annals of Science 59:179-199.

 Historia Mathematica 3 1 :34 - 61 .

 Ferraro, G. 2007. The foundational aspects of Gauss's work on the hypergeometric, factorial and digamma

 functions. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 61 : 457-5 1 8.

 Ferraro, G., and M. Panza. 2003. Developing into series and returning from series. A note on the foundation

 of 1 8th-century analysis. Historia Mathematica 30: 1 7-46.

 Fraser, C. 1985. J. L. Lagrange's changing approach to the foundation of the calculus of variations. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 39: 151-191.

 Fraser, C. 1987. Joseph Louis Lagrange algebraic vision of the calculus. Historia Mathematica 14: 38-53.
 Fraser, C. 1 989. The calculus as algebraic analysis: Some observations on mathematical analysis in the 1 8th

 century. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 39: 317-335.

 Galois, E. (EMM). 1976. Écrits et mémoires mathématiques d'Evariste Galois , 2nd edn, ed. R. Bourgne

 and J.-P. Azra. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Gauss, C.F. (WERKE). 1863-1933. Werke. Königlichen Gesellshaft der Wissenschaften, Göttingen, 12

 Gilain, C. 1988. Condorcet et le calcul intégral. In Sciences à l'époque de la Révolution française , ed.

 R. Rashed, 85-147. Paris: Blanchard.

 Giusti, E. 1983. Analisi matematica , 2 volumes. Torino: Boringhieri.
 Grabiner, J.-V. 1974. Is mathematical truth time-dependent? The American Mathematical Monthly 81:

 volumes.

 354-365.

 Grabiner, J.V. 1981a. The origins of Cauchy' s rigorous calculus. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 Grabiner, J.-V. 1981b. Changing attitudes towards mathematical rigor: Lagrange and analysis in the eigh-
 teenth and nineteenth centuries. In Epistemological and social problems of the sciences in the early
 nineteenth century, ed. H.N. Jahnke and M. Otte, 31 1-330. Boston: D. Reidel.

 Grabiner, J.V. 1990. The calculus as algebra. J. L. Lagrange , 1736-1813. New York: Garland Publishing.

 Grattan-Guinness, 1. 1 970. The development of foundations of mathematical analysis from Euler to Riemann ,

 Reprint of Grabiner's 1 966 PhD theis.

 3 volumes. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 Grattan-Guinness, 1. 1990. Convolutions in French mathematics, 1800-1840 , 3 volumes. Basel: Birkhäuser.

 Gregory, J. 1667. Vera circuli et hyperbolaœquadratura [. . .], ex Typographia Iacobi de Cadorinis, Patavii.
 Gusdorf, G. 1971. Les principes de la pensée au siècle des lumières. Paris: Payot.
 Hallett, M. 2008. Reflections on the purity of method in Hilbert's Grundlagen der Geometrie. In The

 philosophy of mathematical practice, ed. P. Mancosu, 198-255. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Hilbert, D. 1898. Grundlagen der geometrie. In Festschrift zur Feier der Enthüllung des Gauss-Weber-

 Denkmals in Göttingen, 3-92. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.

 Klügel, G.-S. 1800. Erläuterungen über den beweis des polynomischen lehrsatzes von dem Verfasser des

 beweises. Sammlung combinatorisch-analytischer Abhandlungen 2: 145-154.

 Lacroix, S.-F. 1797-1798. Traité du calcul différentiel et du calcul intégral , ans. V-VI: 1797-1798, 2

 Lacroix, S.-F. 1800. Traité des différences et des séries: faisant suite au Traité du calcul différentiel et du

 volumes. Paris: Duprat.

 calcul intégral , 2 volumes. Paris: Duprat.

 Lacroix, S.-F. 1810-1819. Traité du calcul différentiel et du calcul intégral , 3 volumes. Paris: Courcier.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1761 . Essai d'une nouvelle méthode pour déterminer les maxima et les minima des formules
 intégrales indéfinies. Mélanges de Philosophie et de Mathématiques de la Soc. Roy. de Turin 2: 1760-
 1761, 2nd part, pp. 173-95. Also in Lagrange, J.-L. (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange , ed.
 M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], Vol. I, 335-362. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 96 G. Ferraro, M. Panza

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1 772. Sur une nouvelle espèce de calcul relatif à la differentiation et à l'intégration des quan-

 tités variables. Nouv. Mem. Acad. Roy Sei. Bell. Lett. [ Berlin ], 1772 (publied in 1774), pp. 185-221. Also
 in Lagrange, J.-L. (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange, ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux],
 Vol. III, 441-476. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1788. Méchanique analytique. Paris: Chez La Veuve Desaint.
 Lagrange, J.-L. 1797. Théorie des fonctions analytiques [...]. Paris: Impr. de la République, Prairial an V.
 Lagrange, J.-L. 1798. De la resolution des equations numériques de tous les degres. Pans: Duprat, an VI.
 Lagrange, J.-L. 1799. Discours sur l'objet de la théorie des fonctions analytiques. Journal de l'École Poly-

 technique , 2 (6th cahier ), Thermidor an VII (July-August 1799), pp. 232-235. Also in Lagrange, J.-L.
 (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange , ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], Vol. VII, 325-328.
 Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1801. Sur le calcul des fonctions. Impr. du Cercle Social, 1801. Vol. X ( Leçons ) of Ecole
 Normale III (NE); reprinted with slight revisions as the 12th cahier of the Journal de l'École Polytec-
 nique, Thermidor , an XII (July-August 1 804). References are relative to this last edition.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1806. Leçons sur le calcul des fonctions, nouvelle édition revue, corrigée et augmentée
 par l'auteur. Paris: Courcier. Also in Lagrange, J.-L. (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange, ed.
 M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], Vol. X. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1 808. Traité de la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés. Avec des Notes

 sur plusieurs points de la Théorie des équations algébriques. Paris: Courcier. Also in Lagrange, J.-L.
 (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange, ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], Vol. VIII. Paris:
 Gauthier- Villars.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1811-1815. Mécanique analytique. Paris: Courcier, 2 volumes. Also in Lagrange, J.-L.
 (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange , ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], 14 volumes. Paris:
 Gauthier- Villars.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1813. Théorie des fonctions analytiques. Paris: Courcier. Also in Lagrange, J.-L.
 (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange, ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], Vol. IX. Paris:
 frai ithi er- Vi liars

 Lagrange, J.-L. (ŒUVRES). 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange, ed. M. J.-A. Serret [et G. Darboux], 14

 volumes. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Laguerre, E. 1878-1879. Sur l'intégrale /z°° ^j-dje. Bulletin de la Société mathématique de France 1:

 Laplace, P.-S. 1812. Théorie analytique des probabilités. Paris: Courcier.

 Monna, A.F. 1972. The concept of function in the 19th and 20th centuries [. . .]. Archive for History of Exact

 72-81.

 Sciences 9: 57-84.

 Ovaert, J.L. 1 976. La thèse de Lagrange et la transformation de l'analyse. In Philosophie et calcul de l'infini,

 ed. C. Houzel, L.L. Ovaert, P. Raymond, and J.-L. Sansuc, 157-222. Paris: Maspero.

 Panza, M. 1 985. Il manoscritto del 1 789 di Arbogast sui principi del calcolo differenziale e integrale. Rivista

 di storia délia scienza 2: 123-157.

 Panza, M. 1 99 1 -1 992. The analytical foundation of mechanics of discrete systems in Lagrange's théorie des
 fonctions analytiques, compared with Lagrange's earlier treatments of this topics. Historia Scientiarum
 dd ■ 87_n? noon nnH d s- m_?i9 nocm

 Panza, M. 1992. La forma délia quantité. Analisi algébrica e analisi superiore: il problema dell'unità délia
 matematica nel secolo deU'illuminismo, volume 38 and 39 of Cahiers d'historié et de philosophie des
 sciences, Paris.

 Panza, M. 1 996. Concept of function, between quantity and form, in the eighteenth century. In History of
 mathematics and education: Ideas and experiences, ed. N. Knoche, H. N. Jahnke, and M. Otte, 241-274.
 Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

 Panza, M. 2003. The origins of analytical mechanics in 18th century. In A history of analysis, ed. H. N.
 Jahnke, 137-153. Washington/London: American Mathematical Society/London Mathematical Society.

 Panza, M. 2005. Netwon et les origines de l'analyse: 1664-1666. Paris: Blanchard.
 Panza, M. 2007. Euler s Introductio in analysin infinitorum and the program of algebraic analysis: Quan-
 tities, functions and numerical partitions. In Euler reconsidered. Tercentenary essays, ed. R. Backer,
 1 19-166. Heber Citv: Kendrick Press.

 Peano, G. 1891. Sulla formula di Taylor. Atti della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 27: 40-46.
 Also in Peano, G. 1957-1959. Opere Scelte , 3 volumes, Vol. 1, 204-209. Roma: Edizioni Cremonese.
 Pensivy, M. 1987-1988. Jalons historiquesn pour une épistémologie de la série infinie du binôme, Vol. 14

 de Sciences et techniques en perscective.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pepe, L. 1986. Tre 'prime edizioni' ed un'introduzione délia Théorie des fonctions analytiques di Lagrange.

 Lagrange's theory of analytical functions 197

 Bollettino di storia delle scienze matematiche 6: 1 7-44.

 Poisson, S.-D. 1805. Démonstration du théorème de Taylor. Correspondance de l'École Polytechnique , 1,

 1804-1805, issue of 3rd Pluviôse an XIII (January-February 1805), pp. 52-55.

 Sebestik, J. 1964. Bernard Bolzano et son mémoire sur le théorème fondamental de l'analyse. Revue
 d'histoire des sciences 17: 129-164. Containing a French Translation of Bolzano, B.P.J.N. 1817. Rein
 analytischer Beweis des Lehrsatzes [...]. Prag: G. Haase (, Abhandlungen der Königl. Böhmischen Gesell-
 schaft der Wissenschaften 5: 1-60).

 Truesdell, C. 1995. The rational mechanics of flexible or elastic bodies , 1638-1788 , Vol. IX of Euler, L.

 (OPERA). 191 1-1976. Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia. Leipzig: Soc. Sei. Nat. Helveticae.

 Vuillemin, J. 1962. La philosophie de l'algèbre. Paris: P.U.F.
 Wilkers, M. V. 1 990. Herschel, peacock, babbage and the development of the Cambridge curriculum. Notes

 and Records of the Royal Society of London 44: 205-219.

 Woodhouse, R. 1803. The principles of analytical calculation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Wright, C. 2000. Neo-Fregean foundations for real analysis: Some reflections on Frege's constraint. Notre

 Youschkevitch, A. 1976-1977. The concept of function up to the middle of the 19th century. Archive for

 Dame Journal of Formal Logic 41 : 317-334.

 History of Exact Sciences 16: 37-85.

 Zimmermann, K. 1934. Arbogast als Mathematoker, und Historiker der Mathematik. Ruprecht- Karls-Uni-

 versität, Heidelberg, 1934. Inaugural-Dissertation zur Erlangung der Doktorwürde der Hohen Natural-
 wissenschaftlich-Mathelatischen Fakultät.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:15:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

