 

 

 

 

Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals
Author(s): Richard T. W. Arthur
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 5 (September 2013), pp. 553-593
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479155
Accessed: 19-05-2020 11:57 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:553-593
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0119-z

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 Richard T. W. Arthur

 Received: 1 March 2013 / Published online: 24 April 2013
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract In contrast with some recent theories of infinitesimals as non-Archimedean

 entities, Leibniz's mature interpretation was fully in accord with the Archimedean
 Axiom: infinitesimals are fictions, whose treatment as entities incomparably smaller

 than finite quantities is justifiable wholly in terms of variable finite quantities that
 can be taken as small as desired, i.e. syncategorematically. In this paper I explain
 this syncategorematic interpretation, and how Leibniz used it to justify the calculus. I

 then compare it with the approach of Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis, as propounded
 by John Bell. I find some salient differences, especially with regard to higher-order

 infinitesimals. I illustrate these differences by a consideration of how each approach

 might be applied to propositions of Newton's Principia concerning the derivation of

 force laws for bodies orbiting in a circle and an ellipse.

 "if the Leibnizian calculus needs a rehabilitation because of too severe treatment by historians in the past
 half century, as Robinson suggests (1966, 250), I feel that the legitimate grounds for such a rehabilitation
 are to be found in the Leibnizian theory itself. "—(Bos 1974-1975, 82-83).

 1 Introduction

 Leibniz's doctrine of the fictional nature of infinitesimals has been much misunder

 stood. It has been construed as a late defensive parry, an attempt to defend the success

 of his infinitesimal calculus—understood as implicitly committed to the existence of

 Communicated by: Niccolô Guicciardini.

 R. T. W. Arthur (El)
 McMaster Univeristy, Hamilton, ON, Canada
 e-mail: rarthur@mcmaster.ca

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 554

 R. T. W. Arthur

 infinitesimals as actually infinitely small entities—in the face of criticisms of the ade
 quacy of its foundations. It has also been read as being at odds with other defences of

 the calculus Leibniz gave on explicitly Archimedean foundations. I take the position
 here (following Ishiguro 1990) that the idea that Leibniz was committed to infinitesi

 mals as actually infinitely small entities is a misreading: his mature interpretation of

 the calculus was fully in accord with the Archimedean Axiom. Leibniz's interpretation

 is (to use the medieval term) syncategorematic: Infinitesimals are fictions in the sense

 that the terms designating them can be treated as if they refer to entities incomparably

 smaller than finite quantities, but really stand for variable finite quantities that can
 be taken as small as desired. As I (Arthur 2008) and Levey (2008) have argued, this
 interpretation is no late stratagem, but in place already by 1676.

 In Sect. 2,1 present this interpretation by tracing its development from Leibniz's

 early work on infinite series and quadratures to his unpublished attempt in 1701 in the

 tract "Cum prodiisset" to provide a systematic foundation for his calculus. We shall

 see that as early as 1676 Leibniz had succeeded in providing a rigorous foundation for

 Riemannian integration, based on the Archimedean Axiom. The appeal to this axiom,
 generalized by Leibniz into his Law of Continuity, undergirds his interpretation of
 infinitesimals as fictions that can nevertheless be used in calculations, and forms the

 basis for his foundation for differentials in "Cum prodiisset".

 I then turn to a comparison of Leibniz's approach with the recent theory of infini
 tesimals championed by John Bell, Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis (SIA), of which I
 give a brief synopsis in Sect. 3. As we shall see, this has many points in common with
 Leibniz's approach: the non-punctiform nature of infinitesimals, their acting as parts

 of the continuum, the dependence on variables (as opposed to the static quantities of
 both Standard and Non-standard Analysis), the resolution of curves into infinite-sided

 polygons, and the finessing of a commitment to the existence of infinitesimals. Never

 theless, there are also crucial differences. These are brought into relief in Sects. 4 and
 5, by a consideration of how each approach might be applied to some of the central

 results in cosmology concerning force laws for planetary motions. In Sect. 4,1 explain
 how Leibniz uses differential equations to re-derive the results Newton had obtained

 for the υ2/r law for the centripetal force on a body orbiting around a centre of force

 and for the inverse square law. After briefly describing Newton's own derivations of
 Propositions 4,6 and 11 in his Principia, I detail Leibniz's derivations of the "solicita

 tion" ddr experienced by an orbiting body in a circular and then elliptical orbits. Then,

 in Sect. 5,1 consider the question of the legitimacy of Leibniz's use of second-order

 differentials, by reference to his own attempts to provide a foundation. It is found
 that while Leibniz's syncategorematic approach is adequate to ground his derivations

 using second-order differentials, there is no corresponding possibility for a deriva
 tion of such expressions using nilsquare infinitesimals; that is to say, while one can

 define derivatives of all orders using SIA and thus effect proofs of all the propositions
 concerning orbiting bodies, and while one can also define differentials of second and

 higher orders in SIA, the nilsquare property precludes duplication of the calculations

 of Newton and Leibniz which involved dt2. So not all the results obtained classically

 by the use of infinitesimals can be duplicated by SIA: even if the infinitesimals of SIA

 are much closer in conception to Leibnizian infinitesimals than those of Non-standard

 Analysis, they are not Leibnizian infinitesimals.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 555

 2 Leibniz's foundation for the infinitesimal calculus

 As Leibniz explains in his mature work, the infinite should not be understood to refer

 to an actual entity that is greater than any finite one of the same kind, i.e. categoremat

 ically, but rather syncategorematically: in certain well-defined circumstances, infinite

 terms may be used as if they refer to entities incomparably larger than finite quantities,

 but really stand for variable finite quantities that can be taken as large as desired. Leib

 niz's interpretation of infinitesimals as fictions is intimately linked with his doctrine of

 the infinite. Just as the infinite is not an actually existing whole made up of finite parts,

 so infinitesimals are not actually existing parts which can be composed into a finite
 whole. As Leibniz explained to Des Bosses at the beginning of their correspondence
 in 1706,

 Speaking philosophically, I maintain that there are no more infinitely small mag

 nitudes than there are infinitely large ones, that is, no more infinitesimals than
 infinituples. For I hold both to be fictions of the mind through an abbreviated

 way of speaking, adapted to calculation, as imaginary roots in algebra are too.

 Meanwhile I have demonstrated that these expressions are very useful for abbre

 viating thought and thus for discovery, and cannot lead to error, since it suffices
 to substitute for the infinitely small something as small as one wishes, so that

 the error is smaller than any given, whence it follows that there can be no error.
 (GPII 305)

 The roots of this syncategorematic interpretation, like the roots of Leibniz's calculus
 itself, can be discerned in his earliest work on quadratures and infinite series, specif

 ically in his work on the hyperbola. Already in the Fall of 1672 in his reading notes
 on Galileo Galilei's Two New Sciences (Discorsi), Leibniz had formulated the basis

 of his later position. There he notes Galileo's demonstration that there are as many
 square roots of (natural) numbers as there are natural numbers, and that "therefore
 there are as many squares as numbers; which is impossible",1 and then comments:

 Hence it follows either that in the infinite the whole is not greater than the part,

 which is the opinion of Galileo and Gregory of St. Vincent,2 and which I cannot

 accept; or that infinity itself is nothing, i.e. that it is not one and not a whole. Or

 perhaps we should say: when distinguishing between infinities, the most infinite,
 i.e. all the numbers, is something that implies a contradiction, for if it were a

 whole it could be understood as made up of all the numbers continuing to infinity,

 and would be much greater than all the numbers, that is, greater than the greatest

 number. Or perhaps we should say that one ought not to say anything about the
 infinite, as a whole, except when there is a demonstration of it. (A VI iii, 168;
 LoC 8-9)

 1 Relevant extracts from Galileo's Discorsi may be found in (LoC 352-357).

 2 At EN 78, Salviati says: "for I believe that these attributes of greatness, smallness and equality do not

 befit infinities, of which one cannot be said to be greater than, smaller than, or equal to another"; and again

 at the end of the ensuing proof: "in final conclusion, the attributes of equal, greater, and less have no place
 in infinities, but only in bounded quantities" (EN 79; LoC 355-56). For Gregory of St Vincent's opinion,

 see his 1647, lib. 8, pr. 1, theorema, 870 ff.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 1 Leibniz's hyperbola

 Two features of this commentary are seminal for Leibniz's later thought: the uphold

 ing of the part-whole axiom for the infinite, with the entailed denial that the infinite is

 a whole; and the more nuanced claim that one cannot assert a property of the infinite

 except insofar as one has an independent demonstration of it.

 The first claim is graphically illustrated by a calculation Leibniz performs in 1674, in

 which we are confronted with an infinite whole which has a direct visual representation :

 the area under a hyperbola between 0 and 1. By this time, Leibniz has made great
 strides in summing infinite series, and applying the results to calculate "quadratures",
 the areas under curves. In this example, he uses his knowledge to demonstrate the
 inapplicability of the part-whole axiom to infinite quantities (Fig. 1).

 In the above diagram, which Leibniz has deliberately drawn symmetrically,

 MGBEM is a hyperbola, and the variable abscissa DE = χ (dashed line) is taken
 to vary between CB (taken as the x-axis) and (the horizontal) ACF.... Leibniz calcu
 lates the area by "applying" DE to (the vertical) AC (= 1) as a base. He expands DE
 as (1 — )0-1 = 1 + y + y1 + y3 H , and gets the result ACBEM = 1 +'/2 +'/3 +'
 IA +'/5 + ' · · In modern terms, Leibniz is evaluating the area under the curve x= (1

 - y)-1 by calculating the definite integral /J χ Ay using a series expansion to obtain

 556 R- T. W. Arthur

 ACBEM = j( 1 - y)~ldy =[y + y2/2 + y3/3 + y% + · ■ ·]^

 1

 ο

 = 1+1/2+1/3+'/4+1/5 + ···

 Now Leibniz applies the line HL = (1 + y) 1 = 1 — y + y2 — y3 -i to the line

 CF (= 1) to obtain the finite area CFGLB. That is,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 557

 CFGLB = f (1 + y)-ldy = [y- y1^ + y3/3 -

 ο

 = 1 -1/2+1/3-1/4+1/5 + ···

 But if we now subtract the finite space CFGLB from the infinite space ACBEM, we
 obtain

 ACBEM-CFGLB = (1 - 1) + ('/2 +V2) + (h ~1/ή + (>4 +V4)

 + (Vs -Vs) + * * * = 1 +V2 +V3 +V4 +'/5 + · · "

 = ACBEM

 Leibniz comments:

 This is pretty amazing (satis mirabilis), and shows that the sum of the series
 1, V2» V3 etc· is infinite, and consequently that the area of the space ACBGM
 remains the same even when the finite space CBGF is taken away from it, i.e.

 that nothing noticeable is taken away.

 By this argument it is concluded that the infinite is not a whole, but only a fiction;
 for otherwise the part would be equal to the whole. (A VII 3, N. 38io, p.468;
 October 1674)

 Of interest here is the close connection between the visualizable infinite whole—

 the area under the hyperbola—and its expansion as an infinite series. For the infinite
 series is treated as if it were a whole, as if it has a definite sum, and so forth. But in
 this case, the result leads to a contradiction, given the applicability of the part-whole

 axiom to the infinite. Even though this establishes the fictional nature of such infinite

 wholes, however, this does not mean that one cannot calculate with them; only, the

 viability of the resulting calculation is contingent on the provision of a demonstration.
 As an example, we can look at another seminal calculation Leibniz made involving

 the hyperbolic series, in the process of answering a challenge set him by Huygens soon
 after his arrival in Paris in 1672. This was to determine the sum of the series of the

 reciprocal triangular numbers, Vi, V3, Vô» Vio» Vis. · · · Leibniz achieved this by noting
 that the successive terms are twice those of the differences between successive terms

 of the hyperbolic series: 1 = 2(1 — V2); 1h = 2('/2 — V3); '/δ = 2(73 and so
 forth. But the sum of a series of such difference terms will, because of the cancellation

 of terms, equal the difference between the first term of the hyperbolic series and the

 last. Leibniz immediately realized the generality of this result, which he enshrined in

 what I have elsewhere (Arthur 2006) called his Difference Principle: "the sum of the
 differences is the difference between the first term and the last" (A VII, 3, 95). As is

 well known, after generalization to infinite series, this result will lead Leibniz to his

 formulation of the Fundamental Theorem of the Calculus: the sum (integral) of the

 differentials equals the difference of the sums (the definite integral evaluated between

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 558

 R. T. W. Arthur

 first and last terms), f Bdx = [A]f. Thus, the sum of the first η terms of the original
 series,

 ^ Ti ='/i +V3 +Ve +V10 +V15 Η l· 2/(«2 + n)

 will be twice the difference between the (n + l)th and the first term of the hyperbolic
 series:

 / = 1

 n+1

 Σ Hi — Vι +'/2 +]/3 +!/4 +Vs + · · · + l/(n + 1)
 (=1

 η

 ( = 1

 ΣΤ' = 2(//ι - /ί«+ι) = 2[1 - 1/(» + D]

 Applying similar reasoning to infinite series, Leibniz calculates that if the sum of the

 infinite series S(H) = Σ"=1 H, = '/1 + '/2 + '/3 + '/4 + '/5 + · · ·, and half the sum of the
 reciprocal triangular numbers ]/2S(T) = '/2 Tt = '/2 +'/6 + '/i2 + V20 + '/30, · · ·,
 then

 S(H)-X/2S(T) — V2 +'/3 +V4 +Vs + · · · = S(H) - 1

 That is,

 giving

 S(T) = 2.

 Now one might of course object to this reasoning that, since the hyperbolic series is a

 diverging infinite series, Leibniz has effectively cancelled infinities in subtracting its

 sum S(H) = X"=1 H, from both sides of the equation above. Clearly, this would not
 be news to Leibniz, given the argument for the fictionality of the infinite treated as a

 whole given above. And indeed, Leibniz is sensitive to the need for rigour here. He
 acknowledges that this application of the Difference Principle "ought to be demon
 strated to come out in the infinite" (362), and proceeds to show how this can be done.

 This is crucial, for in the above reasoning Leibniz has treated the infinite series as if

 they are wholes. But this can only be done, according to his commentary on Galileo, if

 there is a corresponding demonstration. Moreover, treating the infinite series as wholes

 is equivalent to treating them as if they had last terms, since otherwise the Difference

 Principle would not be applicable. This gives the all-important connection between

 Leibniz's doctrines of the fictionality of infinite wholes and the fictionality of infini
 tesimals. A justification of treating the infinite series as wholes is at the same time a

 justification of treating them as if they had a last, infinitely small term or terminatio,
 l/oo.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 559

 Leibniz's demonstration proceeds by taking an arbitrarily small >'th term as the

 terminatio of the series, where "y signifies any number whatever". For the hyperbolic
 series, the terminatio of a finite series of terms H (y) will be l/y, and for the series
 of reciprocal triangular numbers Τ (y), it will be 2/(y2 + y), since the >'th trian
 gular number is (y2 + y)/2. Thus, when half the series Σ Τ (y) is subtracted from
 X H(y), the terminatio of the resulting series will be l/y — 1 /(y2 + y), or (y2 + y —

 y)/(j3 + y2), or I /(>' + 1). But this is the terminatio for £ H(y + 1). Leibniz does
 not complete this demonstration in these terms, preferring to proceed to a geometrical

 depiction in terms of a triangle, but it entails that for arbitrarily large y, the sum of

 half the series, '/ο Σ Τ (y), is 1 — I/(>' + 1). So the sum of the reciprocal triangular

 numbers, ]Γ Τ (y), approaches 2 arbitrarily closely as y is taken arbitrarily large. Cor

 respondingly, the terminatio of either this series or the hyperbolic series is not actually

 0, but an arbitrarily small number.

 This, then, yields the link between Leibniz's syncategorematic interpretation of

 the infinite and his interpretation of infinitesimals as fictions. To treat the infi
 nite series as whole is to treat it as if it has an infinitieth term or infinitely
 small terminatio·, whereas in fact the number of terms is greater than any num
 ber that can be given, and the magnitude of the terminatio is correspondingly
 smaller than any that can be given. This connection is stated explicitly by Leib
 niz in an annotation he made on Spinoza's Letter on the Infinite in the Spring
 of 1676:

 Finally those things are infinite in the lowest degree whose magnitude is greater

 than we can expound by an assignable ratio to sensible things, even though there

 exists something greater than these things. In just this way, there is the infinite
 space comprised between Apollonius' Hyperbola and its asymptote, which is
 one of the most moderate of infinities, to which there somehow corresponds in

 numbers the sum of this space: x/\ +'/2 + '/3 +'/4 + ■ · · > which is Vo- Only
 let us understand this 0, or nought, or rather instead a quantity infinitely or
 unassignably small, to be greater or smaller according as we have assumed the
 last denominator of this infinite series of fractions, which is itself also infinite,

 smaller or greater. For a maximum does not apply in the case of numbers. (A VI
 3, 282; LoC 114-115)

 For some time, Leibniz appears to have hesitated over this interpretation, and as late

 as February 1676 he was still deliberating about whether the success of the hypothesis

 of infinities and the infinitely small in geometry spoke to their existence in physi

 cal reality too. But by April of the same year, the syncategorematic interpretation
 is firmly in place, and we find Leibniz exploring the implications of the rejection

 of the infinitely small in a series of mathematico-physical reflections.3 During the
 same period, he was putting the finishing touches to his treatise on the infinitesi
 mal calculus, De quadratura arithmetica (Leibniz 1993), which he submitted for the
 Académie Française in the summer of 1676. Here, we find his first explicit exposi

 tion of the interpretation of infinities and infinitesimals as fictions, and the provision

 3 See Arthur (2009) for a discussion of the development of Leibniz's early views on infinitesimals.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 560

 R. T. W. Arthur

 of a theorem which, in Leibniz's words, "serves to lay the foundations of the whole
 method of indivisibles in the soundest way possible". Indeed, as Eberhard Knobloch
 has remarked, this theorem is a "model of mathematical rigour" (2002, 72).

 In the treatise, Leibniz promotes his new method of performing quadratures directly
 "without a reductio ad absurdum" (Prop 7, Scholium; Leibniz 1993, 35), by what we
 would now call a direct integral. This, he believes, necessarily involves the assump
 tion of "fictitious quantities, namely the infinite and the infinitely small" (35). The
 traditional Archimedean method of demonstration was by a double reductio ad absur
 dum: it would be shown that a contradiction could be derived on the assumption that

 the quantity in question was smaller than a given value, and another contradiction on

 the assumption that the quantity in question was greater than that value, thus proving
 that it equalled it. Leibniz's method is instead to proceed by an application of the
 Archimedean Axiom. This axiom (actually due to Eudoxus) asserts that for any two
 geometric quantities χ and y (with y > χ), a natural number η can be found such
 that nx > y. This also entails that no matter how small a geometric quantity is given,
 a smaller can be found, and it is this property to which Leibniz appeals. Thus, he

 prefers a justification "which simply shows that the difference between two quantities
 is nothing, so that they are then equal (whereas it is otherwise usually proved by a
 double reductio that one is neither greater nor smaller than the other)" (35). That is,
 he applies the Archimedean axiom to demonstrate that the error involved in calcula

 tions with infinitely small differences can be reduced to a quantity less than any given

 quantity by taking a difference sufficiently small, rendering it effectively null.

 Moreover, this justification does not have to be effected in every case: it is enough

 to show that it can be done in a general case. This Leibniz does in a case that is surpris
 ingly general, given the usual accusations about the parlous lack of justification he and

 Newton are alleged to have provided for their methods. For the key theorem that Leib

 niz successfully demonstrates in De quadratura arithmetica using this Archimedean
 method is what is now known as Riemannian Integration, as Eberhard Knobloch has
 shown in detail (2002).4 This is Proposition 6; (Leibniz provides a similar justifica
 tion for his Theorems 7 and 8). In his demonstration of Proposition 6 (Leibniz 1993,

 30-33), Leibniz first identifies and then relates the sum of the "elementary rectangles
 [rectangula elementales]" (that is the Riemannian sum of unequal rectangles by which
 the curve is being approximated, which we may denote Q), and that of the mixtilinear

 figure [spatium gradiformis] that is the area under the curve between two ordinates \ L

 and 4D, which we may denote A. Then he demonstrates that the difference between

 the area and the sum of the elementary rectangles, A - Q, can be no greater than the

 area of a certain rectangle whose height is the maximum height ψά,Ι) of any of the
 elementary rectangles, and whose width is the distance between the two ordinates iL
 and 4D. Thus, A — Q <\ L4D χ But because the curve is assumed continuous,

 Archimedes' Axiom applies. Thus, the height Ψ4 D, even though it is greater than

 the heights of all the other elementary rectangles, "can be assumed smaller than any

 assigned quantity, for, however, small it is assumed to be, still smaller heights could

 be taken." Therefore, the area of the rectangle 1 L^Drj/ "can also be made smaller than

 4 The exposition I give is indebted to Knobloch (2002), but in the symbolization I have followed Leibniz's
 own from the De quadrature! (Leibniz 1993).

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 561

 any given surface". Thus, the difference A — Q too "can also be made smaller than

 any given quantity. QED." (30-33) There is, therefore, no error involved in calculating

 the quadrature as the sum of an infinity of infinitesimal areas, provided this is under

 stood to mean that there are more little finite areas than can be assigned, and that their
 magnitude is smaller than any that can be assigned; in that case, so many such areas
 of sufficient smallness can be taken as to make the difference between their sum and

 the quadrature less than any that can be assigned.

 Thus, it is not the case that Leibniz has two methods, one committed to the existence

 of infinitesimals as "genuine mathematical entities", "fixed, but infinitely small", and

 the other Archimedean, treating the infinitely small as arbitrarily small finite lines,
 ones that could be made as small as desired;5 nor that he simply uses the infinites
 imal calculus and then airily refers to the fact that one could instead have used an
 Archimedean method.6 Rather, Leibniz's use of the Archimedean Axiom justifies

 proceeding as if there are infinitesimals, and at the same time demonstrates that what

 they really stand for are finite quantities which can be taken as small as desired. Once

 this is demonstrated in a suitably general case, it also justifies the use of these fictions

 in other analogous cases. As Leibniz himself writes, "Nor is it necessary always to use

 inscribed or circumscribed figures, and to infer by reductio ad absurdum, and to show

 that the error is smaller than any assignable; although what we have said in Props. 6,
 7 & 8 establishes that it can easily be done by those means." (Scholium to Prop. 23,
 Leibniz 1993, 69).

 In effect, the application of the Archimedean Axiom enables a kind of Arithmetic
 of the Infinite. In his article, Knobloch identifies a number of rules which are tacitly

 applied by Leibniz in De quadratura arithmetica, "without demonstrating them, only
 relying on the 'law of continuity'" (2002, 67). Examples are "1. Finite + infinite =
 infinite", "2.1 Finite infinitely small = finite", "2.2 χ = (y + infinitely small) =>* — >'
 & 0 (is unassignable)". 2.2 can be demonstrated by Leibniz's method as follows.
 Suppose* = y+dx, where dx > 0, and suppose dx is a smallest assignable difference
 between χ and y. Assuming it is a variable geometric quantity, the Archimedean Axiom

 will apply to it. It will, therefore, have an assignable ratio to another geometric quantity
 Ζ such that a number η > 0 can be chosen to make ndx > z. Therefore, z/n will be

 smaller than dx, contrary to supposition. Therefore, χ — y — dx is unassignable; the
 difference between χ and y is smaller than any quantity that can be assigned; it is

 incomparable with (has no finite ratio to) any finite quantity. What this means is that
 there can be no assignable error in equating χ — y with 0. Similar demonstrations can

 be given for the other rules.

 5 Thus, Henk Bos, in his classic article on Leibniz's differentials (1974-1975,55), sees Leibniz as pursuing

 "two different approaches to the foundations of the calculus; one connected with the classical methods of

 proof by 'exhaustion', the other in connection with a law of continuity." The quotations given in my text
 are from Bos (1974-1975), 12, 13. See also Herbert Breger's similar criticisms of Bos on these points in
 his (2008, 195-197).

 6 Thus, to give a recent example of this kind of interpretation, Douglas Jesseph writes: "Leibniz often made

 grand programmatic statements to the effect that derivations which presuppose infinitesimals can always be

 re-cast as exhaustion proofs in the style of Archimedes. But he never, so far as I know, attempted anything

 like a general proof of the eliminability of the infinitesimal ..." (Jesseph 2008,233).

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 562 R. T. W. Arthur

 Leibniz was quite explicit about this Archimedean foundation for his differentials

 as "incomparables". In his response to Bernard Nieuwentijt's criticisms in 1695 he
 wrote that when dx is added tox, the increment ck

 ... cannot be exhibited by any construction. That is, I regard only those homoge

 neous quantities to be comparable (in agreement with Euclid, Book V, Definition
 5), of which one can exceed the other when multiplied by a number, that is, a

 finite number. And I maintain that any entities whose difference is not such a

 quantity are equal. (...) This is precisely what is meant by saying that the dif
 ference is smaller than any given. (Leibniz 1695; GM V 322; also quoted in
 (Bos 1974-1975, 14)

 The full "Law of Continuity" that Leibniz published for the first time in 1688 is a

 generalization of the method that we have just been examining:

 When the difference between two instances in a given series, or in whatever is

 presupposed, can be diminished until it becomes smaller than any given quantity

 whatever, the corresponding difference in what is sought, or what results, must

 of necessity also be diminished or become less than any given quantity whatever.
 (A VI4, 371, 2032)7

 But in a second formulation, it also appears to be a generalization of the approach

 to infinite series we examined above, where the infinite limiting term or terminatio is
 included as if it were an infinitieth term in the series:

 "In any proposed continuous transition that ends in a certain limiting case (termi

 nus), it is permissible to formulate a general reasoning in which that final limiting case
 is included.8"

 It is the Law of Continuity in this form that is the basis of Leibniz's attempts to

 ground the rules of the calculus. His first attempt, in his first publication of the calculus,
 Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis (1684)9, was not clear to his contemporaries,
 as it was vitiated by a number of errors. In this article, Leibniz rather confusingly
 begins by defining dx as "any straight line assumed arbitrarily", before giving his
 rules for manipulating of differentials (e.g. d(xv) = xdv H—ud*).10 But in a reply

 to the criticisms of Nieuwentijt and others, Cum prodiisset, drafted in or shortly after

 1701 but first published by Gerhardt in 1846, he attempts "to show a little more clearly

 that the (so-called) algorithm of our differential calculus proposed by me in 1684 may

 be confirmed to be perfectly correct".11

 7 Leibniz adds: "Or, to put it more commonly, when the cases (or given quantities) continually approach
 one another, so that one finally passes over into the other, the consequences or events (or what is sought)
 must do so too." (A VI4, 371, 2032; translations mine.)

 8 Leibniz (1846), 40; Bos (1974-1975), 56.

 9 Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis, itemque tangentibus, quae necfractas nec irrationales quantitates
 moratur, et singulare pro illis calculi genus. Acta Eruditorum Lips. 1684, GM V 220-226

 10 Nova Methodus, GM V 220.

 11 Henk Bos has drawn attention to the importance of Cum prodiisset in his article on Leibniz's differentials
 (Bos 1974-1975). As he observes, since it contains a reference to a work by Gouye of 1701, and "deals
 with the problems which were discussed in 1701-1702, it is probable that it originated in or not much later

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 563

 Fig. 2 Tangent to parabola

 In this later justification, Leibniz has dx stand for the difference between two abscis

 sas Χ ι and X2, so that dx — X2 — X], with dy the difference between the corresponding

 ordinates X1 Y\ and X2Y2· For the sake of definiteness, he uses a particular example,
 the parabola χ2 = ay (Fig. 2 below).12

 Since (x + dx, y + dy) is also a point on the parabola, "we will have

 y-\-ây — {χχ-\-2χάχ Λ-Axàx)/a (2.1)

 and subtracting y from one side and x1 /a from the other, there will remain

 ày/άχ = (2x + dx)/a (2.2)

 which is the general rule expressing the ratio of the difference in ordinates to the
 difference in abscissas." Now Leibniz appeals to his Law of Continuity:

 Now, since by our postulate it is permissible to include in a general reasoning
 also the case where the ordinate X2Y2, having been moved closer and closer to

 the fixed ordinate X \ Y\ until it finally coincides with it, it is clear that in this

 case dx will be equal to zero or should be omitted, and so it is clear that, since
 in this case TY\ is the tangent, X\Y\ to TX\ is as 2x to a. (Leibniz 1846,44)

 Leibniz's summary of how the Law of Continuity is applied here is notably clear:

 Hence it may be seen that in all our differential calculus there is no need to call

 equal those things that have an infinitely small difference,13 but those things

 are taken as equal that have no difference at all, provided that the calculation is

 than 1701" (1974-1975, 56, η. 92). In a marginal note Leibniz mentions "the Parisians" and urges that
 "All this must be reviewed very carefully so that it can be published, leaving out the sourer things said in

 contradicting others." (Leibniz 1846, 39)

 12 Leibniz (1846), 44. Note that Leibniz characteristically draws his diagrams with the abscissas and λ;-axis
 vertical and the ordinates and y-axis horizontal. I have altered his |X, 2^, etc. toXi, Y2, etc., for ease of

 reading, and also corrected his dr to (d)*, as he seems to have intended, but otherwise this is his figure.

 13 This is a response to Nieuwentijt's definition of an infinitesimal as something actually infinitely small:
 see below.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 supposed to have been rendered general, applying equally to the case where the
 difference is something and to where it is zero; and only when the calculation
 has been purged as far as possible through legitimate omissions and ratios of
 non-vanishing quantities until at last application is made to the ultimate case, is
 the difference assumed to be zero. f44—45)

 It can be appreciated, I think, how close this is to a modern justification of dif

 564 R. T. W. Arthur

 ferentiation in terms of limits. Leibniz has here assumed that the difference dx is a

 finite difference (we would write Ax), and when an expression for Ay/Ax has been
 found in which χ has as far as possible been cancelled, he effectively takes the limit

 as Ax —> 0 to arrive at an expression for dy/àx.

 The rigour of Leibniz's algorithm can be seen by applying it to the counterexample
 proposed by Rolle. He supposed a parabola y2 = ax, and quoted Leibniz's result that

 2yày = αάκ or (adx — 2yày) = 0

 (2.3)

 Now Rolle reasoned that since (x + dx, y + d_y) is also a point on the parabola, we
 will have

 (y + d y)2 = ax + adx = y2 + 2ydy + d y2 (2.4)

 => d y2 — (ax — y2) + (adx — 2yd y) = 0 + 0 (2.5)

 Thus, he concluded, dy — dx — 0, and Leibniz's infinitesimals are identically equal
 to zero.

 But the use of (2.3) in the calculation violates Leibniz's proviso that the difference

 may be assumed to be zero only after "the calculation has been purged as far as
 possible through legitimate omissions and ratios of non-vanishing quantities" and one

 has reached the limiting case. Prior to that, the general rule that applies to all finite
 differences is dx/dy = (2y + dy)/a\and if one substitutes that formula into Eq. (2.4)
 in Rolle's calculation one obtains the identity dy2 = dy2. If, on the other hand, having
 obtained dx/dy = (2y + dy)/a, one applies it to the ultimate case by effectively
 letting dy -> 0, one obtains (2.3) as a result.

 What this application of the Law of Continuity legitimates, then, is proceeding as

 if dx and dy are infinitely small quantities that can be neglected in the last step of the

 calculation; whereas what in fact they stand for are finite differences that are assumed to

 vary in accordance with the Archimedean Axiom, so that they can be made arbitrarily
 small. Leibniz was aware, however, that this new algorithm was a kind of shorthand

 for what in his time would be acceptable as a properly geometrical proof. That would

 have to proceed by proportions, where only quantities of the same dimensions could

 stand in ratios to one another, and all quantities would be finite or "assignable", even

 in the limit. In Cum prodiisset, he, therefore, gave a proof sketch in which "dr and dy

 are retained in the calculation in such a way that they signify non-vanishing quantities

 even in the ultimate case". He lets (d)jt be "any assignable straight line" (i.e. a fixed

 finite line segment), and then defines another segment (d)_y, by the proportion

 (d)y:(d)jr = DY2:DY\ = dy:dx

 (2.6)

 Ô Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 3 Leibniz's finite surrogates

 Thus, (d) v varies in such a way that for all finite dx and dy > 0 it maintains the same

 finite ratio to the fixed line (d)x as d>> has to dx. But, as Bos observes, the same (d)y can

 also be given an interpretation in the limit when the variable dx = 0, namely through

 the proportion

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 565

 (d)y:(d)x = y:a

 (2.7)

 where σ is the subtangent to the curve. Bos's diagram follows (Fig. 3):

 Now, since the resulting formula is still interpretable even in the case where
 dx = 0, the Law of Continuity asserts that this limiting case may also be included

 in the general reasoning:14 dy:dx can be substituted for (d)y : (d)x in the resulting
 formulas even for the case where dx = 0: "in this way Ay and dx will always be
 assignable in the ratio DY2 to DY which latter vanish in the ultimate case." As Bos
 explains, this explication does indeed make intelligible Leibniz's having begun his
 1684 article by having dx and ây stand for finite lines. What was confusing is that

 there he had dx stand for an arbitrary finite line, corresponding to the (d)x of this later
 explication.

 Proceeding on this foundation Leibniz offers justifications in Cum prodiisset for
 the rules of the calculus for first-order differentials that he had given in 1684: the

 rules for differentiating sums and differences, products, quotients, and powers. First,
 he constructs a figure in which (as above) (d)jt is a fixed straight line segment which

 remains constant as X2 approaches the fixed point Xi.dx = X2 — X\,dy = X2Y2 ~
 XlKl, and (d)y = (Ay /άχ) ■ (d)jc. He also introduces a third variable ν and defines
 another variable straight line segment (d)u by (d)u = (du/djc) · (d)x.(Leibniz 1846,
 46)

 Following Bos, I will give as an example his justification on this basis for the

 differentiation of a product: d(xv) = xdv + vdx. First Leibniz lets ay = xv (here the

 14 Here I disagree with Bos, who claims that in taking the secant as the limiting position of the tangent,

 Leibniz "did not invoke the law of continuity; as will be seen, he used the law later, presupposing that the
 limiting position of the secant is the tangent." (Bos 1974-1975,57). But that is how the law of continuity
 works: it does presuppose a limiting case, it does not establish its existence.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 566

 R. T. W. Arthur

 purpose of the constant a is to preserve the homogeneity of the equation), and then
 allows χ, y, and υ to increase by dx, dy, and dv, respectively:

 "Demonstration: ay + dy = (χ + dx)(v + du)

 — xv + xdv + udr + dxdi),

 and, subtracting from each side the equals ay and xv, we have

 a dy — xdv + vdx + cbrdu

 aây/âx = χάν/άχ + υ + du

 and transposing the case, as we may, to lines that never vanish, we have

 a(â)y/(d)x = χ(ά)ν/{ά)χ + ν + du

 so that the only remaining term which can vanish is dv, and since in the case of

 vanishing differences dv = 0, we have

 as was asserted, *or id)>>:(d)x = (x + v):a* Whence also, because (d)>':(d)jc
 always = dy:dï one may feign this in the case of vanishing dy, dx and put15

 a(d)y — x(d)v + v(d)jc

 ady = xdv + wdx.'

 or

 Thus,

 Ô Springer

 d(*t;) = xdv + ud* QED. (2.8)

 This justification may be regarded as one in keeping with the standards of rigour
 expected by Huygens and Newton, and thus above reproach. It still depends on the

 same conceptions of infinitesimals as fictions: they stand for quantities that are finite

 but variable, and that may be made arbitrarily small.

 My interpretation here contrasts with that of Bos, who reads Leibniz as having

 two different interpretations of differentials, one in which they are infinitely small

 elements of lines, and the other where they stand for finite lines. He points out that

 differentials are equated with finite lines by Leibniz already in his first publication,

 the Nova Methodus of 1684, apparently in preference to the approach taken in the

 manuscript Elementa "which Gerhardt identified as an alternative draft for the first

 15 Leibniz (1846), 46-47; quoted from (Bos 1974-1975, 58). The asterisked phrase is an error for "or
 (d)y : (d).r = \χ(ά)ν/(d) χ + υ) : a, but this does not figure in the remaining calculation.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 567

 publication of the rules of the calculus, in which the differentials are introduced as
 infinitesimals' (Bos 1974—1975, 63). But in the Elementa, dx and dy are defined as
 differences of successive abscissa and ordinates which are then assumed to become

 infinitely small, so that even here they are understood as limit-elements, like Newton's
 nascent and evanescent quantities (Leibniz 1848, 32-33). In the Nova Methodus, on

 the other hand, Leibniz makes more explicit the finiteness of the differences prior to

 this limiting process. He lets dx stand for an arbitrary finite line, and d>! for a variable

 finite line, whose ratio to dx in the limit as dx becomes evanescent equals the ratio of

 the ordinate to the subtangent:

 ày : άχ — y : σ

 In the more sophisticated approach of Cum prodiisset, as we saw above, (d).r is now

 taken as the arbitrary finite line, and (d)y the variable finite line defined by (2.1) and

 (2.2), while d>· and dx are both variable finite quantities whose ratio is always equal
 to the ratio (d)y:(d);t, even in the case where the finite difference dx goes to zero.

 Bos interprets this as meaning that in Cum prodiisset Leibniz has defined (d)>> as the

 differential. For if y — f(x), and the finite differences ày and dx are written as Ay
 and Ax, then (2.1) becomes

 (d)y = (Ay/Ax)(d)x = {[f(x + Ax) - f(x)]/Ax] ■ (d)* (2.9)

 In the limit as Ax —► 0, the expression in braces is f'(x), the derivative with respect

 to χ of the function f(x), and (d)y is the differential of y as defined by Cauchy (Bos
 1974-1975,59).

 But this, it seems to me, is to misinterpret Leibniz's justification, the aim of which
 is not to define (d)>> as the differential, but rather to show that d>· and dv may still
 have an assignable ratio to dx even in the limit where dx —► 0. In that limit, dy, dv

 and dx are infinitely small, fictional quantities. These are the differentials. The role
 of (d)y, (d)v and (d)jc is to be "finite surrogates": they remain assignable quantities
 throughout the limiting process as <it becomes arbitrarily small, and since (d) v and
 (d)x have an assignable ratio equal to d_y:dxr even in that limit (likewise for (d)u
 and (d)jc), differential equations involving terms in ây, dv and dx to the same order
 are interpretable under the fiction where these quantities stand for infinitely small
 quantities.

 Having shown this in an arbitrary case, it obviates the need to show it in every

 case. The strict proof operating only with assignable quantities justifies proceeding by

 simply appealing to the fact that dv is incomparable with respect to υ: in keeping with

 the Archimedean axiom, it can be made so small as to render any error in neglecting

 it smaller than any given. Thus, in a letter to Wallis in 1699, Leibniz justifies the rule
 for â(xy) = xdy + ydx as follows

 ... there remains xdy + ydx + djcdy. But this djcdy should be rejected, as it is
 incomparably smaller than xdy + ydx, and this becomes d(xy) — jcd>· + ydx,
 inasmuch as, if someone wished to translate the calculation into the style of

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 568

 R. T. W. Arthur

 Archimedes, it is evident that, when the thing is done using assignable qualities,

 the error that could accrue from this would always be smaller that any given.16

 As a second example of Leibniz's approach to infinitesimals, it will be instruc
 tive to examine Leibniz's criticisms of Newton's proof of his Lemma 9 in the Prin
 cipia and the demonstration he offers in its stead. Here, I will follow closely the
 development of Leibniz's reactions to Newton's Principia and its methods given by
 Bertoloni Meli (1993), who has analysed the evolution of Leibniz's mathematical cos
 mology from his initial hostile reactions to Newton's to the development of his own
 rival dynamics of celestial motion, in a brilliant and careful study of the surviving
 documents.

 As Leibniz correctly recognized, Lemmas 9-11 are crucial for Newton's proofs of
 the inverse square law; Lemma 10, in particular, is a corollary of Lemma 9, and is

 appealed to by Newton (in the first edition of the Principia) in the proof of Proposition
 6. Each of Newton's lemmas is an instance of his Method of First and Last Ratios, and

 establishes a ratio between quantities as they are on the very point of being generated

 or vanishing. The figures, accordingly, are "ultimate" ones, depicting what Whiteside

 has aptly termed "limit motions" ( 1967,154) the motions a body would undergo during

 a "moment" if it continued with the velocity it had at the beginning of that moment.
 Leibniz had no objection to this procedure; but he did object to what he found in

 Proposition 6, namely the treatment of a curved trajectory in such an ultimate moment

 as compounded from two motions, one a rectilinear inertial motion along the tangent,

 and the other an acceleration towards the centre. This was an objection of his of long
 standing, and is closely related to his syncategorematic understanding of moments

 and of infinite division. In a piece written at the beginning of April 1676, he reasoned
 that if there were such a thing as a perfect fluid—by which he meant matter divided

 all the way down into points, each individuated by a differing motion—then "a new
 endeavour [would] be impressed at any moment whatever" on a body moving in the

 fluid. But this would be to compose a curved line from points and time from instants,
 and would also entail an "impossible" composition at every single instant:

 But if this is conceded, time will actually be divided into instants, which is not

 possible. So there will be no uniformly accelerated motion anywhere, and so the

 parabola will not be describable in this way. And so it is quite credible that circles

 and parabolas and other things of that kind are all fictitious.... For supposing a

 point moves in a parabolic line, it will certainly be true of it that at any instant it is

 moving with a uniform motion in one direction, and with a uniformly accelerated
 motion in another, which is impossible. (A VI 3, 492; LoC 74-77)17

 1(* "... restai xdy + ydx + dxdy. Sed hie dxdy rejiciendum, utipsisxdy + ydx incomparabiliter minus, et fit

 d, xy = xdy + ydx, ita ut semper manifestum sit, re in ipsis assignabilibus peracta, errorem, qui inde metui
 queat, esse dato minorem, si quis calculum ad Archimedis stylum traducere velit." (Leibniz to Wallis, 30th
 March 1699; GM IV 63).

 17 Here Leibniz appears to be applying a principle he had just formulated: "If a given motion can be resolved

 into two motions, one of them possible and the other impossible, the given motion will be impossible." (A
 VI 3, 492; LoC 72-73) The quoted passage should be compared with the quotation Bertoloni Meli gives
 from Leibniz's letter to Claude Perrault, also written in 1676: "I take it as certain that everything moving

 along a curved line endeavours to escape along the tangent of this curve; the true cause of this is that curves

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 569

 Fig. 4 Newton's Lemma 9

 When he first confronted Newton's Principia some 12 years later, Leibniz's ini
 tial reaction was, therefore, to believe that there was a mistake in Newton's com

 position of motions in deriving Proposition 6. On his understanding, in an ultimate

 moment only straight line motions (and equivalently the lines they would traverse in
 such a moment) can be compounded, since ultimately the curve is resolved into an

 infinite-sided polygon with fictional straight sides, each one representing a geometric
 "indivisible" or ultimate difference between successive values. Seeing the depen
 dence of Proposition 6 on Lemmas 9 and 10, therefore, he concentrated his attention
 on them.

 In Lemma 9, Newton has a curved trajectory depicted in an ultimate moment,
 and a claim is made that "the areas of the [curvilinear] triangles ADB and A EC will
 ultimately be to each other in the squared ratio of the sides", i.e. AADB .AAEC =
 AD^ .AÉ1 (Newton 1999,437). Newton performs his proof using his Method Of Finite
 Surrogates: here these surrogates are the lines Ad and Ae, which are finite, with Ae

 remaining fixed, and in proportion to AD and AE, which are supposed variable; likewise

 Abe is a fixed portion of curve similar to ABC, with the elements of the curve AB and

 AC supposed variable, gradually shrinking toward A until Β and C "come together"

 with it. The line AGg is tangent to both curves at A. Newton's proof then proceeds by

 noting that in the limit A, Β and C coincide, LcAg vanishes, and "the curvilinear areas

 Abd and Ace will coincide with the rectilinear areas Afd and Age, and thus (by Lemma

 5) will be in the squared ratio of these sides Ad and Ae" (437). Therefore, given the

 assumed proportionality between these finite surrogates and the infinitesimals, "the
 areas ABD and ACE also are ultimately in the squared ratio of the sides AD and AE.
 QED" (437) (Fig. 4).

 are polygons with an infinite number of sides, and these sides are portions of the tangents..(quoted from
 Bertoloni Meli 1993,75).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 570 R. T. W. Arthur

 Fig. 5 Leibniz: Newton's
 Lemma 9

 Leibniz's reaction to Newton is fraught with irony. For he neglects Newton's use
 of finite surrogates, which is to all intents and purposes identical to his own way
 of justifying the calculus in "Cum prodiisset" using only assignable quantities, as
 explained above. (This irony is compounded by the fact that Leibniz rather arbitrarily

 replaces Newton's letters Ε and C by (D) and (B), the same bracket notation he usually

 uses for finite lines.) It is possible, of course, that Leibniz adopts his finite surrogate

 technique after further reflection on Newton's method, although, as Bos notes, Leibniz

 had promoted his differentials as finite variable quantities bearing a proportion to fixed
 lines in his first publication on the calculus (1684) (albeit in a form that was not easy

 for his contemporaries to understand).18 In any case, in these first notes on Newton's
 Principia, Leibniz dispenses with the finite surrogates completely, so as to concentrate

 on the curvilinear figures that Newton has depicted in his "ultimate moment". Above is

 his diagram, statement and criticism of Newton's Lemma 9, following the description
 given by Bertoloni Meli (Fig. 5):

 If AB, A{B) are unassignable, A.ADB and AA(D)(B) will be in the squared
 ratio of the sides (+ namely, it must be understood that the As are similar, and

 so angle BA(B) has a ratio to angle DAB that is infinitely small, but this does not

 seem to be true, since in AAB(B) the side B(B) has an assignable ratio to A Β
 or A(B), and so to AD and DB.+)

 That is, Leibniz objects that in the limit As ADB and A{D)(B) will not be similar,

 since Newton's diagram already represents the ultimate moment, and in it angle BA(B)

 has a finite rather than infinitesimal ratio to the sides of the triangles. In an effort to show

 that Newton has made an error in calculating with infinitesimals, Leibniz proceeds with

 his own calculation, in which the infinitesimal order of the angle BA(B) with respect
 to AB and AD is rendered explicit by setting AD = x, DB = y, A(D) — χ + dx, and
 D(B) = ν + dy. Leibniz does not succeed in demonstrating any error on Newton's

 18 See (Bos 1974-1975, 57, 63). Certainly some of the wording of Leibniz's later justifications seems to
 show Newton's influence, as Guicciardini notes in his excellent discussion (Guicciardini 1999, 161), even

 if he had developed the method of finite surrogates independently.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 571

 part; nor in fact is there an error, as Meli observes, since as χ tends to zero so does dx,

 so that ultimately the triangles become similar.

 Nevertheless, even though he fails to show anything wrong in Newton's procedure,

 Leibniz's workings provide us with a nice illustration of his approach to the differential

 calculus. First, he expresses y as a series expansion in χ:

 y — a + bx + cx2 + ex3 + ·

 (2.10)

 Now since χ — 0 when y = 0, we have a — 0 a point Leibniz first realized, and then
 subsequently forgot, rendering his calculation inconclusive. But as Meli shows, the
 lemma follows fairly easily from these premises. For

 xy — bx2 + cx3 + ex4 + ·

 (2.11)

 so that since (assuming Lemma 5) area [ADB] = AD ■ DB/2,

 area [ADB] = xy/2 z=x/2(bx2 + cx3 + ex4 Η ) (2.12)

 Meli remarks that "If χ becomes infinitesimal, the terms in jc3 , x4,... are negligible,

 and the area of ADB (= xy/2) is indeed proportional to AD2(— x2)" (242). To this one

 might object that it seems unjustified to assume terms in χ3, χ4,... are negligible when

 terms in jc2 are not. In fact, however, we can proceed more rigorously. For although

 Leibniz apparently thought Newton's finite surrogates could be dispensed with, they

 are completely in accord with his way of proceeding. Thus, let DB.AD = db:Ad, etc.,

 as Newton had assumed, with db and Ad finite, and with this ratio remaining in a finite

 and non-vanishing proportion to ec and Ae (with Ae fixed) even as χ -*■ 0. Then

 DB/AD = AD ■ DB/AD2 = b + ex + ex2 + ■ ■ ■ (2.13)

 But since this equals db:Ad, which is finite and non-vanishing as χ -> 0, it follows

 that

 2 χ area [ADB)]/AD2 = AD ■ DB/AD2 = b{const.) (2.14)

 Now the same reasoning will apply for AA(D)(B), giving

 area [ADB)]: area [A(D)(B)] = AD2 : A(D)2 (2.15)

 Newton's Lemma is, therefore, sound even by Leibniz's lights, as indeed he came

 to realize despite not having successfully completed this calculation.19

 Alternatively, the move from Eqs. (2.13) to (2.14) is justifiable by the consideration

 that ck is incomparably small relative to any finite quantity of the same order as jc, and

 19 As Meli reports (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 103), Leibniz's attitude seems to have undergone a sea change
 on moving on from Sect. 1 of the Principia on First and Last Ratios, to Sect. 2, on the determination of

 central forces. Accordingly, in the first set of Excerpts Leibniz took from the Principia the following year,
 "lemma 9 is transcribed without commentary, and seems to be accepted without difficulty" (242).

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 572 R. T. W. Arthur

 thus ignoring it will produce an error smaller than any that can be assigned, and thus

 null. Thus, if χ in Eq. (2.13) is an infinitesimal variable, then cx stands for a finite line

 that can be made smaller than any finite quantity, and thus smaller than b, for any b

 and c, and a fortiori for higher order terms.

 Similar considerations apply to Lemma 11, stating that the curvature of a trajectory

 at a given point is the same as the curvature of the osculating circle at that point. In
 the first stage of composition of his Marginalia identified by Meli and Leibniz objects

 to Newton's Corollary 7 to Proposition 4, in which the proportionality of centripetal

 forces to v2/r, proved in Proposition 4 for bodies rotating uniformly in circular orbits,
 is extended to non-circular orbits for limit-motions: "Since I do not yet accept the
 generality of Lemma XI, I also doubt the generality of this corollary 7" (Bertoloni
 Meli 1993, 107). Somewhat later, according to Meli, he corrected himself: "On the
 contrary, this is true, because the considerations on the secant of the angle made
 by the radius from the centre to the curve, and that of the radius of the osculating
 circle to the curve, vanish on account of the similarity of the figures."20 That is,
 according to Meli's analysis, "since Proposition 4 is stated in the form of a proportion

 between the homologous elements of two similar figures, their similarity cancels out

 the dependence of paracentric conatus [—the endeavour toward the centre—] on the
 secant of the angle and on the osculating radius" (107).

 3 Smooth infinitesimal analysis

 Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis has many features in common with Leibniz's approach.
 It begins, like Leibniz, by eschewing the composition of the continuum from an infinity

 of points. In contrast to the account of the continuum established by Cantor based on
 Point Set Theory, according to which a continuous line is an infinite (indeed, nondenu

 merably infinite) set of points, SIA is rooted in Category Theory, and mappings rather

 than points are taken as basic. The category of smooth manifolds, Man, is embedded
 in an enlarged category C which contains "infinitesimal" objects, and a topos Setc
 is then formed of sets varying over C. "Each smooth topos Ε is then identified as a

 certain subcategory of Setc. Any of these toposes has the property that its objects are

 undergoing a form of smooth variation, and each may be taken as a smooth world."

 (Bell 1998, 14). With this foundation secured, a great many results of differential cal

 culus may be obtained "—with full rigour— using straightforward calculations with

 infinitesimals in place of the limit concept" (Bell 1998, 4), as if infinitesimals exist.

 Here I say "as if infinitesimals exist" advisedly. For another feature that SIA has

 in common with Leibniz's approach is that, whilst it licenses certain infinitesimal
 techniques, it is not committed to the existence of infinitesimals in the continuum.

 That is, as in Leibniz's theory, infinitesimals are fictions in a precisely defined sense.

 The sense in which they are fictions in SIA, however, is that although it is denied that

 an infinitesimal neighbourhood of a given point, such as 0, reduces to zero, it cannot be

 inferred from this that there exists any point in the infinitesimal neighbourhood distinct

 20 Marginalia, M 42 A: translated from the Latin quoted by Meli, 107.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 573

 from Ο.21 Thus, the Law of Excluded Middle, and with it the Law of Double Negation,
 both fail in smooth worlds. Bell explains this as follows. Define two points a and b
 on the real line (as represented in a smooth world Σ) as distinguishable iff they are
 not identical, i.e. iff ->a = b, where '=' denotes identity. Now define the infinitesimal
 neighbourhood 1(0) of a given point 0 as the set of all those points indistinguishable
 from 0. That is, define 1(0) as follows:

 1(0) =def {*!—.*= 0}

 (3.1)

 Now if the Law of Double Negation (or, equivalently, the Law of Excluded Middle)
 held in Σ, we could infer that χ = 0 for each χ in 1(0), so that the infinitesimal

 neighbourhood of 0 1(0) would reduce to {0}. But we know that this neighbourhood
 does not reduce to {0} in Σ. So we cannot infer the identity of points from their

 indistinguishability. Again, suppose there is a point a in / that is distinguishable from
 0, i.e. suppose there is a point α ε I such that ->a = 0. But since αεί, ~·->α = 0 by
 definition. But this is a contradiction. Therefore, it is not the case that there exists

 a point a in I that is distinguishable from 0. That is, the logic of smooth worlds is
 intuitionistic logic: the Law of Non-contradiction holds, as we have just seen; but the

 Laws of Excluded Middle, Double Negation, and one form of Quantifier Negation do
 not hold in smooth worlds. From -i(Vjc e I)x = 0 (it is not the case that all members
 of / are identical with 0), we can not infer that (3x € I)->x = 0 (there is a member

 of / that is distinguishable from 0).22 This makes precise the older conception of an

 infinitesimal difference as a difference smaller than any assignable, but not zero. It

 does so, in effect, by denying that an unassignable difference reduces to zero, but not

 allowing the inference from this that there exists an unassignable difference different
 from zero, it is in this sense that the infinitesimal intervals of SIA are fictional.

 On this foundation, Bell erects the theory of SIA. First, he defines Δ as consisting
 in those points χ in R such that x2 = 0. The letter ε then denotes a variable ranging
 over Δ (21). The fundamental assumption is then that every curve is microstraight
 (9, 22). That is, arbitrary functions / : R —*■ R are assumed to behave locally like
 polynomials, so that with f(x) = ao + a\x+a2X2-\ a„x" and ε2 — 0, we have

 /(ε) = αο + a\£ f°r any ε in Δ.

 (3.2)

 This is the Principle of Microstraightness, and it implies that (ε, /(ε) lies on the
 tangent to the curve at the point (0, ao). It also entails (if one considers only the
 restriction of g of / to Δ) that g is affine on Δ. This may be compared with Leib

 niz's statement that "... to find a tangent is to draw a straight line which joins two

 21 In a sympathetic but exacting analysis of SIA, Geoffrey Hellman observes that the status of infinitesimals

 in SIA is odd. On the one hand, "the "existence of non-zero nilsquares" is actually refutable", but on the
 other, "in the background one assumes their 'possibility' in making sense of the whole theory" (Hellman

 2006,10). Certainly there is no constructive definition of them (11), even as fictional entities. Here, I think,
 Leibniz's theory is more in keeping with the constructivist spirit.

 22 More precisely, the logic of smooth toposes is free first-order intuitionistic or constructive logic. See
 Bell (1998), 101-102.

 "β Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 R. T. W. Arthur

 points of the curve which have an infinitely small distance, that is, the prolonged
 side of the infinitangular polygon which for us is the same as the curve." (Leibniz
 1684a, GM V 223). That consideration motivates the Principle of Microaffineness
 (Bell 1998, 23):

 For any map g: Δ —*■ R, there exists a unique b in R such that, for all ε in A, we

 574

 have

 g (ε) = g(0) + eb.

 (3.3)

 This principle allows one to define the derivative of an arbitrary function / : R —*■ R

 as follows (1998, 26). Define the function gx(s) = f(x + ε). By Microaffineness, it
 follows that there is a unique bx such that for all ε in Δ,

 f(x +ε) = gx(e) = gx( 0) + ebx = f(x) + ebx (3.4)

 If we allow χ to vary, the values bx will constitute a new function, the derivative

 fix):

 f(x +ε) = f{x) + sf'(x) (3.5)

 If the function / is a function of time, and ε is an infinitesimal time, we have as a

 direct consequence of this the Principle of Microuniformity (of natural processes): any

 such process may be considered as taking place at a constant rate over the "timelet"
 ε (1998, 9). Another important consequence of Microaffineness is the Principle of
 Microcancellation: for any a, b in R, if εα = εb for all ε in Δ, then a = b (1998,
 24). I quote Bell's proof:

 Suppose that, for all ε in 8, all εα = eb and consider the function g : Δ —*■ R
 defined by g (ε) — εα. The assumption then implies that ghas both slope a and
 slope b: the uniqueness clause in Microaffineness yields a — b. (24)

 I will now illustrate the neatness and simplicity of SIA by means of two examples: (i)

 the proof of the product rule for derivatives, and (ii) the proof of Newton's Proposition

 1 of the Principia, the Kepler Area Law. For both of these illustrations, I shall follow
 Bell's exposition.

 (i) The Product Rule for Derivatives

 Let y(x) = f(x)g(x). We wish to prove that y' = f'g + fg'. By the definition of the
 derivative,

 f{x + ε) = fix) + Sf'ix), (3.6)

 and likewise for g and y. Thus, since

 y(x + ε) = f(x + ε) · g(x + ε), (3.7)

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 575

 we have

 y(x) + ey'(x) = [f{x) + ef'(x)\ ■ [g(*) + £#'(*)] (3.8)

 = y(x) + ε [/'(x)g(x) + g'(*)/00] + s2f\x)g\x) (3.9)

 Now subtracting y from both sides and assuming ε2 = 0, we have

 ey'(x) = « [/'(*)g(*) + g\x)f(x)], and thus (3.10)
 y'(x) = f'(x)g(x) + g'(x)f{x) (3.11)

 The inference from (3.10) to (3.11) is guaranteed by the Principle of Microcan

 cellation: if εα = eb for all ε in Δ, then a — b. As we saw, this in turn depends on
 the nilsquare property ε2 = 0. So in the proof, this property is invoked three times:

 indirectly in the definition of the derivative (3.6), in the inference from (3.9) to (3.10)

 directly, and again indirectly in proving the Microcancellation property involved in
 the inference from (3.10) to (3.11).

 (ii) Newton's Proposition 1, the Kepler Area Law

 In his proof of this law, Bell assumes that the area A, the radius r and the angle θ are

 all functions of t, which increases by a nilsquare infinitesimal ε "with ε in Δ". "Then

 by Microstraightness the sector OPQ is a triangle of base r(t+e) = r+ er' and height

 r sin[0(/ + ε) — 0{t)] — r sin ε#' = red'" (Bell 1998, 69) (3.12)

 Here, the nilsquare property is invoked in Microstraightness, in the definitions of

 the derivatives r' and Θ', and again in the equating of sins#' with εθ'. Since the area

 is half the base times the height, this gives for the area of sector OPQ

 OPQ = y2(r + ε/)Γεθ' = ι/2εΓ2θ'

 (3.13)

 if the term ε^Γτ'θ' is dropped, again invoking the nilsquare property. But the area
 OPQ is the increment in area produced by the motion of the radius vector,

 OPQ = A(t + ε)- A(t) = ε A'if) (3.14)

 so that (3.13) and (3.14) give, by Microcancellation,

 A'{t) = VV (3.15)

 where k is a constant.

 A{t)—kt, (3.16)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Expressing A' as a function of x, x', y, y', Bell then proves that A"(t) — 0, so that,

 assuming A(0) = 0, we have the Area Law

 576

 R. T. W. Arthur

 As a historical note, we may remark that Bell's procedure is reminiscent of that

 pioneered by the seventeenth century Dutch mathematician Bernard Nieuwentijt.23 In

 his treatment (which was independent of Newton's and Leibniz's), Nieuwentijt began

 by defining infinitesimal and infinite quantities: "A quantity smaller than any given
 one may be called, for the sake of abbreviation, infinitesimal; greater than any given
 one, infinite." He then laid down a number of axioms. The first is that "That which

 cannot be multiplied so many times, that is, by such a great number, that it becomes

 equal in magnitude to any given [finite] quantity, however small, is not a quantity, but

 a mere nothing in geometry." (Nieuwentijt 1695,2: Axiom 1 ). Axiom 2 states that any

 arbitrary finite quantity can be divided into arbitrarily many equal or unequal parts less

 than any given quantity, so that the division of a finite quantity b by an infinite number

 m yields an infinitesimal quantity. (This is in accord with Axiom 1, since b/m may

 be multiplied by the product of the infinite number m and the finite number c/b so

 that it does equal any other finite quantity c.) But it now follows (Nieuwentijt 1695,4:

 Lemma 10) that if two infinitesimal quantities b/m and c/m are multiplied together,

 their product bc/mm is zero. For when multiplied by the largest possible number m, the

 product be/m is still infinitesimal and, therefore, cannot be made equal to any finite
 quantity; by Axiom 1, the product of any two infinitesimal quantities is, therefore,

 zero. Nieuwentijt's infinitesimals are nil-square infinitesimals. Nieuwentijt was proud
 of this result, regarding it as the "Ariadne's thread" that would provide an exit from
 the labyrinth of the continuum by establishing a strict criterion for which infinitesimal

 quantities could indeed be neglected in any calculation (Nieuwentijt 1695, 81).

 Notwithstanding this agreement on nilsquare infinitesimals, there are, of course,
 many profound differences between SIA and Nieuwentijt's approach. For SIA, like
 Leibniz's approach, is based on smoothly varying geometric quantities, whereas
 Nieuwentijt's infinitesimals are defined through division by an infinite number m,
 where m is the largest number. They are, therefore, invertible, unlike the infinitesi

 mals of SIA; they are also actual infinitesimals by Nieuwentijt's definition, quantities

 smaller than any finite quantity, the inverses of categorematically infinite quantities.
 Moreover, SIA presupposes intuitionistic logic, whereas Nieuwentijt's logic is classi
 cal. Finally, Nieuwentijt's theory does not admit higher order differentials, whereas,
 as we shall see, this is possible in SIA. But the key points it has in common with
 Nieuwentijt's approach are these: the Principle of Microaffineness, which "entails

 that all curves are 'locally straight'" (110); and the Nilsquare Property, which guaran

 tees that all squares and higher powers of an infinitesimal are intrinsically zero, and

 not just by comparison with other quantities.24

 23 See the lucid account of Nieuwentijt's theory in Mancosu (1996), 158ff, and also Nagel (2008), 200-205,
 for a succinct account of his dispute with Leibniz.

 24 Mancosu has very aptly summarized the difference between Nieuwentijt's approach and Leibniz's in his

 (Mancosu 1996, 160). One of these differences is that on Nieuwentijt's theory, the infinitesimal b/m cannot
 be eliminated from computations; but Bell's Principle of Microcancellation shows how to circumvent this

 problem. Bell has also provided a useful comparison of the difference between Nieuwentijt's approach and
 Leibniz's in his (2006, 98-100).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 577

 Fig. 6 Newton's Proposition 6

 4 Propositions 4 and 6 of Newton's Principia

 The comparison between Leibniz's syncategorematic approach and that of SIA can be
 set in relief by applying both to the same examples. Because of its historical impor
 tance, and also because it gave both Leibniz and Varignon some measure of grief25
 and, therefore, presents itself as an excellent touchstone, I shall consider Newton's

 Proposition 6 of Book 1 of the Principia, the theorem that is the basis of his derivation
 in Proposition 11 of the inverse square law of attraction due to gravity for a body

 orbiting in an ellipse. I will briefly present Newton's own proof of Proposition 6 with
 some commentary. Then I will proceed to a sketch of Leibniz's proof of the inverse
 square law for the ellipse, in which he avails himself of Newton's Proposition 1 (the

 area law), and its composition of motions along the chords, to give an algebraic proof

 using his method of differentials. But first, to motivate this, I will follow Nico Bertoloni

 Meli in giving an analysis of Newton's Proposition 4 according to the two different

 compositions of motion: Newton's composition of a rectilinear uniform motion along

 the tangent with a uniform acceleration towards the centre, and Leibniz's composition
 of a rectilinear uniform motion along the chord with a rectilinear uniform motion
 towards the centre (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 82-83).

 It seems appropriate to consider Newton's treatment in the first edition of the Prin

 cipia (published in 1687), since this is the one that Leibniz's critical comments were
 directed towards.26 There he states Proposition 6 as follows (Fig. 6):

 If a body P, revolving about a centre S, describes any curved line APQ, while
 the straight line ZPR touches that curve at any point P; and to the tangent from

 any other point Q of the curve, QR is drawn parallel to the distance SP, and the

 perpendicular QT is dropped onto the distance SP: I say that the centripetal force

 is as the reciprocal of the solid SP2 ■ QT2/QR, provided that the quantity of

 this solid is always taken as that which is made when the points Ρ and Q come

 together.

 25 On Varignon and Leibniz on central force see (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 81-83,201ff.).

 26 For the second edition (published in 1713) Newton composed a new Proposition VI, which remains
 the same in the third (1726), and the first edition text became Corollary 1. Although the first edition can

 be pieced together from the footnotes in Newton (1999), Part I is usefully presented in its entirety (in a
 different translation by Mary Ann Rossi) by Brackenridge (1995), 235-267.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 578

 R. T. W. Arthur

 In the first edition27 Newton gives the following proof:

 For in the indefinitely small figure QRPT the nascent linelet QR is, given the
 time, as the centripetal force (by Law 2), and given the force, as the square of

 the time (by Lem. 10), and thus, if neither be given, as the centripetal force and

 the square of the time jointly, and thus the centripetal force is as the linelet QR

 directly and the square of the time inversely. But the time is as the area SPQ, or
 its double SP χ QT, that is, as SP and QT jointly, and thus the centripetal force

 is as QR directly and SP2 χ QT2 inversely, that is, as SP2 ■ QT21 QR inversely.
 QED. (Newton 1999,454)

 In Proposition 11, Newton went on to use this formula to derive an expression for

 the centripetal force holding a body in an elliptical orbit. If the minor and major axes
 of the ellipse are, respectively, b(= 2BC) and q(= 2AC), then the latus rectum of the
 ellipse is L — 2BC2/AC = b2/q. By adroitly using the properties of the ellipse and
 the lemmas he had established for proportions in the limit motions, Newton is able to

 prove that SP2 ■ QT2/QR = L ■ SP2. Therefore, from Proposition 6, the centripetal
 force is the reciprocal of this, and thus as the inverse square of the altitude, SP.

 Newton's proof of Proposition 6 involves a composition of a uniform motion with a

 uniformly accelerated motion, which Leibniz could not accept, as mentioned in Sect. 2.

 He interprets Newton's "force" as cause of an increment in quantity of motion, so that it

 should be proportional to velocity, not to acceleration.28 Newton's proof also appeals
 to Lemma 10, whose validity Leibniz initially doubted. Thus, in his marginalia to
 Newton's Principia Leibniz altered Newton's statement in the proof of proposition

 6, "the nascent linelet QR is, given the time, as the centripetal force (by Law 2), and
 given the force, as the square of the time (by Lem. 10)", replacing both instances of the
 word 'force' by 'velocity', and 'as the square of the time' simply by 'as the time'.29

 Subsequently, as we noted in Sect. 2 above, Leibniz came to see that Newton's way
 of applying his Lemmas to limit-motions involved no mathematical error. In fact, as
 Meli explains, the two ways of analyzing the composition of motion, Newton's com

 position of a rectilinear uniform motion along the tangent with a uniform acceleration
 towards the centre, and Leibniz's composition of a rectilinear uniform motion along

 the chord with a rectilinear uniform motion towards the centre, generally lead to the

 same mathematical result. But Leibniz still preferred a composition of two uniform

 motions, rejecting the physicality of Newton's instantaneous acceleration.30 It will be

 27 This proof is replaced by a new proof (of Corollary 1 to the new proposition 6) in the 2nd and 3rd
 editions, where QR is said to be "equal to the sagitta of an arc that is twice the length of an arc QP, with Ρ
 being in the middle; and twice the triangle SQP (or SP χ QT) is proportional to the time in which twice
 that arc is described and, therefore, can stand for the time." (453-454). Nonetheless, Newton does write

 after the new proof of Prop. 6: "The proposition is easily proved by lem. 10, coroll. 4.".

 Bertoloni Meli notes how, in his notes on Corollary 1 to the First Law, Leibniz objected to Newton's use

 of "force" in stating it—writing after"... vi", "(malo dicere conatu)"—meaning that vis should be replaced
 by conatus, that is (directed) infinitesimal tendency to motion. See (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 224, 239, 163).

 29 See Bertoloni Meli (1993), 162.

 10 "La voye est plus simple," Leibniz wrote to Varignon in October 1706, "qui ne met pas l'accélération
 dans les elemens, lorsqu'on n'en a point besoin. Je m'en suis servi depuis de 30 ans." (GM IV 150-151;
 Bertoloni Meli 1993, 81).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 579

 Fig. 7 Tangent composition

 R P

 N

 worthwhile to further our understanding of Leibniz's reasons for this before proceed
 ing to his derivation of the centripetal force law for the ellipse, by examining proofs

 of the centripetal force law for circular motion (Newton's Proposition 4) according to

 the two different compositions.

 In his own proof of Proposition 4 in the first edition using a tangent composition,

 Newton draws two homologous and concentric circles, so that the centripetal forces are

 "in the first ratio of the nascent spaces CD and cd", where CD and cd are the deflections

 of the two revolving bodies. (The second homologous figure was necessary, since in

 the mathematics of his day only ratios of quantities with the same dimensions could
 be taken.) We will dispense with that here, and follow (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 82-83)
 in giving a modernized proof of Proposition 4. For a body orbiting S in a circular arc

 from Ρ to Q, we have the diagram in Fig. 7 above:

 Here, the centripetal force is as the deflection QR. From the figure, with the diameter

 of the circle NP = 2SP, LNQP is a right angle, so that QR:PQ = PQ:NP — PQ:2SP,
 giving

 QR = PQ2/2SP

 (4.1)

 Likewise, the first ratios of the velocities along the arcs of the two circles in equal
 times will be as the first ratio of the nascent arc PQ to its homologue and, therefore,

 in the ratio of the nascent straight lines PQ and its homologue. Again dispensing with

 proportions, in a given moment df, with υ the velocity along PQ, PQ — vdt and SP
 = r, so the centripetal force F is as

 QR = PQ2/2SP = l/2(v2/r)dt2

 (4-2)

 In fact, however, the motion along QR is uniformly accelerated so that

 QR — ^ad^.Thus,

 a = v2/r (4.3)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz objected to this, as he did not think there could be an acceleration in an instant.
 Rather, he conceived acceleration to occur by successive increments of motion, in

 accordance with the belief, typical of the mechanical philosophy, that all action is by
 contact. Thus, while he had no objection to the composition of motions in Newton's

 Proposition 1, where the action of a force is represented by an increment of motion
 occurring in a moment, and the parallelogram law is applied to combine two uniform

 motions into a third, he could not accept a composition of a uniform inertial motion

 along the tangent PR with a uniformly accelerated motion toward the centre, along
 QR (Fig. 8).

 580 R. T. W. Arthur

 Fig. 8 Chord Composition

 So he preferred the kind of composition used in Proposition 1, where the curved

 trajectory is conceived as the "ultimate perimeter" of a polygon as the number of sides

 is increased indefinitely and their width is decreased indefinitely. As is clear from the
 figure below, with QR and SP parallel and equal, QRIPQ = PQ/SP, so that

 QR = PQ2/SP.

 (4.4)

 But SP is finite and PQ is first order infinitesimal; therefore, QR must be second

 order infinitesimal. Thus, the velocity w of the body along QR, although constant

 because it represents a uniform motion, must be a first order differential du, so that

 QR = w ■ dt = du ■ di = d(dr/di) ■ dt = ddr (4.5)

 Meanwhile

 Springer

 PQ2/SP = v2àt2/r (4.6)

 Combining (4.4)-<4.6) we have

 ddr = v2dt2/r (4.7)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 581

 On a modem understanding, we would interpret this as a formula for acceleration:

 d2r/df2 = u2/r (4.8)

 This is not, however, how Leibniz would understand (4.7). For him, it says that

 the solicitation in equal infinitesimal times di is as v2 and inversely as r. Moreover,
 as Leibniz explains in the Tentamen de Motuum Coelestium Causis published in the
 Acta of Leipzig in February 1689, "if motion is represented by a finite line which
 is traversed by a body in a given time, the impetus or velocity is expressed by an
 infinitely small line, and the element of velocity, which is solicitation of gravity or

 centrifugal conatus, by a line infinitely many times infinitely small".31 That is to say, on

 Leibniz's way of thinking, a body only has motion in a finite time. The instantaneous

 velocity ν is represented as a line-element dr produced in an element of time di whose
 ratio dr:dî is equal to the ratio of two finite lines described in the same finite time.

 Solicitation, on the other hand, is an infinitesimal element of velocity in an element of

 time assumed constant, not an instantaneous rate of change of velocity. It is, therefore,

 not to be confused with Newton's acceleration. Thus, in a time di, velocity υ is as dr,
 and solicitation is as dv or ddr. As Leibniz tells Burcher de Voider, "solicitations are

 as dx, velocities are as χ [= / dx], and forces as xx or f xdx"?2 We shall return to
 this point later.

 Now we are in a position to examine Leibniz's published solution in the Tentamen

 for the centripetal force toward the centre of a body orbiting that centre in an elliptical

 orbit. Again, this force for him will be a solicitation, a "dead force", and as such will be

 an element of a conatus proportional to dv and thus ddr. So as in the case of the circle

 above, he needs to find an expression for ddr based on the properties of the geometric
 figure, in this case the ellipse. Following Newton's lead, he uses the properties of the

 ellipse. But he will use them to set up a differential equation—indeed, the very first
 differential equation ever published—rather than proceeding in the classical manner
 with ratios of quantities. Thus, for an ellipse with distance from one focus r, minor
 axis BE = e, major axis ΛΩ = q, eccentricity e, and latus rectum XW = a, we have
 the relations

 To simplify, Leibniz makes the substitution

 2 2
 ez = qz

 aq

 ρ = 2r - q

 31 Tentamen de Motuum Coelestium Causis, Leibniz's major work on cosmology, in which he re-derives
 Newton's results in accordance with his own physico-mathematical principles, was published in the Acta of

 Leipzig in February 1689; I follow the English translation given by Bertoloni Meli, An Essay on the Causes
 (if Celestial Motions (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 126-142; 131).

 32 Leibniz to De Voider, GPII 154, 156; quoted by Bertoloni Meli 1993, 88.

 (4.9)

 (4.10)

 (4.11)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 582

 R. T. W. Arthur

 and obtains from an analysis of the geometry of the figure the proportion

 (a9/r):dr :: b:y/(e2 - p2) (4.12)

 where αθ is twice the area swept out by the radius in the element of time θ = dt, with

 the constant a arbitrarily set equal to the latus rectum.33 Leibniz rewrites (4.12) as

 brdr = αθ^(β2 - ρ2) (4.13)

 "which is the differential equation" (Meli, 137). Using the fact that with ρ = 2r — q,
 we have dp = 2dr, so that

 dVO2 - Ρ2) = -2pdp/2^/(e2 - p2) = -2pdr/y/(e2 - p2),

 and remembering that αθ is constant, Leibniz differentiates (4.13), to obtain:

 b dr dr + br ddr = —2paedr/^/(e2 — p2) (4.14)

 "Eliminating dr from these two equations [4.13 and 4.14]" (Meli, 137), Leibniz

 obtains:

 that

 thus giving

 ba292(e2 - p2)/b2r2 + brddr = -2pa202/br (4.15)
 => ddr = a202(—e2 + p2 - 2pr)/b2r3 (4.16)

 Now, using the relations (4.9) e2 = q2—b2 and (4.11) ρ = 2r—q, we can calculate

 -e2 + p2 - 2pr = b2 -2qr, (4.17)

 ddr = α2θ2φ2 - 2qr)/b2r3 (4.18)

 or, since by (4.10) b2 = aq,

 ddr = α2θ2/τ3 - 2αθ2/Γ (4.19)

 Here Leibniz identifies the first term as twice the centrifugal conatus, and the second

 as the solicitation due to gravity, in agreement with Newton's inverse square law.
 Taking into account Leibniz's slip in not taking α to be the .vemi-latus rectum (see
 footnote 37), so that b2 should in fact be 2aq, the result should be

 ddr = α2θ2/r* — αθ2/r2

 (4.20)

 Here Leibniz makes a trivial slip, as pointed out by (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 118). In order for αθ to be

 twice the area of the elementary triangle, a needs to be half the latus rectum. Thus, XW = 2a, and b2 = 2aq,

 introducing an error of a factor of 2 in the second term of Eq. (4.19).

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where a is the semi-latus rectum and e the eccentricity. Differentiating and rearranging,
 we obtain

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 583

 This derivation can be compared with a modern derivation using differentials as

 follows. In spherical co-ordinates (r, a), the equation of the ellipse is

 r — a/{\ + e ■ cosa) (4.21)

 dr = ea ■ sina · da/(l + ecosa)2

 = er2 · sina · da/a

 (4.22)

 Now by Kepler's Law (cf. (3.15) and (3.16)), we have r2da = adt, giving

 dr = e ■ sina · di

 =» d2r = e ■ cosa · da · di = ae ■ cosa · dt2/r2 (4.23)

 But by (4.20), e ■ cosa = a/r — 1, giving

 d2r = (a2/r3 - a/r2) ■ dt2 (4.24)

 agreeing with Leibniz's result (4.19), as corrected in (4.20).

 Eschewing differentials and using only derivatives, an equivalent result can be

 derived as

 r" = (a2/r3 - a/r2)

 (4.25)

 5 Second-order differentials

 This addresses the mathematical physics. But a crucial question remains: is Leib
 niz entitled to his second-order differentials, given his understanding of first order
 differentials as fictions? And can SIA achieve a similar result? In this section I shall

 first consider whether second-order differentials are definable on the sy ncategorematic

 interpretation of infinitesimals, and then whether they are definable in SIA. Then I will
 proceed to determine whether Leibniz's calculations above are justifiable on such a
 syncategorematic interpretation, and whether a similar calculation might be achieved

 using SIA. These considerations will motivate a revised treatment of differentials in
 SIA, as well as lead to some reflections on the relationship between Leibniz's infini
 tesimals and the infinitesimals of SIA.

 The question of Leibniz's entitlement to second-order differentials has been sub
 jected to a lucid examination by Henk Bos in his (1974-1975). As Bos demonstrates,

 Leibniz's own attempt to justify rules involving second-order differentials in Cum

 prodiisset is compromised by his desire to produce differential equations that do not
 depend on the "progression of the variables" chosen, i.e. on the specification of an
 independent variable. In setting up his general scenario, Leibniz lets the variables
 dx and ddx vary independently, the only condition being that when d* -* 0, also

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 584 R. T. W. Arthur

 (d)x

 i(d)x

 Y3

 Fig. 9 Second-order Differentials

 dcU -> 0. But as Bos explains, he also needs dik to be infinitely small with respect
 to àx, i.e. for άάχ/άχ -*■ 0 as dx -*■ 0. The condition that guarantees this in general
 is that dx be constant, so that ddx = 0.

 As Bos points out, Leibniz's assumption that ck and ddx vary independently is

 visible in his attempt to justify the rules for second-order differentials by assuming
 two constant lines of different lengths, (d)jc and (dd)x—which he also writes 2(d)*—
 and two variable lines (d) v and (dd)>\ which are such that

 (d)y:(d)jc = dyidjc as before, and (5.1)

 (dd)j:(dd)x = (dy + dày):(dx + ddx) (5.2)

 He then assumed that in the limit as d* -> 0, (dd)y = (d)>>. As Bos observes,

 however, this is the case only if in that limit (dd).t = (d)x. This is equivalent to
 assuming χ as independent variable, i.e. an arithmetic progression in x, so that dx is
 constant and ddr = 0. On this assumption, however, as Bos goes on to show, Leibniz's

 formula may be successfully derived along the lines he proposed, consistently with

 the syncategorematic interpretation described above (Fig. 9).34

 Heredjc = X2-X\,ddx = X3-X2,y = X\Y\,dy = X2Y2-XxY\, andddy =

 X3Y3 — X2Y2. In his construction Leibniz takes the varying line (d)y defined by (5.1)

 to be equal to a second varying line Χ\ω\, in such a way that, in the limit where Y\
 and Y2 coincide, when it becomes X1Ω1, it bears to the fixed line (d)x the ratio of the

 ordinate X\Y\ to the subtangent X\T. This accords with his definition (2.2) of dy.dx

 as being equal in the limit to (d)_y : (d)x = y : σ. "Since this can be done wherever the

 point Y\ is assumed on the curve," he writes, "in this way a curve ΩΩ will be produced
 which is the differentrix of the curve YY" (Leibniz 1846, 49). A similar construction

 34 This is a slightly simplified version of Leibniz's figure, with the abscissas drawn vertically as was his
 custom, and with his ι X, \ Y, etc., written as X\, Y\, etc., as before.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 585

 is then given for 2(d) y in terms of 2(d)* in terms of a second differentrix. Leibniz
 uses the same approach in his published reply to Nieuwentijt (1695), noting that a
 construction of such a differentrix is always possible.35

 The particular formula that Leibniz then proceeds to demonstrate in Cum prodiisset

 is that for the second-order differential dd>· given that ay = jcv, where α is a constant

 to preserve the homogeneity of the equation. For finite differences, we have

 a(y + d>>) = (λ: + ά*)(υ + du) (5.3)

 a(y + 2ày + ddy) = (^ + 2àx + dcLc)(u + 2àv + ddv) (5.4)

 and

 giving

 gives

 aày = jcdt; + udx + dïdu (5.5)

 and, after some elementary algebraic manipulation,

 a · dd_y = A: · ddu + υ · dd*+2di> · djc+2du · ddx+2dx · ddu+dcLc · ddu (5.6)

 Since dx is constant, and dck = 0, we may drop the terms in ddx Dividing by dx2

 In place of Leibniz's definition (5.2) and an analogous one for (dd)t>, Bos lets

 a ■ àày/àx2 = χ ■ ddu/cLc2 + 2dv/àx + 2dx · ààv/àx2 (5.7)

 This is still an equation in variable quantities that may be made as small as desired.
 But in order to "transpose the case as far as possible to quantities that never vanish",

 we need to define (d)t> analogously to the definition of (d)y in (5.1):

 (d)u : (d)x = di> : dx (5.8)

 (dd)y : [(d)x]2 = dd>> : dx2 (5.9)
 (dd)w : [(d)jc]2 = ddu : dx2 (5.10)

 Assume further that these ratios all have an interpretation when dx = 0. Then each

 of (5.8M5.10) can be substituted for its counterpart involving dx in (5.7), yielding

 a{àà)y/(ά)χ2 = χ ■ (dd)u/(d)x2 + 2(d)v/(d)x + 2dx · (dd)u/(d)x2 (5.11)

 35 See Leibniz's reply to Nieuwentijt in his (1695), and Bos's lucid account: "Obviously, the procedure
 can be repeated again, by which LEIBNIZ has shown that finite line-variables can be given proportional to
 differentials of any order" (Bos 1974-1975,65).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 586

 R. T. W. Arthur

 By hypothesis, this formula remains interpretable when d* = 0, when the last term

 vanishes. So the Law of Continuity asserts that this limiting case may also be included

 in the general reasoning: dv/ck can be substituted for (ά)υ/(ά)χ etc. in the resulting

 formulas even for the case where dx = 0, with dy, dx, dv, ddy, in this case interpreted
 as fictions. Therefore,

 a dày/àx2 = χ ■ ddv/àx2 + 2άν/άχ (5.12)

 a ddy — χ ■ ddu + 2dv ■ cb: QED (5.13)

 This is the formula that Leibniz was aiming to derive, achieved by (Bos 1974-1975,

 61-62) using Leibniz's method together with his own creative emendations. Although

 it is only a particular result, the point is that the assumptions it depends upon are quite

 general: an analogous construction is possible for any variable y that is differentiate in

 the neighbourhood of the point in question, i.e. is a smooth function of x. The particular

 result comes with the caveat that it is only valid for χ as independent variable, and is

 not a general formula relating to the second-order differentials ddy and ddv. This can

 be made more perspicuous by adopting the notation used by Hermann Grassmann in
 his Ausdehnungslehre of 1862 (2000, 249ff), in which (5.13) would be written

 adxy = χ ■ άχυ + 2dxv ■ dx

 (5.14)

 Bos is of the opinion that the need to specify second derivatives with respect to an
 independent variable "needlessly restricts the generality of the differential calculus,
 as it imposes the choice of a special progression of the variables" (66). But by his own
 arguments, on the one hand, second-order differentials are not well defined without

 this restriction; and, on the other, second-order differentials may in any case often be
 circumvented. As Bos explains, Leibniz showed, in his treatment of the evolute as

 envelope of the family of the normals to a curve, how higher order differentials can be

 eliminated by calculating the differential equation of the curve, yielding formulas for

 the radius of curvature that are independent of the progression of the variables (Bos

 1974-1975,41). Bos suggests that the fact that this expedient, as well as Leibniz's own

 attempts to found the calculus (by what I have called his "finite surrogate" methods),

 led him to introduce differential quotients, defined as ratios of finite quantities that

 remain finite in the limit as dx -* 0, took him a long way towards the modern
 definitions of function and derivative of a function (66). This is perfectly true; but it

 is no criticism of Leibniz's founding of the calculus in terms of infinitesimals when

 these are understood as fictions under those very conditions: not as actually infinitely
 small quantities, but as finite quantities that may be made as small as desired, and

 which may be treated in the limit as if they are infinitely small. Thus, the equation
 Leibniz derives at the end of Cum prodiisset relating to the second-order differentials

 "will hold when the points Χ ι and Χι coincide", he writes, "if, by a certain fiction, we

 suppose dx, ddx, du, ddu, d v, and ddy to remain even when evanescent, as if they are

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 587

 infinitely small quantities (and there is no danger in this, since the matter can always
 be referred back to assignable quantities)" (Leibniz 1846, 50).

 This establishes Leibniz's right to use second-order differentials under that fiction,

 provided an independent variable is identified.

 How let us turn to the question of higher order differentials in Smooth Infinitesimal

 Analysis. I should emphasize at the outset that SIA does not actually need them; it is
 perfectly able to derive a formula such as (5.12) under the assumption that y and ν

 are functions of χ as an independent variable, with ddy/dx2 understood as the second

 derivative of y with respect to x, and similarly with ddu/dx2 and du/djc.

 Thus, if ay = xv, with a constant, by the product rule (3.11), y'(x) = f'{x)g(x) +

 g'(x)f(x),

 ay'(χ) — χυ'(χ) + υ(*) (5.15)

 Applying the same rule to take the derivative of this equation, we have

 ay"(x) = xv"(x) + 2v'(x) (5.16)

 which is the analogue of (5.12) in derivative form. By the same token, SIA is easily
 able to derive (4.25), r" — (a2/^ — a/r2), the formula for acceleration in an elliptical
 orbit.

 Those calculations, however, involve derivatives, not differentials. The question
 we are treating is whether Leibniz's infinitesimals are successfully modelled by the

 infinitesimals of SIA, and his derivations depend on the use of second-order differen

 tials. Are these definable in SIA? Indeed they are, and I am indebted to John Bell for

 providing me with the following account of how this should be done.36

 The basic idea is that, for a map h: R -*■ R, the nth order differential d"h should

 be taken to be the "nth order infinitesimal part" of the difference in the value of h{x)
 when χ is replaced by χ + ει -I- S2 H h εη, with ε\,...,εη e Δ. This difference is

 h(x+eι+£2 Η 1-en)-h(x)

 = (ει Η 1- £n)h'(x) + (ει£2 Η h en-ie„)h"(x) H h«i.. ,enh(n)(x).

 (5.17)

 The "nth order infinitesimal part" of the difference is the last term on the r.h.s.,

 namely ει,..., snh(n)(x). Accordingly, for η > 1 we define

 dnh : R χ Δη -»· Δ

 36 Bell's definition of second-order differentials here differs from that given in his (1998, 90-91), where

 they are defined as nilcube infinitesimals, ones such that ε3 = 0. But as I pointed out in an earlier version of

 this paper, this makes the decision of what type of infinitesimal to adopt (nilsquare or nilcube, etc.) depend
 on their applicability to the problem at hand; moreover, all the principles of SIA that we have depended
 upon above depend critically on the nilsquare property, which fails if the infinitesimals are nilcube. Bell

 has generously offered the present account (private communication) to circumvent such difficulties.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 588

 by

 For example

 R. T. W. Arthur

 d "h(x, ει,...,εη) = ε\.. .enh(")(x).

 (5.18)

 dh(x, ε) = sh'(x), d2h(x, ε, η) = ε ■ η ■ h"(x) (5.19)

 Using this definition, we may derive the formula for the second derivative of a

 product. Given /, g: R -» R, let h = f.g. Then for ε,η e A, we have

 d2h(x, ε, η) = εη(fg)" = εη(/'g + fg')' = εη(/"g + 2 f g + fg")

 = εη/''g + 2 ef^g' + εη/g"
 = 8 ■ Ί2/ + 2df ■ d^ + / ■ d2g (5.20)

 From this, it is easy to derive Leibniz's formula (5.13): if ay = xv, then addy =
 xddv + 2dvdx. For in this case f{x) = x, g(x) = v, so that /' = 1, /" = 0, df =
 dx = const, and d2 f = 0, giving

 a ■ d2y = d2(xv) = xd2v + 2dx ■ du

 (5.21)

 Now let us proceed to the question of whether the formulas Leibniz derived for
 orbiting bodies, such as (4.7) and (4.20), are in accordance with these foundations.
 Taking Leibniz's infinitesimals first, we have seen that second-order differentials are
 well defined under his syncategorematic interpretation, provided an independent vari

 able is identified. That is the case here. We are assuming, as both Leibniz and Newton
 do, that time may be taken as independent variable, so that df is constant, and ddr =
 0. Under this assumption, one may derive legitimate formulas involving second-order

 differentials such as ddr, like those derived by Leibniz above. In those formulas, ddr
 implicitly depends on a choice of t as the independent variable. But in such a case,
 with dr = r'dt, we have

 dd r = dr'di + r'ddf

 = dr'di (since dd/ = 0)
 = d/di(r') · (dî)2 = r" ■ (dt)2 (5.22)

 For example, in Leibniz's chord composition for centrifugal solicitation in a circular

 motion, the solicitation ddr is represented by a line element which is traced out with

 a uniform velocity w in the time θ - dr. Thus, the velocity w is a linear function of

 the (infinitesimal) time, and we may set

 W = fiΟ + /\θ (5.23)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where /ο and/ι are functions of r and the transverse velocity v. We may justify this

 analogously to the Leibnizian justification of Newton's Lemma 9 we gave above. First,

 â Springer

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 589

 we expand w in terms of Θ:

 W = /ο + ί\θ + f2e2 + /303 + UeA + ■ · · (5.24)

 But since w — 0 when θ = 0, it follows that fo = 0. Now since QR = w-dt — ωθ,

 we have

 ddr = w0 = f1e2 + f2e3 + /3Θ4 + /4Θ5 + · · · (5.25)
 =► ddr/θ2 = fx + /20 + /302 + /403 + · · · (5.26)

 Now in the case of the circle, QR = PQ2/SP, and since equal areas of the elementary
 triangles PQS are described in equal times, we have PQ SP = αθ, a being a constant.
 Therefore,

 ddr = QR- PQ2/SP = (aef/SP3 (5.27)
 =► ddr/θ2 = a2/SP3 (5.28)

 But since a2/SP3 is finite and non-vanishing when 0 —> 0, it follows by comparison

 with Eq. (5.26), that fa, fa, fa,... are all 0. Therefore,

 ddr = f\92, with w = f\6

 (5.29)

 Turning now to the problem of reproducing these results using the infinitesimals
 of Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis, we are immediately confronted with the difficulty

 that the basic principles of SIA as expounded so far, as embodied in the Principle of
 Microuniformity, will not countenance time variation of geometric quantities across
 an infinitesimal interval. As Whiteside (1966) has shown, if we want the infinitesimal

 elements of the curve to be rectilinear, as they are by the Principle of Microstraightness,

 then they must be second-order infinitesimals, in contradiction to Microuniformity.
 Relatedly, if we try to duplicate the Leibnizian calculation above using nilsquare
 infinitesimals, this means that any second-order differential, such as Leibniz's ddr

 representing solicitation, is identically zero. This can be seen as follows. If the moment

 df is taken to be a nilsquare infinitesimal, then PQ2 — (vdt)2 — v2dt2 — 0. Thus,

 QR = ddr = PQ2/SP = 0

 (5.30)

 That is, to use Leibniz's terms, there can be no solicitation along QR. In Newton's

 terms, if the force at the very beginning of the interval is "given as the square of
 the time inversely", i.e. as 1 /(SP ■ QT)2 with S Ρ ■ QT proportional to dt, then the

 acceleration in the moment di is undefined, according to SIA. For the nascent triangle,
 SPQ has an area dA = X/2SP ■ QT = kdi, so (SP ■ QT)2 = 4dA2 = 4k2di2 = 0.
 In sum, because ε2 = 0, we are unable to apply SIA to Newton's Propositions 4, 6
 and 11.

 Î! Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Looking back to Bell's definition of second-order differentials and his derivation

 R. T. W. Arthur

 590

 of (5.21)

 a ■ d2y — d2(xv) = xd2v + 2dx ■ dv

 we see that if χ is the independent variable, then du = υ' ■ dx and d2u = v" ■ (d_r )2,
 so that

 a ■ d2y = (χ · v" + 2) · (djc)2 = 0 (5.31)

 In other words, if χ is the independent variable, then the infinitesimals ε and η
 of (5.19) must differ at most by a constant factor k, so that ε ■ η — ks2 = 0, and
 d2h(x, ε, η) is identically zero.

 How does this situation bear on Leibniz's foundation for infinitesimals? For, as Bell

 observes (1998, 1-5), Leibniz's non-punctiform infinitesimals are in many respects
 analogous to those of SIA. The Leibnizian polygonal representation of curves is closely

 related to Bell's Principle of Microstraightness: in each case, the curve is analyzed as

 compounded of infinitesimal rectilinear segments that are in a certain sense fictional

 parts. But whereas in SIA, the "area deficit" is simply stipulated to be zero (Bell 1998,

 8)—that is, it is shown to be of the order of dx2, where χ is the independent variable,

 and thus rigorously equal to zero—in Leibniz's justification of Riemannian integration

 the Area Deficit is shown to be zero in the limit by an application of the Archimedean

 Axiom without any assumption about the nilpotency of infinitesimals. In fact, using
 Leibniz's method it is possible—as we saw in the above proofs of Lemma 9 and
 Propositions 4, 6 and 11—to have the second-order differential ddr proportional to
 the square of a first order infinitesimal. Because QR = QP2/SP, with QP first order
 infinitesimal and SP finite, QR must be second-order infinitesimal to preserve orders
 of infinity. This is impossible with nilsquare infinitesimals.
 As we saw, Leibniz was able to derive the result (4.7),

 du = ddr oc υ /r

 (5.32)

 for the centrifugal solicitation of a body revolving in a circular orbit in an arbitrary
 infinitesimal interval of time di. Here du is an element of velocity, and a simple

 integration of it gives a velocity, i.e., on Leibniz's understanding, increases its order

 of infinity without changing its dimension. (In his calculations, he tends to leave the

 dependence on the time interval tacit, as here with the dependence on di2.)37 Similarly,

 two integrations of ddr raise it two orders of infinity, and yield a finite line r.

 We would read Leibniz's expression, however, as giving us a second derivative with

 respect to time,

 d2r/dt2 = v2/r — du/dt

 (5.33)

 37 See Bos (1974-1975), 5-10, 12-35 and Bertoloni Meli (1993), 66-73 for clear expositions of the
 difference between Leibniz's understanding of differentiation and integration and the modern conception.

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals

 591

 namely an acceleration, from which the velocity u is obtainable by an integration with

 respect to time, and the radius r by two such integrations. So from a modern perspective
 a non-zero solicitation in a moment or "timelet" di is equivalent to an acceleration,
 contrary to Leibniz's understanding. But when Leibniz's second-order differentials are
 recognized to be functions of an independent variable (here, time), the corresponding

 adjustment to the understanding of differentials strips him of his grounds for resisting

 the composition of a uniform motion from an inertial motion and an accelerated one:

 what Leibniz conceived (in (4.5)) as an inertial motion along QR with a velocity w —

 du in a time di, is equivalent to a uniform acceleration du/dt. Thus, in motion under

 a central force, Microstraightness implies the failure of Microuniformity.

 Thus, Leibniz is able to uphold the Principle of Microuniformity because of a
 different understanding of how physical quantities are integrated in the calculus; but

 a successful grounding of second-order differentials through the syncategorematic
 interpretation leads to an abandonment of this position, and with it, the Principle of
 Microuniformity. SIA, on the other hand, is able to uphold Microuniformity, à la
 Nieuwentijt, only by equating the squares of all first-order infinitesimals to zero, and

 therewith rejecting the entire apparatus underlying Newton's calculation of central
 forces, from Lemma 9 through to Proposition 6 and its corollaries and applications—
 all of which involve time variation of quantities across an infinitesimal time, and

 quantities depending on the squares of nascent or evanescent areas which are, as in
 the Nieuwentijtian calculus, necessarily equal to zero.

 6 Conclusion

 Despite many points in common, we have seen that Leibniz's syncategorematic
 approach to infinitesimals and the theory of Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis are by
 no means equivalent. Indeed, the conceptions of infinitesimal quantities at the heart of
 each approach are radically diverse. According to John Bell, "The property of being
 a nilsquare infinitesimal is an intrinsic property, in no way dependent on compar
 isons with other magnitudes or numbers." (Bell 1998, 2). Leibniz's syncategorematic
 infinitesimals, by contrast, are essentially comparative, and are defined by an implicit

 limiting process. The application of the Law of Continuity presupposes the existence
 of a limiting value, and also the smoothness of the co-varying quantities in the neigh

 bourhood of this value. On this approach, the vanishing of infinitesimal quantities is

 always a comparative affair, and is grounded on a strictly Archimedean geometry.
 It remains to be seen, however, whether this Leibnizian syncategorematic approach

 can be set on a foundation as adequate to modern mathematical standards of rigour
 as is SIA.

 Acknowledgments An earlier version of this paper was originally submitted for publication in September
 2005 in a volume on infinitesimals edited by William Harper and Craig Fraser, and remained available on

 the internet in the meantime. This explains the fact that references have been made to it in articles that have
 already been published, such as Levey (2008), Arthur (2008, 2009). But this revised version has, I hope,
 been much improved by the criticisms and constructive feedback of Niccolô Guicciardini and John L. Bell;

 any remaining errors or misunderstandings are my responsibility alone.

 ·£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 592 R. T. W. Arthur

 References

 63(2): 221-225.

 Arthur, R.T.W. 2006. The remarkable fecundity of Leibniz's work on infinite series. Annals of Science

 Arthur, R.T.W. 2008. Leery Bedfellows: Newton and Leibniz on the Status of Infinitesimals. In Infinitesi
 mal Differences: Controversies between Leibniz and his Contemporaries, ed. Ursula Goldenbaum and
 Douglas Jesseph, 7-30, Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.

 Arthur, R.T.W. 2009. Actual Infinitesimals in Leibniz's Early Thought. In The Philosophy of the Young
 Leibniz, Studia Leibnitiana Sonderhefte 35, ed. Mark Kulstad, Mogens Laerke and David Snyder,
 11-28.

 Bell, J.L. 1998. A Primer of Infinitesimal Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Bertoloni Meli, Domenico. 1993. Equivalence and Priority: Newton versus Leibniz. Oxford: Clarendon

 Press.

 Bos, H.J.M. 1974-1975. Differentials, Higher-Order Differential and the Derivative in the Leibnizian

 Calculus. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 14: 1-90.

 Brackenridge, J. Bruce. 1995. The Key to Newton's Dynamics: the Kepler Problem and the Principia.

 Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Breger, Herbert. 2008. Leibniz's Calculation with Compendia. In Infinitesimal Differences: Controversies
 between Leibniz and his Contemporaries, ed. Ursula Goldenbaum and Douglas Jesseph, 185-198, Berlin
 and New York: De Gruyter.

 Cohen, I. Bernard, and George E. Smith. 2002. The Cambridge Companion to Newton. Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press.

 Gerhardt, C.I. ed. 1849-1863. Leibnizens Mathematische Schriften (Berlin and Halle: Asherand Schmidt;

 reprint ed. Hildesheim: Olms. 1971), 7 vols; cited by volume and page, e.g. GM II 316.

 Gerhardt, C.I. ed. 1875-1890. Der Philosophische Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (Berlin: Weid

 mann; reprint ed. Hildesheim: Olms, 1960), 7 vols; cited by volume and page, e.g. G II 268.

 Grassmann, Hermann. 2000. Die Ausdehnungslehre: Vollstandig und in strenger Form bearbeitet (1862)
 [The Theory of Extension, Thoroughly and Rigorously Treated], English translation, 2000. ed. Lloyd
 Kannenberg. Extension Theory: American Mathematical Society.

 Gregory of St Vincent. 1647. Opus Geometricum quadraturae circuit et sectionum coni, 2 volumes. Antwerp.
 Guicciardini, Niccolô. 1999. Reading the Principia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Hellman, Geoffrey. 2006. Mathematical Pluralism: The Case of Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis. Journal of

 Ishiguro, Hidé. 1990. Leibniz's Philosophy of Logic and Language (2nd ed.) Cambridge: Cambridge Uni

 Philosophical Logic 35: 621-651.

 versity Press.

 Jesseph, Douglas. 2008. Truth in Fiction: Origins and Consequences of Leibniz's Doctrine of Infinitesimal
 Magnitudes. In Infinitesimal Differences: Controversies between Leibniz and his Contemporaries, ed.
 Ursula Goldenbaum and Douglas Jesseph, 215-233, Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.

 Knobloch, Eberhard. 2002. Leibniz's Rigorous Foundation of Infinitesimal Geometry by means of Rie

 mannian Sums. Synthese 133:59-73.

 Leibniz, G.W. 1684. Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis, itemque tangentibus, quae nec fractas, nec
 irrationales quantitates moratur, et singulare pro illis calculi genus. Acta Eruditorum, 467-473; GM V
 220-226.

 Leibniz, G.W. 1695. Responsio ad nonnullas difficultates a dn. Bernardo Nieuwentijt circa methodum

 differentialem seu infinitesimalem motas. Acta Eruditorum 310-316; GM V 320-326.

 Leibniz, G.W. 1701. Cum prodiisset atque increbuisset Analysis mea infinitesimalis ... In Leibniz 1846,

 Leibniz, G.W. 1846. Historia et Origo calculi differentialis a G. G. Leibnitzio conscripta. ed. C. I. Gerhardt.

 Leibniz, G.W. 1923. Siimtliche Schriften und Briefe, ed. Akademie der Wissenschaften der DDR. Darmstadt

 and Berlin: Akademie-Verlag; cited by series, volume and page, e.g. A VI 2, 229.

 Leibniz, G.W. 1993. De quadratura arithmetica circuit ellipseos et hyperbolae cujus corollarium est

 trigonometria sine tabulis. Ed. and commentary by Eberhard Knobloch. Gottingen: Vandenhoek &
 Ruprecht.

 Leibniz, G.W. 2001. The Labyrinth of the Continuum: Writings on the Continuum Problem, 1672-1686. Ed.,

 sel. & transi. R. T. W. Arthur. New Haven: Yale University Press; abbreviated LoC with page number.

 39-50.

 Hanover.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals 593

 Levey, S. 2008. Archimedes, Infinitesimals and the Law of Continuity: On Leibniz's Fictionalism. In Infin

 itesimal Differences: Controversies between Leibniz and his Contemporaries, ed. Ursula Goldenbaum
 and Douglas Jesseph, 107-133, Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.

 Mancosu, P. 1996. Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Seventeenth century.

 Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Nagel, Fritz. 2008. Nieuwentijt, Leibniz, and Jacob Hermann on Infinitesimals. In Infinitesimal Differences:

 Controversies between Leibniz and his Contemporaries, ed. Ursula Goldenbaum and Douglas Jesseph,
 199-214, Berlin and New York: De Gruyter.

 Newton, Isaac 1967. The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton, Volume 1, 1664-1666. ed. Whiteside,

 D. T. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Newton, Isaac. 1999. The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Trans. I. Bernard

 Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Nieuwentijt, Bernhard. 1695. Analysis Infinitorum, seu Curvilineorum proprietatates ex polygonuarum

 natura deductae. Amsterdam: Wolters.

 Whiteside, D.T. 1966. Newtonian Dynamics. History of Science 5: 104-117.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

