 

 

 

 

Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725–1752: Part 2: developing the methods,

1730–1744
Author(s): Andreas Verdun
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 5 (September 2013), pp. 477-551
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479154
Accessed: 19-05-2020 11:57 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:477-551
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0118-0

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 Part 2: developing the methods, 1730-1744

 Andreas Verdun

 Received: 24 February 2013 / Published online: 4 April 2013
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract The analysis of unpublished manuscripts and of the published textbook
 on mechanics written between about 1730 and 1744 by Euler reveals the invention,
 application, and establishment of important physical and mathematical principles and

 procedures. They became central ingredients of an "embryonic" lunar theory that he

 developed in 1744/1745. The increasing use of equations of motion, although still para

 metrized by length, became a standard procedure. The principle of the transference
 of forces was established to set up such equations. Trigonometric series expansions
 together with the method of undetermined coefficients were introduced to solve these

 equations approximatively. These insights constitute the milestones achieved in this

 phase of research, which thus may be characterized as "developing the methods". The

 documents reveal the problems Euler was confronted with when setting up the equa
 tions of motion. They show why and where he was forced to introduce trigonometric

 functions and their series expansions into lunar theory. Furthermore, they prove Euler's

 early recognition and formulation of the variability of the orbital elements by differ

 ential equations, which he previously anticipated with the concept of the osculating
 ellipse. One may conclude that by 1744 almost all components needed for a technically
 mature and successful lunar theory were available to Euler.

 Communicated by: Ν. Guicciardini.

 In memoriam Curtis A. Wilson (1921-2012).

 A. Verdun

 Bemoulli-Euler-Zentrum, University of Basel, Universitâtsbibliothek,
 Schônbeinstrasse 18/20,4056 Basel, Switzerland
 e-mail: bez@unibas.ch

 A. Verdun (Ε)
 Astronomical Institute, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
 e-mail: andreas.verdun@aiub.unibe.ch

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 478 A. Verdun

 1 Introduction

 In the first part of this trilogy of papers devoted to the development of Euler's lunar
 theories (cf. Verdun 2012), I analyzed unpublished manuscripts and notebook records

 written by him between 1725 and 1730 and containing his earliest tentative approaches

 to lunar theory. I presented evidence that Euler learned the basic empirical facts about
 the Moon's motion from the book Astronomia philolaica of 1645 by Ismael Boul
 liau (1605-1694) and from the books by David Gregory (1659-1708) and Charles
 Leadbetter (1681-1744). Euler was most probably motivated to engage with lunar

 theory by his careful study of the statements on the motion of the lunar apses in the
 three editions of the Principia published by Isaac Newton (1643-1727). The doc
 uments we have reveal that he struggled considerably with different approaches to
 find a method or strategy by means of which a sound lunar theory could be con
 structed. Most of his early methods were not successful, because he formulated his

 very first thoughts on the motion of the Moon in terms of central forces, radius of

 the osculating circle or curvature radius, Huygens' centrifugal principle, de Moivre's
 and Keill's theorems, and of multiple force centers (represented by the Earth and the

 Sun) acting simultaneously on the Moon. I found that Euler, in that early phase of the

 development of his research, did not yet realize the importance neither of the useful

 ness of the equations of motion nor of the need to parametrize them by time. His first

 approaches were dominated by the problem of central force motion, which at that time

 (about 1710) played an important role in the proof of the inverse problem of central
 forces by Johann I Bernoulli (1667-1748) and Jacob Hermann (1678-1733). Pierre
 Varignon (1654-1722) published a series of papers on that topic using Leibnizian
 calculus between 1703 and 1712. When Euler was transforming Newton's Principia
 into analytical language resulting in what we now call rational mechanics, he was
 following a tradition of mechanical and mathematical methods prepared by Bernoulli,
 Hermann, and Varignon. The fact that Euler's first steps emerged in this context may
 be appraised as quite unspectacular with respect to innovative ideas. His approaches
 may be judged as inadequate to solve the problem of multiple central forces, on which
 he based his first theoretical constituents to cope with the lunar problem. Neverthe
 less, his first trials and ideas contained the nuclei which some time later led him

 to the concept of the osculating ellipse and to the principle of the transference of

 forces. I argued that his grappling with multiple force centers and associated curva

 ture radii led him to the concept of the osculating ellipse. The conflict how to deal
 with multiple force centers actually concealed a fundamental problem, namely the
 choice of an appropriate (origin of) reference frame, that Euler disentangled some

 time later in his "Mechanica" by the discovery of what he called "genuina methodus"
 (genuine method), but what I call the principle of the transference of forces. This

 principle turned out to be one of the most important steps towards a mature lunar

 theory which he took between 1730 and 1744.1 will present in this part of my trilogy

 both the path that has taken him to this principle and to the use of the equations of

 motion (although still parametrized by length). By the use of equations of motion he

 was, for the first time, confronted with approximate solutions in the form of series
 expansions.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 479

 The manuscripts presented in this part have not been analyzed before in the con

 text of the development of Euler's lunar theory. A first approximate analysis was pre

 sented in Verdun (2010). That study showed the potential inherent in these documents.
 Although some of the manuscripts are unfinished or only fragmentarily preserved,

 they may be used to put together the pieces for the development of Euler's early lunar

 theories (Verdun 2010). The reconstruction presented in this paper, although incom
 plete, will reveal the development of the principal methods invented and applied by

 Euler to cope with the lunar problem. A general overview of Euler's unpublished and
 published documents related to lunar theory is given in my first article (cf. Verdun
 2012).

 Let me also repeat some caveats of my first part that are valid for this part as
 well. For this part, four manuscripts and Euler's first textbook on mechanics are rel

 evant. It is impossible to date the manuscripts exactly to within, e.g., 1 or 2 years.

 Consequently, the order I present them here is mainly for didactic reasons. Not every

 derivation of mathematical formulae and not every explanation and comment by Euler
 can be reproduced here. This will be the goal of a critical edition of these works,
 which is also being prepared.1 Figures (sketches) are reproduced as exact copies of

 Euler's original drawings, including all inconsistencies and inaccuracies (e.g., faultily
 drawn tangential, parallel or perpendicular lines). When reconstructing intermedi
 ate results and formulae which Euler did not derive explicitly, I often will refer to
 Volume I, Chapter V, of his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736), which Euler finished in
 1734 and which contains much of the results developed by him already until that
 time.

 The structure and organization of this second part is similar to the first one. In
 Sect. 2,1 will start with short descriptions of the documents and with my attempt to

 date them as exactly as possible due to indications that were not yet considered up to

 now. In Sect. 3,1 will summarize and review those parts of them, which are relevant

 both for the time interval under consideration and for the development of Euler's lunar
 theories. The whole body of these summaries may be regarded as a reconstruction
 of the development of Euler's methods invented and used for lunar theory during the
 relevant period of time. This reconstruction serves for the final assessment of Euler's

 achievements given in Sect. 4. It is followed by the conclusions given in Sect. 5. As in

 the first part, I relegate more detailed descriptions of the documents into the Appendix
 to relieve the main body of this article from the more technical and mathematical
 contents of these documents.

 2 Description and dating of the documents

 There are four unpublished manuscripts by Euler which were written most proba
 bly between 1730 and 1744, when he established his position at the Academy of St.

 Petersburg and then moved on to become a member of the Berlin Academy in 1741

 1 It is part of my granted project to edit and publish Euler's manuscripts and notebook records related to
 lunar theory as an online edition in the context of the "Euler Heritage Project" planned by the Bernoulli
 Euler-Center in Basel, Switzerland.

 •S Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 480 A. Verdun

 (cf. Fellmann 2007). They are preserved in the Archives of the Russian Academy
 of Science in St. Petersburg and referred to here as Ms 167, Ms271, Ms273, and
 Ms 276. In addition, early in this time period, Euler composed his two-volume text
 book on mechanics, which was published in 1736. At least one chapter of the first
 volume—the shortcut of which is Ε15—is directly related to lunar theory. Due to

 the uncertainty in the exact dating of these documents, I will present them (as I have
 already done in my first paper) in a hypothetical, didactically motivated order thus
 emphasizing the evolutionary character of the development of Euler's methods used

 for lunar theory.

 2.1 Euler's textbook manuscript Ms 167 on Mechanics

 This document is listed as number 167 in the catalogue of Euler's unpublished manu
 scripts (see Kopelevic et al. 1962, pp. 58-60 ). It consists of 99 folios written on both
 sides in a carefully executed clean copy style handwriting. Kopelevic et al. (1962)
 dates this manuscript to the [early] 1730s, perhaps because it may be regarded as a
 draft version of his "Mechanicd' (E15, cf. Euler 1736), which was finished by 1734.
 It is entitled "Mechanica seu scientia motus" (Mechanics or the science of motion)
 and must have been written before Ms 271 and before the final version of the first

 volume of his "Mechanica sive motus scientia analy tice exposita" (Mechanics, or the
 analytical exposition of the science of motion), because it contains neither the lunar
 problem (as presented in Chapter V in Ε 15, cf. Euler 1736) nor the principle of the
 transference of forces (which will be addressed below). This manuscript, intended
 to be composed in at least two parts, is only fragmentarily preserved, because only
 the first part exists and several folios from it were lost in the course of time. The
 whole manuscript was published in 1965 by Gleb K. Mikhailov (cf. Mikhailov 1965,
 pp. [93]—224). It is not identical with the published version, but differs considerably

 with respect to its content and structure, which is why the editors of Kopelevic et al.
 (1962) called it a "variant" version of the "Mechanica". Part I "De motu a potentiis
 producto" (On the motion produced by forces) contains three sections: Section I "De
 motu a potentiis in punctum liberum agentibus producto" (On the motion produced

 by forces acting on a free pointlike body) deals with the free motion of point masses.

 It contains four chapters. Section II "De motu a potentiis in punctum non liberum
 agentibus producto" (On the motion produced by forces acting on a pointlike body
 which is not free) treats the constrained motion of point masses and consists of three

 chapters. Section III "De motu corporum rigidorum a potentiis utcunque sollicitato

 rum" (On the motion of rigid bodies driven by any forces) is devoted to the free motion

 of rigid bodies and contains only one chapter, thus indicating the incompleteness of

 this manuscript. This section is of special importance due to the fact that it contains

 the very first derivation of the law of angular momentum for motions of rigid bodies
 around space fixed axes. This derivation corresponds to Euler's records in his third

 notebook Ms399, fol. 75v-76r, written between 1736 and 1740 (cf. Verdun 2010, pp.
 497-500), in his "Scientia navalis" (cf. Ε 110, Enestrom 1910, p. 30f, finished in 1738,
 cf. Fellmann and Mikhailov 1998, letter no. 21, p. 264, dated December 20, 1738),
 and in his "Dissertation sur la meilleure construction du cabestan" (cf. Ε 78, Enestrôm

 <2) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 481

 1910, p. 19f, presented to the St. Petersburg Academy on Juli 3, 1738, cf. Kopelevic
 et al. 1962, No. 246, p. 78).

 2.2 Euler's unpublished manuscript Ms 271

 This document is registered as number 271 in the catalogue of Euler's unpublished
 manuscripts (cf. Kopeleviî et al. 1962, p. 85). It consists of three folios written on
 both sides in a carefully executed clean copy style handwriting. It is entitled "De
 Motu Lunae in Ellipsin" (On the motion of the Moon in an ellipsis) and contains 16
 paragraphs consisting of text, formulae, and one figure. There are some corrections,

 overwritings, and marginal notes by Euler. The mathematical formulae are integrated

 into the text and are written in the old-fashioned geometric-synthetic Newtonian style

 without any use of the calculus. It may be considered an unfinished first approach by
 Euler to construct lunar tables using elementary physical and geometrical methods.

 This is probably why Kopelevic et al. (1962) dated the origin of this manuscript to the

 years 1725-1726, but also perhaps due to its characteristic style (ductus litterarum)

 of Euler's early handwriting. There is evidence given by the notebooks Ms 397 and
 Ms 398 (cf. Kopelevic et al. 1962, pp. 114-115), that this manuscript could also have
 been written a few years later (between 1727-1729). It is, indeed, quite possible,
 that it was written even around 1730 due to the fact that it contains the very early

 formulation of the Principle of the transference of forces, as it will be presented
 below. This assumption is supported by the following argument: In Proposition 97 of
 his "Mechanica", wherein Euler formulated this principle, he wrote (cf. Euler 1736,
 Prop. 97, Schol. 1):

 [...] Interim tamen certum est, si huius propositionis solutio posset evolvi ex
 eaque tabula confici, hoc in astronomia maximam habiturum esse utilitatem.

 ([...] Yet meanwhile it is certain that, if the solution of this proposition can be
 evolved and from that a table constructed, then it would be of the most use in

 astronomy.)

 Ms 271 is, in fact, Euler's first trial to construct lunar tables using the principle of

 the transference of forces. He introduced his treatise by stating:

 §.1. In pracedenti dissertatione, qua motus lunae tabulas exhibui, orbitam lunae
 pro circulo habui, et ex hoc tabulas computavi. Cum autem orbita lunae multo
 propius ad ellipsin accedat, statui hie motum lunae in ellipsi examini subjicere,

 et inde tabulas supputare, in quibus omnes motus lunae anomaliae, quae hactenus
 sunt observatae, continerentur, quatenus eae non ab aberratione orbitae ab ellipsi

 oriuntur, qui error hinc ortus valde exiguus est, et de quo alibi tractabo.

 (In the preceding treatise, in which I have given the tables of the Moon's motion,

 I have supposed the Moon's orbit to be a circle and calculated the tables on that

 assumption. But because the lunar orbit resembles much more an ellipse, I have

 here investigated the Moon's motion in an ellipse and computed tables, which
 contain all irregularities of the Moon's motion that have been observed until

 now, as far as they are not caused by the deviation of the orbit from an ellipse;

 the error emerging from that is very small, and I will treat it elsewhere.)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 482

 A. Verdun

 The "preceding treatise" Euler mentions in this statement, in which he computed
 lunar tables on the basis of a circular lunar orbit, is not preserved. Furthermore,

 it becomes not clear from this statement whether Euler planned to give new lunar
 tables but did not calculate them (for any reasons or because he did not finish his

 dissertation), or whether he in fact constructed lunar tables due to the recipe derived
 in this treatise from the principle of the transference of forces but that these tables
 have also gone lost (there are no such tables known or preserved). From the above
 statement of the "Mechanica" one may assume that the former case happened, which

 means, that he did not calculated lunar tables on the basis of an elliptic lunar orbit

 incorporating the principle of the transference of forces (thus considering the action
 of the Sun) before the time he was composing and publishing his "Mechanicathat
 is by 1734-1736.

 2.3 Euler's unpublished manuscript Ms 273

 This document is registered as number 273 in the catalogue of Euler's unpublished
 manuscripts (see Kopelevic et al. 1962, p. 86). It is only fragmentarily preserved
 and consists of 11 folios written on both sides. Due to the missing title and due
 to its structure, dividing it into propositions, corollaries, and scholia, it might have
 been part of a larger treatise on celestial mechanics or lunar theory. It is pep
 pered with mathematical derivations and formulae presented in a text book style
 manner. What stands out are the varying characteristics of Euler's hand writing,
 which implies that this manuscript presumably was not written at one and the same
 time, but its composition was taken up anew time and again. In the margins, Euler
 referred to 13 Figures which all got lost. The manuscript was dated by Kopelevic
 et al. (1962) to the years 1727-1730. It is most likely the earliest document in
 which Euler clearly formulated the principle of the transference of forces. This is
 why it was most probably written after Ms 167 and after Ms 271, and not before
 1730.

 2.4 Euler's published textbook on Mechanics Ε 15

 Euler's textbook on mechanics, the so-called "first mechanics", was published in two
 volumes in 1736 (cf. Ε15 and Ε16 in Enestrôm 1910, p. 4). Only the first volume is

 relevant for the development of the lunar theory (cf. Euler 1736). It is his first mon

 umental work that made him widely famous in the scientific community. Although a

 milestone in the history of mechanics, this book has never been analyzed and appre
 ciated in depth from a modern historiographical point of view. There are only two
 translations, one in German by Jakob Philipp Wolfers (cf. Wolfers 1848), and one in

 English newly made by Ian Bruce (cf. http://www.math.dartmouth.edu/euler/). Euler

 finished the first volume already during the year 1734. In a letter written probably in

 November 1734 to Daniel Bernoulli, Euler announced that he had completed the first
 volume of his "Mechanica

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 483

 Von meiner Mechanica ist der erste Tomus auch ganz fertig, habe aber wenig
 Hoffnung, dass man denselben allhier drucken werde. 2

 (The first volume of my Mechanica is also quite done, but I have only little hope
 that it will be printed here.)

 Actually, Euler probably planned to write a textbook on celestial mechanics or lunar
 theory (cf. Fellmann 1983, p. 65), but only Chapter V addresses clearly these topics
 and thus gives evidence for this assumption, although the preliminary chapters are
 relevant to such a program with regard to their concepts and foundations as well.
 Nevertheless, Chapter V may be considered Euler's first published investigations into

 lunar theory.

 2.5 Euler's unpublished manuscript Ms 276

 This document is registered as number 276 in the catalogue of Euler's unpub
 lished manuscripts (see Kopelevic et al. 1962, p. 86), where its composition is
 dated to the 1740s. This fragmentarily preserved manuscript is entitled "De Motu
 Luna;" (On the motion of the Moon) and consists of four double-side written
 folios. The text is written in a carefully executed clean copy style handwriting.
 There are no references to figures, but it is most likely that Euler intended to
 illustrate this manuscript. Due to its content and state of the used methods one
 may conclude that is was written between 1738 and 1743. The text is carefully
 written out in full length, from which one may assume that this manuscript was
 ready for publication. Unfortunately, the main body of the manuscript is lost. It
 would have contained most probably Euler's first elaborated lunar theory. Evi
 dence for this assumption is given by the mathematical procedure developed by
 Euler in the beginning of the manuscript which has been advanced to such a high
 degree that it would have led to a first approximate solution of the lunar prob
 lem.

 3 Reconstruction of the development of Euler's methods used for lunar theory

 Similar to part 1 (cf. Verdun 2012), this reconstruction is given by way of summaries

 of the contents of Euler's documents, which are presented in more detail in the Appen

 dix to this part. These documents disclose Euler's efforts to treat the Moon's motion
 as a three-body-problem, defined by the Earth-Moon-Sun system, and as a dynam
 ical problem. On the one hand, this approach led Euler to equations of motion that

 demanded new mathematical methods for their solution. Most important are the central
 issues from Ms 167: his considerations on relative forces and "scalas" of forces, inter

 preted as "variational curves". They probably set the theoretical framework which

 enabled him, in Ms 271, to formulate the principle of the transference of forces. On

 the other hand, his approaches in Ms 167 are still linked to geometric-kinematic con
 siderations. Euler derived the equation of motion for a pointlike body moving in a

 2 Cited according to Enestrôm (1906), p. 139.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 484 A. Verdun

 straight line in the notation of Leibnizian calculus parametrized by time, which he
 immediately re-parametrized by length, apparently still believing in the advantage of

 finding the geometric nature of the curve described by the Moon much easier. We
 observe Euler cutting this cord gradually in Ms 273, in which he established the prin

 ciple of the transference of forces definitely and stating it explicitly. In addition, he

 became aware of the significance of terms in the equation of motion depending recip
 rocally on the cube of the distance between Sun and Moon. The treatment of this
 problem became an important issue in Ms 276. Ms 273 also proves Euler's virtuosic
 mastering of the two-body-problem in all its facets, including the explanation of the

 motion of the lunar apses by a force law which is inversely proportional but not to
 the square of the distance. In this manuscript, Euler became fully aware of the vari
 ation of the orbital parameters due to the perturbational effects caused by the Sun.

 To solve the differential equations for the motion of the Moon that take into account
 the simultaneous actions of Sun and Earth, he was forced to introduce a novelty:
 the approximation by series expansions, allowing him to integrate the equations term
 by term. Euler published most of these achievements in Chapter V of his textbook
 on mechanics, the shortcut of which is Ε15. It deals mainly with the mobile ellipse

 rotating around the central body located in one focus, and Euler's attempts to treat it
 as an osculating ellipse whose characteristic parameters are variable with time. His
 achievements in Ε15 are dominated by the definite establishment of the principle
 of the transference of forces, that became an important cornerstone for his further

 developments. Using this principle, he also derived the motion of the nodes of the
 lunar orbit probably for the first time. The last manuscript, Ms 276, Euler wrote most

 probably before 1744. It contains nearly all ingredients needed for a successful and
 technically mature lunar theory. Here, he clearly recognized that approximations by
 series expansions are unavoidable. Moreover, the determination of the inverse cube of
 the distance between the Sun and the Moon in terms of the distances between the Earth

 and the Sun and between the Earth and the Moon as well as the geocentric angular
 distance between the Sun and the Moon involves a formula for the inverse cube of

 the Sun's distance that has to be put into the power of —3/2. The solution implied the
 expansion of the resulting formula into an infinite series that contains the cosines of

 angular arguments defined by the geocentric angular distance between the Sun and the

 Moon. At that point series expansions by trigonometric functions found its entrance

 into celestial mechanics, at least with Euler. At the same time, he began to recognize

 the importance of the angular arguments for the interpretation of the perturbational

 effects. Last but not least, the manuscript contains Euler's very first application of

 the then well known method of undetermined coefficients for solving the differential

 equations. Up until 1744, there remained only one important step leading to the final

 breakthrough that opened the door to a powerful lunar theory. This will be the topic

 of part 3.

 3.1 Summary of Ms 167

 Springer

 Inspired by Jacob Hermann's Phoronomia (cf. Hermann 1716), Euler introduced the

 concepts "scala celeritatum" and "scala potentiarum", which express the graphical

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 485

 representation of the point-to-point dependency of a parameter (such as the velocity
 or the force) from another one (e.g., from the distance between two bodies or the
 distance covered by a body). From the way Euler used and applied these notions
 in the presented examples and problems one may suppose that the "scala" does not
 represent just one but any curve or family of curves, similar to "variational curves". If

 this assumption holds, as some problems treated by Euler in this manuscript suggest,
 he might also have asked the following question within that context: how can the
 whole system of forces acting in the system Sun-Earth-Moon be transformed in such

 a way that there are no forces left acting on the Earth? In other words, is there any

 transformation of forces operating in such a way as to keep the Earth at rest with respect

 to inertial space? The consequence of such kind of transformation would imply that
 the Moon's motion could be described as observed from the Earth considered to be

 at rest. Euler treated the problem concerning the relative motions of bodies already
 in his second notebook Ms 398 (cf. Verdun 2012, Chapter D.2). The solution of this
 question involves the choice of an appropriate reference frame and the concept of
 relative motion (cf. Maltese 2000). This approach is probably motivated by Euler's
 definitions and considerations on absolute and relative forces, which appear neither
 in Newton's nor in Hermann's work (cf. Jammer 1957; Westfall 1971; Kutschmann
 1983).

 Before starting with some "variational-type" problems, Euler introduced the equa

 tion of motion (or "Newton's" second law of motion) as formulated by Hermann in

 1716 (cf. Hermann 1716, p. 57). It seems that Euler in that time assumed that the equa

 tion of motion is applicable only for the case of rectilinear motions. He substituted—

 and this is even more striking—the time element with the path or line element, thus

 deriving the equation of motion parametrized by length. This kind of parametrization
 is more convenient if the geometry of the curve covered by a body has to be figured

 out. This is why Euler kept this parametrization in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736,
 Prop. 20) as well as in his further investigations until about 1744. The integration of
 the equation of motion (parametrized by length) produces a factor 2, which Euler (e.g.
 in his "Mechanica") kept in the equation of motion by choosing the physical units in
 such a way that this factor would not cancel out (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 25 and Expla
 nation 15). Then Euler treated some problems which are closely related to what we
 call today "calculus of variations" in terms of the concepts of "scala potentiarum" and
 "scala temporum". This type of problems concerns the question to find all possible
 "scalas potentiarum" causing the body either to cover a given space in a given time
 interval or to reach a given position with a given velocity. We observe here Euler's
 acquaintance with a then quite new but steadily growing branch of mechanics and
 applied mathematics which later became known as "variational calculus". However,
 its relation to Euler's Ms 167 and to his "Mechanica" has not been recognized and

 analyzed yet by historians of science (cf. Goldstine 1980; Fraser 1994).

 Having introduced the terms "normal" and "tangential" forces (thus following
 Johann Bernoulli and Varignon, cf. Bernoulli 1712; Varignon 1703a,b,c, 1704, 1705,
 1707a,b, 1712) and using variants of the equation of motion, Euler treated the two

 body-problem in the usual way as he had already done in the previous manuscripts in

 terms of curvature radius and Huygens' theorem (cf. Verdun 2012). It is remarkable

 that, in this context, the concept "central force" does not appear at all. Euler further

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 486 A. Verdun

 derived Keill's theorem. Finally, he clearly recognized that this kind of approach is

 limited and not suitable for solving the three-body-problem, i.e., in cases where the tra

 jectories become more complicated. In retrospect, this may be seen as a first important

 insight by Euler. It may be the reason for his insisting in trying to solve the problem
 of two or multiple force centers. This problem he now tackled in a new approach

 by reducing the forces acting on the considered body into the resulting normal and
 tangential force components. With that he was able to derive an integral equation
 determining the nature of the body's trajectory in terms only of the central forces and

 the distances of the test body to the force centers. Moreover, he found an equation

 defining the resulting (instantaneous) curvature radius expressed by those terms. This
 fact proves the central role that the curvature radius plays in Euler's theory of that

 time. Finally, he considered two cases, where one of the force centers is infinitely far
 away. This situation approximates the Earth-Moon-Sun system, where the Sun may

 be regarded as infinitely further away from the Moon than the Earth.

 3.2 Summary of Ms 271

 The main goal of this manuscript is to develop a formula or recipe useable for easy

 construction of lunar tables. Euler based his derivation on the equation of motion as a

 function of the curvature radius. In this form it was given by Varignon (1707a,b) and

 can easily be derived from the equation of motion, parametrized by length, as presented

 in Eulers Ms 167 as well as in his "Mechanica". Euler started by determining the forces

 acting on the Moon by the Sun and the Earth, using the principle of the transference of

 forces, without stating it explicitly. Here, we observe Euler applying this principle for
 the very first time. Evidence for its novelty is given by some cancellations, insertions,

 and marginal notes added by Euler, which indicate his uncertainty as to how to apply

 this principle correctly. He found an equation for the Moon's velocity in terms of a set

 of "orbital parameters", as we would call them today. This equation makes transparent

 the dependencies of the relevant parameters: the first term depends only on the Earth's

 attraction, the second and third on the Sun's gravitational force. In addition, the second

 term depends on the Moon's position in its orbit and on the Earth's distance from the

 Sun, while the third term depends on the lunar aspect, namely on the angle between

 Moon and Sun. Euler recognized that the excess of the terms depending on the Sun

 over the terms not depending on it is always reciprocal to the cube of the Sun's distance

 from the Earth. This is why the Moon's velocity produced by the Sun is much smaller

 than that generated by the Earth. In the 1740s, it turned out that the structure of such

 equations became important for the correct interpretation of the perturbational terms
 represented by the relevant angular arguments and its linear combinations. Euler then

 simplified this equation by approximations and made it applicable for the numerical
 calculation of lunar tables.

 This fragmentarily preserved manuscript contains six propositions, in which Euler

 launched a first serious and comprehensive attack to master the lunar problem. In

 3.3 Summary of Ms 273

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 487

 Proposition I he determined the Keplerian motion (represented by orbital elements

 characterizing the two-body-problem) starting from a dynamic relation that replaces

 the equation of motion. The derivations and corollaries are thoroughly worked out
 and contain all standard aspects characterizing the problem. Proposition II deals with
 the "mobile orbit", i.e., the problem of the apsidal motion of the Moon's orbit, which

 Euler solved using the results gained from the first proposition, combined with the
 substitution of the Moon's distance y from the Earth by y + ây. Again, this propo
 sition is followed by several corollaries, in which different aspects and results are
 discussed. In one of them Euler generalized the law of gravitation by replacing the
 exponent 2 by an arbitrary number η and discussed different cases for the values
 η > 2 and η < 2. Both cases produce an apsidal motion, decreasing and increasing
 in either case. A similar discussion became important in the late 1740s, when the
 problem of the lunar apse developed into a touchstone for the inverse square law of

 gravitation. Proposition III is innovative with respect to two aspects: 1. The statement
 of the problem (Invenire Vires Solis ad Luna; motum perturbandum) contains for the

 very first time in Euler's work on celestial mechanics the word "perturbation", and
 2. Euler puts Newton's Proposition XXV into a rule, thus stating "expressis verbis"
 the principle of the transference of forces. Using this principle Euler was able to
 confirm a result already found by Newton (cf. Newton 1687, Lib. Ill, Prop. XXV).
 What Euler in his Proposition actually demonstrated was the essential seed hidden
 in what Newton showed in a rather intransparent way in the Principia. In Propo
 sition IV Euler analyzed the effects of the Earth's force component acting on the
 Moon resulting in equations representing the change or variation of orbital elements

 (Euler called them "incrementum", without assigning them any symbols). This kind

 of differential equations, relating the change of orbital parameters to any other dif

 ferentials of orbital elements, never before appeared in celestial mechanics. It marks

 the beginning of perturbation theory in terms of orbital elements and their variations.

 However, these "increments" of orbital parameters still do not depend on the time
 element, but on certain distance elements. As will be shown in part 3 of this study,
 Euler's recognition of the importance of the dependency of the equation of motion
 and of the variation of orbital parameters on the time element means an essential part

 of his breakthrough not only in lunar theory but in celestial mechanics and mechanics

 in general. Proposition V deals with the investigation of the effect of an additional
 force acting on the Moon by the Sun, thus explaining qualitatively the form of the
 lunar orbit and its motion. We observe here Euler's geometric interpretation of the
 theoretical results gained by his new "perturbational approach", which led him to

 qualitatively correct conclusions. This interplay became a cornerstone of general per

 turbation theory. Finally, in Proposition VI, Euler derived differential equations for
 the motion of the Moon considering the simultaneous actions of Sun and Earth. To

 solve them, he again introduced a novelty that coined celestial mechanics for the next
 three hundred years: approximations by series expansions. Euler was forced to use

 such an approach to be able to integrate the equations term by term. As will be shown

 below in Euler's manuscript Ms 276, he combined this approach with his development

 of trigonometric series, thus gaining one of the most powerful methods introduced in
 celestial mechanics.

 ft Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 488 A. Verdun

 3.4 Summary of topics in Ε 15 related to lunar theory

 Most of the "mechanical" terms Euler defined in the "explanations" of his "Mechan
 icawhich are also related to lunar theory, were already mentioned and discussed in

 the manuscripts previously presented in this and the first part (cf. Verdun 2012). They

 concern, in particular, 1. the introduction and definition of concepts and technical terms
 as, e.g. absolute and relative motion, various "scalas", and special forces (absolute,
 relative, normal, tangential, centripetal), and 2. Euler's derivation of the equation of
 motion (Newton's second law of motion), parametrized by time and by length. Some
 of them were addressed in his manuscript Ms 167 (see above). It is, however, most
 important to note, that Euler—during the time interval until about 1744—used the
 equation of motion always in one dimension and parametrized by length. The struc

 ture of its derivation is visualized in Verdun (2010), Fig. 2.33. It is striking that Euler
 herein did not refer to Newton nor to Hermann. The difference between Hermann's

 (cf. Hermann 1716, p. 57) and Euler's equation of motion (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 20,
 § 155) consists in Euler's constant of proportionality, expressed by the number n, that
 "depends neither on the [size of the] force, nor on the element of the time, nor on

 the quantity of matter." The integration of this equation of motion, parametrized by

 length, generates a factor 2, which Euler kept in the equation by choosing the units
 of mass and force in such a way that η — 1/2 (cf. Euler 1736, Explanation 15 and
 Scholia). In Ms 167 he did not fix this number yet. Propositions 20,25 and 26, together
 with the accompanied corollaries and scholia, as well as the explanations 15 and 16
 in Euler's "Mechanica" were of fundamental importance for his lunar theories at that

 time. However, the central ideas related to planetary and lunar theory that Euler pub
 lished in that time are presented in Chapter V concerning the curvilinear motion of
 free points acted on by absolute forces of any kind (De motu puncti curvilineo libero

 a quibuscunque potentiis absolutis sollicitati) of his first opus magnum, which is also
 the most voluminous chapter of the "Mechanica". It contains results that are important

 for planetary theory, which may be used for and applied to lunar theory as well, e.g.

 the definition of tangential and normal force components, of the curvature radius, and

 the derivation of the theorems of de Moivre and Keill (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 74, and
 Ms 180, Ms 397, and Ms 398 in Verdun 2012; see also Moivre 1717; Keill 1708).

 One of the central concepts Euler introduced into celestial mechanics in Ε15 is

 the "osculating ellipse", which is of crucial importance particularly for lunar theory.

 His definition of this term differs from Newton's: to explain the motion of the lunar

 apse, Newton introduced a "moving" ellipse, i.e., an ellipse rotating around the central
 body's focus (cf. Newton 1687, Lib. I, Sec. IX). Euler, on the other hand, considered

 the parameters defining the ellipse to be subject of variations (cf. Euler 1736, Prop.
 83, Schol. 2, already cited in Verdun 2012). Moreover, he already sketched ways
 to approach the three-body-problem (cf. Newton 1687, Lib. I, Prop. XVII, Coroll.
 3 and 4; Lib. I, Prop. LXVI).3 However, Euler formulated the problem in a way that

 matches the real situation of the Moon's motion as close as possible; If the centripetal

 force does not disagree much with the ratio of the inverse square with the distances,

 3 I thank Professor Niccolô Guicciardini, University of Bergamo, Italy, for bringing these references to my
 attention.

 ί} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 489

 Fig. 1 Boulliau's figure
 illustrating the scalene cone as a
 model for circular and uniform

 planetary motion (Source:
 ETHZ)

 one has to determine the motion of the ellipse, the continual change of its form, and

 the motion of the body following this variable ellipse (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 84).
 The determination of the osculating ellipse demands, according to Euler, not only
 the knowledge of the nature of the curve, but also of the body's velocity and of the
 centripetal force as well (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 84, Schol. 1):

 The ellipse determined in this way deserves to be called the osculating curve of

 the ellipse from the likeness of the circles of osculation, by which the curvatures

 of lines are measured. Truly this consideration is not purely geometrical, for by
 finding the osculating ellipse, besides the nature of the curve, it is also necessary

 to know the speed of the body and the centripetal force, (translated by Ian Bruce)

 This statement proves Euler's understanding of the problem involved with the concept

 of the osculating ellipse: Given the resulting force causing a certain state of motion,

 one has to determine the parameters defining the osculating ellipse for each instant of
 time (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 84, Schol. 2, already cited in Verdun 2012). In this respect,

 the notion "osculating ellipse" is an innovative element that may not to be found in

 Newton (or anywhere else). It is an original idea by Euler and has the meaning as it is
 still used today (in terms of "osculating orbital elements").

 One of the central issues of Verdun 2012 was to show the importance of the concepts

 associated with the "curvature radius". Euler's transition from this term to the notion

 of an "osculating ellipse" might have been motivated by Boulliau's model of planetary

 motion, which most probably was studied by Euler very carefully (cf. Boulliau 1645,
 Lib. I., Cap. XV, pp. 29-38). Using this model Boulliau tried to reduce the non-circular
 and non-uniform motions of the planets to circular and uniform motions. For that

 purpose he considered a scalene cone ABC, a plane section of which through the axis
 AI perpendicular to the plane of the circular base, whose trace is BC, is illustrated in
 Fig. 1. This cone consists of an infinite number of circles centered on the axis AI with

 radii linearly decreasing from I to A (an example of such a circle in upright projection
 is indicated in Fig. 1 with VOT). Let EK be the trace of the cutting plane, which is
 perpendicular to ABC, representing the major axis of the planet's elliptic orbit, the

 empty focus of which being in M. The cone is supposed to be rotating around its axis
 AI with a given angular velocity ω, thus defining the orbital velocity by ω · r, where
 r is the radius of the circle at any position on the axis AI. The planet's motion in
 the elliptic orbit EK is now considered to be composed of all instantaneous circular

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 490 A. Verdun

 motions between Ε and Κ (cf. Wilson 1970, pp. 112-113; Wilson 1989, pp. 172-173.).
 These circles may thus be interpreted as "osculating circles".

 Euler's introduction of the osculating ellipse was mainly motivated by his insights

 gained in Ms 273 concerning the variation of orbital parameters. If it is true that these

 parameters are changing continuously in time, then the resulting curve described by

 the body may become very complicated and a solution of the problem will only
 approximatively be possible. Therefore, in order to get out of this difficulty, Euler

 tried to find methods which reverse the problem. The reason for the variability of the

 orbital parameters are the multiple force centers being either at rest or in motion. So,

 Euler tried to reduce the problem by considering the motion around the common center

 of gravity, assuming first that the individual forces are proportional to the distances of
 the body from these forces (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 85). Then he concluded (cf. Euler
 1736, Prop. 85, Schol. 2):

 If the centers of forces are attracting in some other ratio besides the simple ratio

 of the distances, a reduction of this kind to a single central position of the forces

 cannot be had in a straightforward manner, and I can hardly calculate the motion

 of the body, nor indeed can hardly anything be determined about the motion.

 Therefore, in these cases, it is necessary to flee to approximations, which are set
 up in different ways according to the various conditions. And on this account,
 Newton was unable to determine the true motion of the moon, which arises from

 two attractions, but he tried only to describe it as nearest as possible. To do this,

 however, it is necessary both to give this problem the most singular consideration

 and to apply the inverse method, according to which one has to determine the

 attracting forces from the curve that the body describes. On this account, we
 will explain in the following what tools can be put in place, when we are to
 investigate the force acting as the unknown in the inverse order. Therefore, as
 we are progressing through this discussion, which can be established in two
 ways. Firstly, we take besides the curve described also the direction of the forces

 acting at individual points as known, and from these quantities the forces acting,

 and the motion of the body itself is to be found. In the other way, by considering

 the curve and the motion of the body on that curve is taken as given, from which

 it is required to extract the force acting, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by
 AV)

 Using this strategy, Euler derives the centripetal force causing the body to move in
 a mobile orbit, i.e., a rotating ellipse (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 89 and Schol. 1, already
 cited in Verdun 2012). This situation is illustrated in Fig. 2. While the body M' is

 moving in the ellipse A'M'Β'', this ellipse is rotating around the central body C being

 in its focus with a given angular velocity. After a given time interval will the ellipse

 be situated in AMB, while the body will be located in M. The principal ideas to solve
 this problem may be found in Ms 397 (cf. Verdun 2012). Euler mentioned, that this

 approach—already used by Newton (cf. Guicciardini 1999, Chap. 3.6, pp. 60-65)—

 is nevertheless insufficient to describe the real motion of the lunar apses adequately
 (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 89, Schol. 2):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 491

 Fig. 2 Euler's figure in his
 "Mechanica" illustrating
 Proposition 89 (Source: ECHO)

 f..Newton has explored this problem in the Principia, Book I, in the whole of

 Section IX, and he applied that theory to determine the motion of the apsidal line
 of the Moon's orbit. But this examination is applied with less accuracy to the

 Moon, since the force acting on the Moon is not directed to a certain fixed point,

 as we have put here, but to a continuously moving point. Therefore we will take
 pains, after having explained remaining relevant matters associated with that

 topic, to set up other more suitable propositions, which can be transferred to the
 motion of the Moon, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by AV)

 This is why Euler tried to describe the motion of the apsidal line by using variant

 centripetal forces which differ from the inverse square law, as he had already done
 so in Ms 273, Prop. II. He discusses centripetal forces that are, e.g., proportional to
 V +C/y , where V = f2/y2 and y denotes the distance between the resulting force

 center and the Moon (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 90 and 91). However, this approach of one
 single centripetal force turned out not to be convenient in the case of the Earth-Sun

 Moon system. Therefore, Euler reversed the problem again (see Fig. 3) and derived
 the force components Ρ and Q causing the body M (Moon) to move freely in any
 given curve AMB rotating around the force center C (Earth), where Ρ is acting along
 MC according to the inverse square law, and Q is acting (along the Sun's direction
 MP) normal to an arbitrarily defined reference line PCD through C. Euler remarks,
 that the resulting formulae may be considerably simplified if the orbit of M differs not

 much from an ellipse (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 94 and Schol. 1):

 These formulae for the curve of the ellipse can be made simpler in various ways,

 if the curve in which the body is moving is approximately circular. And in this

 case it is of some use in the motion of the Moon to be theoretically defined. For
 the Earth is put at rest at C and the Sun on the line CP perpendicular at C is

 considered equally as being at rest; with which put in place and with these forces

 compared both with the forces of the sun and the earth, the synodal motion of the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 492 A. Verdun

 Fig. 3 Euler's figure in his
 "Mechanica" illustrating
 Proposition 94 (Source: ECHO)

 Moon is elicited for some position of the apsidal line and likewise the motion of

 the apsidal line, which only differs slightly from the true motion of the Moon,
 (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by AV)

 He continued approaching to the main problem (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 94 and
 Schol. 2):

 This proposition certainly appears of greater extent than the above, in which
 all the force was directed towards the center of rotation of the orbit; indeed the

 former is included with the force Q vanishing. Yet it cannot account perfectly

 for the explanation of the Moon's motion because one term of the force Ρ varies

 inversely with the cube of the distance MC. Because of this we have to consider
 other orbits [besides rotating ellipses], which appear wider and agree more with

 the physics questions. Of this kind are motions of orbits along certain curves

 which happen in such a way that the orbit is always parallel to itself, which on
 contemplation deserve to be preferred from others, since the forces acting are

 both easier to find and simpler to express by formulas. This is why the following
 theorem is needed, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by AV)

 This theorem concerns the relative motion of the body M with respect to the center
 C: The body M is moving along the curve AM, by some force, around the point C,
 and in addition both the body M and the point C are acted on by an equal force in the

 same direction; consequently, the relative motion of the body M with respect to the
 point C, or the motion of the body M such as is seen from C, and likewise, will be
 such as if this new force is not to be added (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 95). The proof is

 straightforward.

 In the preceding propositions and statements, we observe Euler preparing a new

 strategy, which he will fully develop in Proposition 97. He motivated it by the following
 proposition (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 96, and Fig. 4):

 Let the body M be revolving around the center of force L at rest in the
 curve BM\ to determine the force causing the body to move in the same orbit

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 while it is following the curve AL in such a way that it is always parallel to
 itself.

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 493

 Fig. 4 Euler's figure in his
 "Mechanica" illustrating
 Proposition 96 (Source: ECHO)

 Euler's proof of this proposition is based on the previous one and on the transformation

 of the force components into a new set of components, the characterizing parameters of

 which allow the motion along the curve AL. In the corollaries following this proposition
 Euler discusses the cases where the curves AL and BM are assumed to be circles and

 ellipses. In particular, Corollary 3 deals with the situation supposed by John Machin
 (1680-1751), published in the appendix of the English edition of Newton's Principia
 (cf. Machin 1729). Euler claims, however, that this approach is not sufficient enough
 for an accurate lunar theory and proposes another "genuine" method (cf. Euler 1736,
 Prop. 96, Schol. 2):

 I have therefore especially reported on this Proposition, because in an appendix
 to the new edition of Newton's Principia in English, the most distinguished
 Machin asserts that the motion of the Moon can be considered as in an ellipse,
 the transverse axis of which shall be in the ratio of 2:1 to the conjugate axis
 made around the center of the ellipse, while meanwhile with that ellipse itself
 moving parallel to the periphery of a circle, on which it progresses freely, as I

 have explained in Cor. 3. For my part, I do not deny that this motion is extremely
 similar to the motion that the Moon can show, but I would doubt very much
 that it was an exact ratio. Moreover in the following proposition I have decided
 to determine, what needs to be indicated to determine the motion of the Moon.

 Even if indeed this proposition pertains to astronomy, yet it is assumed that the
 genuine method reported here can be used to examine fundamental questions of

 this kind that are to be resolved, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by AV)

 What Euler here calls a "genuine method" is the principle of the transference of forces,

 which he formulated in Proposition 97 (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 97, and Fig. 5) and which
 he introduced here by stating the following problem:

 With the Sun at rest at S and with the Earth Τ moving around it uniformly in
 the circle Τ D while the Moon L is attracted both to the Earth Τ as to the Sun

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 S in the inverse square of the distances; with which put in place it is required to
 determine the motion of the Moon, such as can be seen from the Earth Τ.

 Then Euler explains clearly the very principle that he had prepared and applied

 already in Ms271 and Ms273 (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 97, pp. 333—334):

 Ab his igitur viribus lunam sollicitantibus, qualis motus producatur, est investi

 gandum. At quia lunae motus, qualis a spectatore in terra constituto observatur,
 definiri debet, terra tanquam quiescens est consideranda; id quod fit, dum toti

 systemati motus ei, quern terra habet, aequalis et contrarius imprimitur, simulque

 sollicitationes, quas terra a sole recipit, contrario modo in lunam et solem cogi
 tatione transferuntur.

 494 A. Verdun

 Fig. 5 Euler's figure in his
 "Mechanica" illustrating
 Proposition 97 (Source: ECHO)

 (Therefore it is to be investigated what kind of motion is being produced by these

 forces that are acting on the Moon. But since this motion has to be determined in
 such a way as it is observed from the Earth, then the Earth has to be considered

 at rest. This is done by assigning the Earth's motion to the whole system equally
 and in opposite direction, together with transferring fictitiously the accelera
 tions impressed on the Earth by the Sun onto the Moon and the Sun in reverse

 manner.)

 To the procedure explaining this principle Euler added a Scholion in which he addmits

 that the proposition still contains some serious simplifications (cf. Euler 1736, Prop.
 97, Schol. 1):

 The equations which hence are deduced for the motion of the Moon, become so

 complex that from them neither its velocity nor its orbit nor the position of the
 apsides and their motion can be exactly determined. Moreover truly from the

 same calculation by neglecting very small quantities in a certain way approximate

 conclusions for the use of astronomy can be drawn, as the great Newton did in
 Book III of the Principia. But even if the calculation would not suffer from
 this inconvenience, yet this proposition would not describe the Moon's motion

 without a great deal of rigor. For we have put the Sun forward again as being

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 495

 at rest, which in a short while disagrees with the truth; then we considered the

 Earth moving in a circle, and the Moon's orbit placed in the same plane with the

 Earth's orbit, which likewise they have otherwise. Yet meanwhile it is certain, if

 the solution of this proposition can evolve and from that a table constructed, then

 it would be of the most use in astronomy, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by
 AV)

 As already mentioned above, this last statement by Euler concerning the construc

 tion of lunar tables probably refers to his unsuccessful trial in this direction made in
 Ms 271. In the corollaries, he discusses some appropriate approximations and some
 consequences deduced from them. Finally, Propositions 102 and 103 contain Euler's
 first approach to derive the motion of the nodes of the lunar orbit, i.e., the line of
 intersection between the orbital planes of the Earth (ecliptic) and the Moon (which
 are inclined by about 5° to each other). For that purpose, he introduced in Proposi
 tions 98-101 three force components acting in the three-dimensional space, which
 we would call Frenet frame today, and discussed the motion of a body driven by

 these forces. Actually, Euler was forced by this problem, namely to find the orbit's
 position in space ("situs orbitae in universum cognoscatur"), to consider three force

 components that are linearly independent from each other. This kind of generaliza
 tion from two to three spatial dimensions appears in this context probably for the
 first time. It became an important issue in the 1740s, when Euler formulated the
 equations of motion in three dimensions exactly due to this reason as well (to be
 discussed in part 3). Using the results derived from the previous propositions, Euler

 studied in Proposition 103 the motion of the nodes in the case of forces being directly

 proportional to the distances between the force center A and the body on which the
 force components are acting. He found a retrograde motion of the nodes even in
 this case and judges the results by comparing them with the real situation and with
 observations:

 This proposition seems to have no use in astronomy, because the force; by which
 the body is attracted to the fixed point A, we assumed proportional to the dis
 tance, whereas for celestial bodies that have in place a force that is inversely
 proportional to the square of the distance. Yet this [proposition] is extremely
 useful, if the orbits of bodies do not depart much from circles; for if the orbit
 becomes more and more circular it depends not on the way how the centripetal
 force depends on the distance. On account of which, when the orbits of planets

 do not depart greatly with circular orbits, this proposition is able to be adapted

 successfully to their motions [...] In lunar motion the motion of the nodes mer

 its special attention, because it is retrograde according to our determination. It

 is observed from the opposition of the preceding node that the nodes differ by

 nearly 43'. Thus we may conclude that

 180(m - 1) 43

 = — or

 m 60

 43 , 1

 m~ + 10,757 ~ + 250'

 From which the force is known a posteriori to be always pulling the Moon

 towards the plane of the ecliptic, (translation by Ian Bruce, modified by AV)

 •β Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 496 A. Verdun

 3.5 Summary of Ms 276

 In the introduction of this unfinished manuscript, Euler considered the Newtonian
 hypothesis, i.e., the inverse square law of attraction, as being proved both by obser

 vation and by the conclusions taken from this hypothesis, although this principle of

 attraction is burdened with difficulties. The first one concerns physics and demands a
 mechanical explanation of the mutual attraction of celestial bodies. The second one

 concerns the determination of the motions due to this attracting force, which—in the

 case of the Moon's motion—is so difficult, that nothing else than approximations could

 be done. The power of calculus seemed for Euler not able to provide confident rules to

 describe such kind of motion sufficiently. It would not have been possible to accom

 plish anything about the lunar motion, if one would not have called the approximation

 for help. Nevertheless, the Moon's motion makes—Euler remarked—the approxima
 tion easier and more accurate, because it does not much deviate from a circle. This is

 why it becomes possible to treat initially the Moon's motion in such a way, as if it is

 driven only by the Earth, but then one has also to take into account the Sun's force.
 This is the strategy Euler is following to find out how much could be achieved by
 means of the state-of-the-art calculus of that time.

 Euler treated first the two-body-problem of the Earth-Moon system, then (in the
 remainder) the three-body-problem of the Sun-Earth-Moon system. The former is

 carried out along the line of thought as presented in the corresponding chapters of
 Euler's "MechanicaLet us skip this part and turn to the latter problem. From the
 beginning Euler applied the principle of the transference of forces thus proving that

 this principle had been fully established by him already at that time. This task implies
 the determination of the inverse cube of the distance between the Sun and the Moon

 in terms of the distances between the Earth and the Sun and between the Earth and

 the Moon as well as the geocentric angular distance between the Sun and the Moon.
 In doing so, the crucial point turns out to be the fact, that the resulting formula for

 the inverse cube has to be put into the power of —3/2. At this point Euler was forced,

 probably for the first time in celestial mechanics, to expand the resulting formula
 into an infinite series. Moreover, this series involves the cosines of the angular argu

 ment, which means that we observe here the very first occurrence of trigonometric

 series expansions to solve the lunar problem approximately. This represents a novel

 approach in celestial mechanics. Euler became fully aware of the difficulty inherent in

 the development of an accurate lunar theory and recognized the meaning and impor

 tance of the use of trigonometric series expansions and their angular arguments for the

 approximate solution of the differential equations. He nevertheless derived trigono

 metric series for the resulting tangential and normal force components acting on the

 Moon, which he used to formulate the differential equation of the Moon's velocity.

 This differential equation is, consequently, also a trigonometric series consisting of

 sine and cosine terms, which Euler now was able to integrate easily term by term. At

 that point he might have recognized the advantage of the use of trigonometric series,

 which are easy to integrate and therefore became so important for celestial mechanics.

 In the remaining folios of the manuscript, Euler tried to prepare for integration the
 equation of motion due to the normal force. For this purpose he used the solution

 gained from the two-body-problem and "adjusted" or "corrected" it in such a way as

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 497

 to consider the additional action of the Sun. The results already obtained gave him
 the idea about the structure of the equation and thus for a general ansatz containing

 coefficients still to be determined. We observe here Euler's very first use of the method

 of undetermined coefficients for solving differential equations in lunar theory. He used

 this simple but robust method throughout his works concerned with celestial mechanics

 (cf. Verdun 2010). Unfortunately, the manuscript is only fragmentarily preserved and

 ends abrupt with Euler's records dealing with the solution of the problem by using

 this method. Therefore it is not quite clear whether he already applied the method of
 undetermined coefficients in full length and whether he finally was able to solve the

 differential equation successfully.

 4 Assessment of the development of Euler's methods invented

 and used for lunar theory

 The study and careful analysis of Euler's documents written between 1730 and 1744

 allow us to infer to some crucial steps that happened when Euler indeed was concerned
 mainly with the development of mechanics. During this period he developed and
 introduced some fundamental methods in the context of lunar theory, that developed

 into standard procedures in the course of his further development of celestial mechanics

 in general.

 4.1 Equations of motion

 Although formulated already by Jacob Hermann in terms of Leibnizian notation of
 calculus, Euler derived the equation of motion (also called "Newton's second law of
 motion") in his "Mechanica" from scratch without any reference to Newton. Remark

 able and important is the fact that he used the equation of motion not parametrized
 by time but by length. The change of the parameter is documented already in Euler's
 Ms 167 and in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 20, Schol. 3). Euler used the
 equation of motion indeed in different forms, but always with the length or distance

 as independent or "free" parameter (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 25, Explanation 15, Schol.
 4 and 5). The reason for this is clear: the central issue for Euler at that time was to

 figure out the nature of the curve a body is following due to any forces acting on
 it. The "nature of the curve" means its analytic representation in the sense of a well

 defined geometric trajectory that could be described in mathematically closed form.

 For that purpose Euler regarded a parametrization by length as most advantageous

 and most straightforward. In the 1730s, the focus of interest was still more put on the

 kinematic aspects, i.e., the geometric shapes of orbits and trajectories and the temporal

 behavior of a body's motion, than on the dynamics. Moreover, this is why the equation

 of motion is always applied in one dimension, i.e., according to the length or distance

 as independent parameter. This did not change even when Euler discussed the Moon's
 motion in three dimensional space in Chapter V of his "MechanicaThe problem
 there instead was reduced to the one dimensional case. The central issue emerging

 during the considered time period, however, was the steadily increasing use of the

 equation of motion, although in variants, to solve problems in mechanics and celestial

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 498 A. Verdun

 mechanics, which finally progressed into a standard procedure. It will be shown in

 part 3, that this development was a necessary prerequisite for the breakthrough that

 happened around 1744. At that time Euler recognized the importance of the para
 metrization by time as well as the formulation of the equations of motion in three
 dimensions, thus describing the body's motion in space from the dynamical point of
 view. The goal was no longer the determination of "the nature of the curve", but of

 the body's position in three dimensional space with respect to any reference frame at

 any given instant of time due to the forces acting at that epoch on the body.

 4.2 Principle of the transference of forces

 This principle is one of the major achievements by Euler made during the considered

 period of time. It states that if the motion of a body M has to be described as seen from

 a body Τ at rest, then all forces acting on body Τ have to be transferred in reverse
 direction onto the body M. Today, this seems to be obvious and naturally. But the
 analysis of Euler's documents showed that a real process was needed to achieve this

 insight. There might have been many reasons that led to the recognition and formulation
 of this principle. According to Euler's unpublished manuscripts presented above, it
 was most probably motivated by his previous considerations on absolute and relative
 forces, on absolute and relative motions, and on the "variational problems" treated
 in terms of the different "scalas" that had already been introduced by Hermann. The

 real problem underlying these concepts is associated with the definition and choice

 of an appropriate reference frame (cf. Bertoloni Meli 1993). That this principle is far

 from being self-evident is proved by the fact that even in 1747, when Daniel Bernoulli
 (1700-1782) wrote his Memoir on the theory of Saturn and Jupiter, with which he

 competed for the prize of the Paris Academy, he either did not know anything about
 this principle or he did not understand it when Euler wrote him about it (cf. Verdun

 2010, Chap. C.2). The documents analyzed above reveal, in addition, that this principle

 has been established as standard procedure during the focused period of time by Euler.

 4.3 Approximations by series expansions

 Actually, there was just one reason to introduce series expansions into lunar theory,

 namely to make differential equations integrable. Due to the practical fact that series

 can not be expanded infinitely, the substitution by series means that the exact solu

 tion can only be approximated. This is the price one has to pay for the convenience

 that the series can be integrated term by term. This is why approximations by series
 expansions became a standard tool in celestial mechanics. In Ms273 we observe its

 very first appearance in this context. However, in Ms 276, this approach turned out to

 be important and successful not only in lunar theory, but in celestial mechanics at all.

 In this manuscript Euler expressed the distance ζ between the Sun and the Moon in

 terms of trigonometric functions. He recognized that the term 1 /z3, which previously

 arose from the principle of the transference of force, induces an elliptic integral that
 can be solved only approximatively by series expansions. At this point trigonomet

 ric series found their way into celestial mechanics and, by their own rights, became

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 499

 important for analytic perturbation theory through their potential to "explain" pertur

 bational effects by certain terms and its angular arguments. The history evolving from

 the different approaches by Euler and others to solve elliptic integrals approximately
 by using trigonometric series expansions was comprehensively described by Heinrich
 Burkhardt (1861-1914), cf. Burkhardt 1908, Chap. III.

 4.4 Trigonometric functions and the importance of their arguments

 The successive use and establishment of the equations of motion induced the demand

 for mathematical methods to solve, although approximately, the differential equations

 resulting from them. Progress in mathematical analysis became synonym with progress

 in the development of integration methods. In the course of Euler's works on mechan

 ics and celestial mechanics, two constituents of such methods turned out to be very

 prolific, efficient, and robust: trigonometric functions combined with the method of

 undetermined coefficients. Although trigonometric functions were introduced already
 by Newton in 1669, and although the method of undetermined coefficients used to

 solve linear differential equations with constant coefficients may probably be traced
 back to Leibniz (cf. Katz 1987, pp. 312-313), it was Euler's achievement to place
 them at the foundation in mathematical analysis and to standardize and establish them

 as parts of powerful integration methods. Let us address the latter aspect in the next
 section and focus first on the former.

 Even until the late 1730s trigonometric functions such as sine, cosine, or tangent
 were considered not as functions in the modern sense, but as certain ratios of lines
 inscribed into a circle of given radius (cf. Katz 1987, pp. 315-316):

 [...] though sine tables existed in abundance, the sine was not considered as

 a "function", even to the extent that logarithms or exponentials were. It was
 thought of geometrically as a certain line in a circle of a given radius, one did
 not, in general, draw a graph of such a function so there was no question of
 finding tangent lines or areas.

 Therefore, it is not astonishing that a true calculus of such functions could not emerge
 for some time. The definition in the sense of function theory and, consequently, the

 analytic treatment in the context of the calculus was initiated only by Euler in two
 treatises, which he presented to the Petersburg Academy on December 4, 1738, and
 on March 30, 1739. In the Memoir entitled De novo genere oscillationum (On a new

 type of oscillation) he deals with the oscillation in the motion of the tides (cf. Euler
 1750a, Ε126). The Memoir entitled Methodus facilis computandi angulorum sinus ac

 tangentes tam naturales quam artificiales (An easy method for computing the natural

 and artificial sines and tangents of angles) is devoted to give procedures useable to

 calculate easily trigonometric functions by series expansions (cf. Euler 1750b, Ε128).

 The preparatory works and earliest records associated with these two memoirs may be
 found in Euler's third notebook Ms 399, fol. 140r-148v, 157v-159r, and 193r, which

 was written between 1736 and 1740 (cf. Kopelevic et al. 1962, p. 115). This notebook

 contains, in particular, his earliest notes about the integration and differentiation of

 trigonometric functions as well as about the integration of second order differential

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 500

 A. Verdun

 equations by using such functions. It gives evidence for Euler's recognition of the
 importance of trigonometric functions to solve differential equations resulting from

 the equations of motion that describe the periodic motion of celestial bodies, as well.
 These functions have the advantage of being easily integrable and of being accurately

 computable for given angular arguments by rapidly converging series expansions, as
 Euler showed in the second Memoir (Ε 128) which is contained nearly complete in his

 notebook Ms 399. Moreover, in Ms 276, Euler must have begun to note the meaning

 and importance of the angular arguments occurring in the trigonometric functions for

 the interpretation of the perturbational effects produced by the geometric constellation

 or situation of the participating bodies.

 4.5 Method of undetermined coefficients

 The well-known method of undetermined coefficients was commonly used for var
 ious problems since its invention by René Descartes (1596-1650), in particular, to
 determine reciprocal series. Euler applied this method also for solving differential
 equations. He established this method as a standard procedure in celestial mechanics
 and lunar theory. According to Moritz Cantor (1829-1920), it was Euler who first
 formulated the principal idea of this method in a Memoir (cf. Euler 1750c, Ε 130),
 presented to the Petersburg Academy at October 22, 1739 (cf. Cantor 1901, p. 676f.):

 Beilàufig bemerkt, diirfte dieses die erste Stelle sein, an welcher der der Methode
 der unbestimmten Coefficienten zu Grunde liegende Gedanke deutlich ausge

 sprochen ist, so vielfach die Methode auch seit ihrer Erfindung durch Descartes
 Anwendung gefunden hatte.

 (By the way, this may be the first place where the idea forming the basis of the

 method of undetermined coefficients is clearly articulated, notwithstanding the
 many times this method has been applied since its discovery by Descartes.)

 The method of undetermined coefficients consists of setting an appropriate ansatz
 which formally is similar to the analytic structure (e.g., order) of the expected func

 tion that solves the differential equation. In general, this will be a series expansion, the

 terms of which containing yet undetermined coefficients that can be determined by

 comparison of the corresponding terms when this ansatz is substituted into the differ

 ential equation and integrated term by term. This method is very simple and robust, and

 may be applied to any equation of motion however difficult. The price to pay for this

 advantage is the inconvenience, that this kind of integration may become extremely

 time consuming, depending on the series' order of the ansatz and on the complexity

 of the differential equation (system). Each term has to be calculated algebraically in

 order to carry out the comparison of the coefficients. However, it is just this method

 that Euler used throughout in his works on celestial mechanics since its first appear

 ance in Ms 276. For example, when he competed for the prize of the Paris Academy
 in 1752, he was forced to calculate over 10,000 terms algebraically (cf. Verdun 2010).

 This was caused by the ansatz, which was a trigonometric series from which the first

 and second derivatives had to be put into the original second order differential equa
 tions system. The resulting products of sine and cosine functions had to be resolved

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 501

 by the addition theorem, thus excessively multiplying the number of terms to be
 integrated.

 4.6 Establishment of orbital elements

 A separate study would be required to reconstruct the rise and development of those

 parameters we call orbital elements today. They characterize form and position of an
 ellipse in the Keplerian two-body-problem. The definition of such orbital elements

 actually may be done in an arbitrary manner. However, the elements that have been

 established until now were published as one set of orbital parameters by Euler in a
 Memoir on planetary motion that he presented to the Petersburg Academy on March

 28, 1740 (cf. Euler 1750d, Ε131, p. 122 and Fig. 9). There are also two manuscripts,
 Ms 252 and Ms253, preserved in the Archive of the St. Petersburg Academy of Sci
 ences that are associated with this Mémoire (cf. in Kopelevic et al. 1962, pp. 79-80).
 Ms 252 is a fragment or draft version, dated to the years 1738-1740. These six inde
 pendent orbital parameters are not constant in the case if more than two celestial
 bodies interact gravitationally with each other. Euler became aware of that fact due

 to his studies on lunar theory during the considered time interval in his "Mechanica"
 (E15) and in his unpublished manuscripts Ms 273 and Ms 276 (see above). In these
 two manuscripts, he derived differential equations for the "increments" or "variation"

 of some of these orbital parameters. It turned out (and will be shown in part 3) that this

 is a new kind and very important approach in lunar theory and celestial mechanics,
 which many years later became famous with the label "Gaussian" or "Lagrangian"
 (planetary) equations of motion. However, it was Euler's achievement to be the first
 to formulate differential equations for the orbital elements (cf. Verdun 2010).

 5 Conclusions

 While Euler, before 1730, still struggled within his search for the right track to cope

 with multiple force centers (cf. Verdun 2012), it was shown in this part that he found

 a way out of the entangled situation with the principle of the transference of forces.
 This principle immediately became a first solid standard procedure within his still
 sparse repertoire of methods that were potentially useful for solving the lunar prob
 lem. Another method that Euler developed, in combination with the former, into a

 standard procedure is the use of the equation of motion, albeit still in variant forms

 and still parametrized by length. The application of both procedures to the lunar prob

 lem confronted him with new serious problems, which triggered the introduction of

 trigonometric series expansions to solve the resulting differential equations for the

 Moon's motion approximately. To integrate them Euler resorted to the well known
 method of undetermined coefficients, which he used for that purpose probably for

 the first time. By 1744 almost all ingredients needed for a successful and technically

 mature lunar theory were available to Euler: The principle of the transference of forces,

 trigonometric functions to expand certain terms into trigonometric series, the repre

 sentation of the variation of orbital elements by differential equations, and the method

 of undetermined coefficients to solve them. However, up until that time there was only

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 one important step missing which was needed for the final breakthrough leading to a

 powerful lunar theory: the equations of motions, formulated in three spatial dimen
 sions and parametrized by time. This step allowed Euler to formulate what I call his

 "embryonic" lunar theory of 1744/45, which will be presented in part 3 of this series
 of articles. The numerous lunar tables Euler constructed between 1745 and 1750 (cf.

 Verdun 2011) most probably are based on that early theory, which he tried to bring

 into closer agreement with observations during that time, as will be subject of the next
 part as well.

 502 A. Verdun

 Acknowledgments This study was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, which approved

 a grant for a project to investigate and edit Euler's unpublished manuscripts related to his early lunar theories.

 This project is performed in the context of the activities of the recently founded Bernoulli-Euler-Center at

 the University of Basel. I thank Prof. Dr. Hanspeter Kraft (Director of the Mathematical Institute, University

 of Basel, and main applicant of the project) for the project's administration, Dipl.-Math. Martin MattmUller
 (Director of the Bernoulli-Euler-Center), Dr. Fritz Nagel and Lic.-Phil. Sulamith Gehr (Bernoulli-Euler
 Center) for assistance and support, Prof. Dr. Gleb K. Mikhailov (University of Moscow) and the St. Peters
 burg Archive of the Russian Academy of Sciences for providing copies of Euler's manuscripts, PD Dr.
 Tilman Sauer (Einstein Papers Project, CalTech, Pasadena and University of Bern) for proofreading the

 manuscript, and the Astronomical Institute of the University of Bern for using its facilities and infrastructure.

 Appendix A: The contents of Ms 167 relevant for the development
 of Euler's lunar theory

 In the "Introductio" of Ms 167 Euler defines the concept of "scala celeritatum", which
 he adopted from Jacob Hermann's Phoronomia (cf. Hermann 1716, p. 54), a work
 that Euler studied carefully and "in which the whole science [of mechanics] has been
 enriched by the treatment of so many selected topics to be found within", as Euler
 mentioned in the preface to his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736, Prefatio). The concept
 "scala" means the graphical representation of values or shortly "graph" or "run of the

 curve". It is not to be confused with the concept of a function in the modern analytical
 sense, although Euler already uses the term "functio" in Ms 167 (cf., e.g., §§69, 82,
 92-96, 106) and later in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736), expressing the dependence
 of the value of a parameter from another one. In that time (about 1730) the term "scala"

 meant the point-to-point correlation between the values of a certain parameter (force,
 velocity, time) and the values on which they depend (distances). In a diagram, the

 latter constitutes the values of the abscissa, the former of the ordinate, thus forming a

 discrete steplike representation (which is the meaning of the word "scala"), which was

 considered to be a continuously progressing curve and expressed—in this sense for our

 context—the "progression of the velocity as a function of the distance covered by the

 considered body". Later on, in Chapter I of Section I, Euler also introduces the concepts

 of "scala potentiarum" and "scala temporum" (cf. Ms 167, §§62, 64). He adopted the
 former from the Phoronomia as well. Hermann introduced not only the term "scala

 potentiarum", but other "scalae", e.g., "scala solicitationum centralium" (cf. Hermann
 1716, p. 28 and p. 52). Euler defined the concepts of "scala celeritatum" and "scala
 temporum" in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 5), he missed, however, to
 define the term "scala potentiarum" and used it without explanation in the solution of

 Proposition 41 (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 41). The term "scala temporum" does not appear

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 503

 in Hermann's Phoronomia, but it already occurs in the letters of Johann I Bernoulli to

 Jacob Hermann written on December 21,1715, and on May 20,1716, from which one
 may conclude that Euler became acquainted with it from them as well. According to
 the way Euler uses the "scala potentiarum" in Ms 167, one may suppose that it does

 not represent just one but any curve in the sense of "variational curves", which is why

 the term "scala" sometimes may be associated with a whole family or series of curves.

 The significance of the concept of "scala potentiarum" for the development of lunar

 theory concerns the fact that Euler learned to find and to determine different "scalas

 of forces" associated with different given initial conditions or properties defined by

 the problem. This actually involves not only variational principles, which were still
 to be developed at that time, but has—by the initial conditions—implications on the
 choice of appropriate reference frames as well. I will briefly address this topic below.

 Euler opens the first part of his treatise, entitled "De motu a potentiis producto"
 (On the motion produced by forces), with definitions of absolute and relative forces,
 which are of equal importance with respect to the development of reference frames:

 Potentiae quarum actiones non pendent a celeritate corporis patientis, vocentur

 absolute, Quae vero aliter agunt, si corpus alia feratur celeritate relativae vocentur.

 (Forces whose actions do not depend on the velocity of the body experiencing
 them are called absolute forces, whereas those that act in a different way when

 the body moves with a different velocity are called relative.)

 Euler has used first the terms "potentiae purae" (pure forces) and "potentiae impurae"

 (impure forces) for absolute and relative forces, respectively, which corroborates the
 conjecture that these concepts are his own neologisms with respect to the meaning
 defined and used by him (cf. Fig. 6).

 Dato autem effectu potentias absolutai in corpus quiescens sequenti modo inveni

 etur effectus in motum. Valeat potentia quaedam corpus A quiescens tempusculo
 infinite parvo ex Λ in Ρ transferre. Nunc vero habeat corpus A celeritatem ζ
 secundum directionem AB quaeritur quomodo eadem potentia eodem tempus
 culo motum corporis perturbabit.

 (The effect of an absolute force on a body at rest being given, the effect on the

 moving body will be determined as follows: Let some force be such that it sends

 a body A at rest in an infinitely small time from Λ to P. Now let the body A

 have the velocity ζ in the direction AB. How will the same force now disturb the

 motion of the body during the same moment of time?)

 Fig. 6 Euler's sketch in Ms 167
 to illustrate the concepts of
 absolute and relative forces

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Quia potentia acque in motum corpus ac in quiescens agere ponitur, con
 cipiatur corpus A motum suum amisisse seu id super piano positum, quod
 motum habet aequalem et contrarium ei quem habet corpus transferetur id
 igitur in P. Restituo autem motu perveniat id interea in Β motu ante con
 cepto. Quamobrem post hoc tempusculum non in Ρ sed in M reperietur, ducta
 recta PM parallela et aequali rectœ AB. Quoniam enim planum in partes con
 trarias motum concipiebatur, ut corpus in locum debitum restituatur, oportet
 piano motum ei, quem ante habere ponebatur, contrarium tribuere, hoc modo
 punctum Ρ 'm M transferetur. Quamobrem corpus A interea diagonalem AM
 descripsisse putandum est. A potentia ergo angulo BAM a sua semita deflectere
 coactum est, et celeritatem acquisivit, quae se habet ad pristinam ut AM
 ad AB.

 504 A. Verdun

 (Since the force is assumed to act equally on a moving body as on one at rest,
 let us suppose the body A to have lost its motion or to be set on a plane which
 has a uniform motion opposite to that of the body. Thus it will be carried to P.

 The motion being restored, let it arrive at Β by the motion conceived before. It
 will therefore be found after this moment of time not at Ρ but at M, where the

 line PM is drawn parallel and equal to AB. For since the plane was supposed to

 move in the opposite direction, in order to return the body to its due place, one

 needs to attribute to the plane a motion opposite to that which it was supposed to

 have before: thus the point Ρ will be carried to M. The body A must therefore
 be thought to have covered in the meantime the diagonal AM. Consequently it
 has been compelled by the force to deviate from its path by the angle BAM and
 has obtained a velocity that is to the original one as AM to AB.)

 In the first section, entitled "De motu a potentiis in punctum liberum agentibus pro
 dueto" (On the motion produced by forces acting in a free pointlike body) Euler treats
 uniform rectilinear motions. To be able to solve non-uniform rectilinear motions, he

 states what we now call "Newton's second law" or "equation of motion":

 Porro si tempora sunt inasqualia, quia turn incrementa celeritatum sunt ut tem
 pore, habebimus hanc legem incrementum celeritatis esse directe ut tempuscu
 lum et potentiam atque ut corpus ipsum inverse.

 (If the time intervals are not equal, the following law holds (since then the

 increments of velocity are proportional to the times): the increment of veloc

 ity is directly proportional to the time element and to the force, and inversely
 proportional to the body itself [i.e., its mass].)(emphasis added)

 Euler adopted this law most probably from the Phoronomia, because Hermann pre

 sented it in the same context as Euler did, namely when dealing with the transition

 from uniform to non-uniform motions (cf. Hermann 1716, pp. 55-57).

 Euler continues his investigations on rectilinear motions of pointlike bodies in
 Chapter I of this section, entitled "De motu puncti a potentiis absolutis tracti rectili
 neo" (On the rectilinear motion of pointlike bodies due to absolute forces). Here he
 formulates the law of motion in Leibnizian notation:

 dz — mpdt : A,

 (1)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where ζ denotes the body's velocity, A its mass, ρ the force acting on it, and m a
 proportionality constant. He substitutes the time element dt = η dx : dz, η being a
 constant, to obtain

 setting the integration constant equal zero. Here we can observe the very origin of
 the factor 2 occurring in Euler's equation of motion, which he maintained over many

 decades of years by choosing appropriate units. Therefore

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 505

 Fig. 7 Euler's setch in Ms 167
 to illustrate the concepts of
 "scala" or function

 dz=mnpdx :Az or Azdz = mnpdx. (2)

 Its integration gives

 Azz — 2mnpx, (3)

 y 2 mnpx
 ~Â~

 (4)

 According to Euler, it is more convenient to express the quantity of velocity by the

 corresponding height or altitude of free fall, which is a distance and therefore easier
 to measure than the velocity. In the sequel Euler defines and determines the units and

 constants in Rhinelandian (Prussian) feet, thus obtaining « = 555, which corresponds
 to the value of gravity on Earth at an altitude of 15,625 Rhinelandian feet.

 The next topic concerns the motion of a body which is attracted in any multiple

 ratio of its distance from the center. In this context Euler introduces the terms "scala

 potentiarum" (progression of forces) and "scala temporum" (progression of time) and

 applies these concepts to solve problems closely related to what we call today "calculus

 of variations" such as (cf. Ms 167, § 80, and Fig. 7):

 Inveniamus nunc omnes possibiles scalas potentiarum, quae faciant, ut corpus

 dictum spatium AC vel eodem tempore percurrat, vel ut in C eundem celeritas

 gradum assequatur.
 (Find now all possible progressions of forces which cause the body either to
 cover a given space AC in a given time or to reach in C with a given degree of

 velocity.)

 Φ) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 506 A. Verdun

 Fig. 8 Euler's sketch in Ms 167
 to illustrate the construction of a

 A (B) B

 "scala potentiarum" (B)(D),
 which is equivalent to a constant
 force BD

 Fig. 9 Euler's sketch in Ms 167
 explaining the curvature radius

 Euler reformulated this kind of "variational" problem in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler
 1736, Prop. 47 and 48). In Ms 167, he also treats the problem of finding a special
 "scala potentiarum" that causes a falling body to move in a certain way according to
 a given time schedule (cf. Ms 167, §§ 88-102, and Fig. 8).

 Chapter III deals with the curved motion of a pointlike body which is driven by
 absolute forces. Euler decomposes the force acting on the body into the tangential
 and normal components with respect to the point of the curve the body is currently
 located in and notes, that the former can change only the body's speed, the latter
 only its direction (cf. Ms 167, §§ 176-177). He defines the curvature radius ("radius
 osculi") or curvature ("radius curvedinis"), which he wants to determine now using
 the normal force: Let (cf. Fig. 9) Mr and ds = Μ μ be the normal and tangen
 tial line elements associated with the element Mm of the curve defining the curva
 ture radius r in M, and ρ be the normal force component (assuming the ratio of
 the normal to the gravitational force as ρ to 1). The altitude υ that corresponds to
 the body's velocity is equal to ρ ■ Mr (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 25, Coroll. 5). This
 velocity corresponds to a distance 2Mr covered by the body during the time ele

 ment Jjfp-j, · This time element is equal to that one used by the body to cover the

 distance Μ μ, which is 4^. By equating these two time elements Euler derives the
 equation

 Mr =

 pds~

 4v

 (5)

 <?j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Using the equivalence Mr : Mm = Mm : 2 r and assuming Mm « Μ μ = d.v, Euler
 solves this for Mr and substitutes it in Eq. (5), obtaining (cf. Ms 167, §178)

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 507

 Fig. 10 Euler's sketch in
 Ms 167 explaining the tangential
 and normal force components

 r = —, (6)

 2v

 Ρ

 which agrees with the result of Ms 180 (cf. Verdun 2012, Appendix B, Eq. (1), con
 sidering that ρ : I = Ν : A).

 Let Ρ be the force acting on the body, ds = Jdx2 + dy2 the line element of its
 curved path that it covers in the time element (cf. Ms 167, §179, and Fig. 10). Then
 the normal and tangential components are given by and respectively. Again
 using the "law" relating the increment of velocity with tangential force (cf. Euler 1736,
 Prop. 25, Coroll. 5), Euler obtains

 dv = ds = — Pdy. (7)

 -P dy

 ds

 He substitutes the normal force into Eq. (6) and equates the result with the formula

 for the curvature radius r = derived from differential geometry, obtaining

 Ρ dxày = 2vddx.

 (8)

 The substitution of Eq. (7) into the last one gives

 du 2ddx
 — + -τ— = ο, (9)
 υ αχ

 whose integral is

 vdx2 = Cds2, (10)

 bg2 ds2

 —fer" <")

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where C denotes the integration constant. If χ = 0 then υ = b and d)> : di = / : 1,
 therefore C — bg2, where g = — //. From Eq. (10) Euler obtains for the altitude

 508

 A. Verdun

 and for the corresponding velocity

 bg2 di2
 dx2

 (12)

 Euler considers first parabolic and circular orbits using this result (cf. Ms 167,
 §§ 183-189), before he treats the general central force problem (cf. Ms 167, §190f,
 and Fig. 11). Let ΒΜΛ be the curve described by a body M due to a central force
 located in C. Let the distance between M and C be y and the central force be P,
 supposing the gravitational force = 1. Let further the length of the perpendicular
 CT to the tangent MT be ρ and Μ Τ — Jyy — pp = t. The normal and tangential

 components of the central force are thus given by ^ and respectively. Let ν be
 the altitude corresponding to the velocity of M and ν + di; that of m. Let r be the
 curvature radius in M. Due to mr = dy and the equivalence of the triangles CMT and
 Mmr, it follows (cf. Ms 167, §191) Mr = and Mm = Therefore, due to

 the tangential force which acts in reverse direction to the motion of M, the increment
 of its velocity becomes

 t

 (13)

 According to Eq. (6), the curvature radius is given by r = On the other hand, it

 is also defined by r — . Therefore,

 = or ρρΛ^2νάρ. (14)

 dp Pp

 The substitution of Eq. (13) into Eq. (14) gives ppv = C. Euler sets ρ = f and υ = b
 to obtain C = bff and thus ppv = bff and ν = Assuming bff being constant,

 this result gives the velocity y/v of the body M defined by the parameter ρ (cf. Ms 167,
 §192). Let Τ be the time needed by the body to cover the arc BM, which is given by

 the known velocity of the body. The time element dΤ needed to cover the arc Mm is

 defined by

 Mm pydy y-Mr

 = ——- = (15)

 y/v tfy/b f \Jb '

 Fig. 11 Euler's sketch in
 Ms 167 used to derive the force

 components

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and the time needed to cover the arc BM is thus given by

 Euler concludes that the time intervals are proportional to the areas covered by the

 associated radius vectors, which is Kepler's area law (cf. Ms 167, § 193). He substitutes

 υ = ^ into Eq. (14) to obtain Keill's theorem (cf. Ms 167, §194):

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 509

 whereby the relations Mm = Mr — and ν = ^ were used. Therefore,

 2 [area]MCm

 = jjh · <"»

 2 areaBCM

 77b ■ <">

 „ 2 bffdp

 p^dy

 (18)

 He derived this theorem already in Ms 398, fol. 26v (see also Euler 1736, Prop. 74,
 Coroll. 4, §592; Keill 1708). Euler admits that the application of this theorem is so

 difficult if the body's curve, either algebraic or transcendent, can not be reduced to an

 equation which is general in a way that the curve may be expressed by an equation
 interrelating orthogonal coordinates (cf. Ms 167, §195):

 Aequatio, quae hoc modo ad curvam invenitur a corpore prolubitu projecto et
 a vi data Ρ ubique sollicitato [descriptam], est inter distantiam corporis a cen
 tra y et inter perpendiculum ad tangentem ex centra p. Cum vera ut plurimum

 difficile sit hinc judicare, qualis sit curva utrum algebraica an transcendens, redu
 cam xquationem hanc generalem ad Eequationem inter coordinatas orthogonales
 quemadmodum curvae exprimi soient.
 (This equation found in this way for the curve described by a body that is pro
 pelled in any manner and acted anywhere by a given force Ρ, depends on the

 distance y between the body and the center, and on the perpendicular ρ from the

 center to the tangent. But because it is extremely difficult to assess from it what
 kind of curve - algebraic or transcendent - it is, I will reduce here this general
 equation to an equation in terms of rectangular coordinates in the same way like

 curves usually are described.)

 We skip Euler's application of this result to special cases, which is not relevant for

 the development of his lunar theory, and turn to his investigations on the motion of a

 body M being subject of two force centers C and D. Let the ratio between the central

 force in C acting on M and the gravitational force as the ratio between the distances

 CM and the constant straight line a, and let the ratio between the central force in D

 acting on M and the gravitational force as the ratio between the distances DM and the

 constant straight line b. Therefore ^ = a and = b, assuming the gravitational
 force being = 1. Let F be the common center of mass of the attracting bodies C and

 D with masses ^ and j, respectively, where CF : DF— a : b. These two force centers

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 510 A.Verdun

 Fig. 12 Reconstruction of the
 missing figure in Ms 167 to
 illustrate two simultaneously
 acting force centers C and D

 Fig. 13 Euler's sketch in
 Ms 167 to illustrate multiple

 acting force centers

 c

 o

 D

 thus act as one single force center being their common center of mass (cf. Ms 167,
 §253, and Fig. 12).

 Let 2 ME be the force acting on M by F. Using the law of sines, Euler derives (cf.

 sin CMF : sin CMD = MB : 2ME = (CF ■ MD) : (CD · MF), (19)

 Ms 167, §254)

 therefore

 ME : MF = (CD MB) : 2 (CF ■ MD) (20)

 (CF + DF)(CD) : CF = (a + b) : a. (21)

 He concludes, that

 ME : MF = (a + b)MB : (2a ■ MD) (22)

 1ME=« + b)MFMB = (" + b)MF =^(1 + Γ)· (23)

 a ■ MD ab \a b J

 Later, Euler considers the more general case of two acting force centers, where the

 centripetal forces are no longer proportional to the distances and where one unique

 common center of force is not determinable (cf. Ms 167, §256, and Fig. 13). However,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 511

 he investigates only the coplanar case, where the whole orbit BM of M is situated in
 a plane together with the force centers C and D, which attract M with any ratio of
 the distance (cf. Ms 167, §257). Let ν be the altitude corresponding to the velocity
 of M in the point M of its curve, and ν + du its velocity in the point m, which is
 situated infinitesimally close to M. Let this line element Mm of the curve be ds.
 Euler denotes CM = y, DM = Y, CT — p, DV = π, MT= *Jyy — pp = q, and

 — π π — p. Let further the curvature radius in M be = r and the distance

 CD between the two force centers c. From the geometry of the two perpendiculars
 CT and DV to the tangent line TV through M it is easily seen that TV— q — ρ and
 DV - CT — π - p. Therefore (cf. Ms 167, §258)

 cc ~ qq — 2qp + pp + pp — 2ρπ + ππ = yy + YY — 2qp — 2ρπ. (24)

 Due to the equivalence of the triangles CMT and DVM with their infinitesimal small
 counterparts it follows ds = and ds = respectively, and therefore

 ds = yjy = iii. (25)

 From § 191 we know that the curvature radii are defined either by r = ^ or by
 r = giving the relation

 ydy rdy

 d/? d;r

 (26)

 By differentiation of Eq. (24) Euler obtains

 ydy + YdY — q dp + ρ dq + ρ άπ + π dp. (27)

 Eqn. (24) may also be written as ρ = q — Jcc — (ρ — π)2, and from the combination

 of the Eqs. (25) and (26) one obtains ρ — ^~·. Therefore

 1 ~ Â Â and Ρ = λ 5 · (28)

 dpjcc -(ρ- π)2 άπ J cc - (ρ - π)2
 α ρ — άπ άρ — άπ

 This result for q, substituted into y = y/pp 4- qq, gives (cf. Ms 167, §259)

 _ y/ccdP2 + PP(dP ~ djT)2 ~ (P ~ *)2~dp (29)

 ^ dp — άπ

 and analogously

 v _ yfccάπ2 + ππ(άρ - d^)2 - (ρ - π)2άπ2
 ' — ι , » W"/

 dp — απ

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 512

 A. Verdun

 representing the two distances of the body M from the two force centers C and D used
 to determine the resulting force acting on M. Euler denotes these two forces with Ρ

 and Q, respectively, and decomposes them into the normal and tangential components
 (cf. Ms 167, §260). Let and be the normal components of Ρ and Q, and its

 sum ^ + Ογ- be their resulting normal force. According to § 178 and assuming the
 gravitational force — 1, this normal force becomes

 ^ (31)

 y Y r

 from which it follows

 ppr , βπ/·

 υ = 17 + ^Γ' <32)

 Substituting Eq. (26) into this result, Euler obtains

 υ - + — . (33)

 Ppdy Qn dY

 2dρ 2άπ

 Let and (4f- be the tangential components of Ρ and Q, respectively, and its sum

 ~L + ^· their resulting tangential force (cf. Ms 167, §261 ). Using the result derived in
 § 176, the increment (taken negative against the force direction) of the body's velocity
 becomes

 du = —(34)

 Pqds Qpds

 y y

 Combining this result with Eq. (25) gives

 dv = -Pdy - QdY, (35)

 whose integral is

 v = C-J Pdy-J QdY, (36)

 where C denotes the integration constant, which has to be determined using the given

 initial velocity in a given location of the body's orbit. Euler derived this result already

 in Ms 180, fol. 3r (cf. Verdun 2012). Equating the Eqs. (33) and (36) allows him to
 determine the two forces Ρ and Q. Without demonstration Euler presents the result
 (cf. Ms 167, §262):

 ρ π dpdv + 2νάράπ ράπάν + 2νάπάρ

 άγ(ράπ-πάρ) 3 àY {π dp - ράπ)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This substituted in q = y/yy — pp and ρ = *JYY — ππ gives (cf. Ms 167, §263)

 From the equations r = and r — Euler has the relations

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 513

 In Ms 180 Euler left the integro-differential equation leading to this result still
 unsolved, which provides evidence for the conjecture, that Ms 167 must have been
 written some time later. Euler comments this result as follows:

 Ex his apparet si detur curva quœcunque et corporis in ea moti celeritas in singulis

 locis, insuper duo quaecunque puncta, inveniri posse vires ad ea puncta tendentes,

 quae faciant ut corpus libéré eam curvam describat, et in singulis locis celeritates
 habeat datas.

 (Thus it is clear: if any curve and the velocity of a body moving on it is given

 for each point, and in addition any two points [of the curve are given], then it

 is possible to find forces directed on to these points, which cause the body to
 follow this curve freely and to assume the given velocity in each point.)

 However, there still remains the problem to determine the nature of the curve supposing

 the two central forces Ρ and Q are given. For that purpose the parameters p,q,n, and
 ρ of y and Y, which define d.v and r, have to be determined. From Eq. (25) it follows
 that

 vdy YdY

 q = ~ and ρ = ——. (38)

 as as

 ρ = and π = . (39)

 yjds2 -dy2 iVds2 - dY2
 ds ds

 ydy YdF

 dp — and π = . (40)

 yjds^^dy1 Y^/ds2 - dF2
 dp — ds and dp = ds . (41)

 This substituted in the first derivatives of q = s/yy — pp and ρ = λJYY — ππ and
 considering Eq. (25) gives

 Substituting Eqs. (38) and (39) into cc = (q — ρ)2 — (ρ - π)2, Euler obtains
 (cf. Ms 167, §264)

 2 4yY{ccàyàY+ yYày2 + yYàY2-yyàyàY-YYàyAY)
 5 ~ Iccyy + 2ccYY + 2y2Y2 - c4 -y4 - Y4

 If this element of the body's curve is known, one can find the associated oscult
 ing radius r in terms of y and Y together with its differentials, using r = and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Therefore, the resulting curvature radius becomes

 yds^/di2 — dy2 Y d-sVds2 — dY2

 (44)

 ds2 — dy2 — y ddy ds2 — d Y2 — Y ddK

 If the curve that the body describes and one of the central forces, say P, are given,
 then the other central force Q can be determined as well (cf. Ms 167, §266). Let be

 ^ = χ and jf = z. Therefore, ν = Ρ χ + Qz and

 514

 A. Verdun

 Eq. (39). Assuming cLv to be constant, the first derivative of ρ in Eq. (39) gives

 ds2 dν - dy3 - y dy ddy

 dp — r . (43)

 ds-y/di2 — dy2

 It may also be expressed in terms of the acting central forces Ρ and Q by equating
 (36) and (32) (cf. Ms 167, §265):

 2C — 2 J Ρ dy — 2 J QdY — + —ψ—, (45)

 from which the nature of the curve can be described using Eq. (39):

 Γ f PpJds2 — dy2 + OrVdi2 — dK2
 2C-2 / Pdy-2 / QdY = — (46)

 and thus the resulting curvature radius becomes

 2Cds-2ds f Pdy - 2ds f QdY

 r = J —-— J g -. (47)

 Ps/ds2 — dy2 + QVds2 — d Y1

 du = Ρ dx + xdP + Qdz + zdQ — —Pdy — QdY

 (48)

 iQ + β«1±± + = 0. (49)

 Multiplying this by eJ - Euler obtains

 r dr+d£

 r dy+d.

 eI'JTtQ = D-j- '■ ^ày + xdP + Pix)^ (50)

 where the integration constant D can be determined from the initial conditions.

 Finally, Euler treats the case where one of the force centers may be considered as

 infinitely far away from the other (cf. Ms 167, §267, and Figs. 14, 15). (This situation

 or

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 515

 Fig. 14 Euler's sketch in
 Ms 167 illustrating the first case
 where the force center is

 infinitely far away

 Fig. 15 Euler's sketch in
 Ms 167 illustrating the second
 case where the force center is

 infinitely far away

 may, in fact, be assumed for first order approximations in the case of the Earth-Moon

 Sun system, where the Sun is regarded as infinitely further away from the Moon than
 the Earth.) Supposing the force center D situated in infinity, or c — oo. Therefore
 MD is parallel to CD. Let CP be a perpendicular to CD and denote PM= z- Thus
 Y = c + ζ and dY — dz holds. Let β be a function of z. From these assumptions,
 substituted into Eqs. (42) and (44), Euler obtains

 \/yy &y2 + yy dz2 — 2 y Ζ dy dz

 ds —

 Jyy - zz

 and

 dsVdi2 — dz2

 r =

 -ddz

 (51)

 (52)

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 516

 A. Verdun

 where dz is supposed to be constant. The other equation for the curvature radius, Eq.
 (47), becomes

 _ 2Cds -2ds f Pdy-2ds f Qdz ^

 Pjds2 — d y2 + Q^/ds2 — d z?

 Equating these results (Eqs. 52 and 53) gives

 2ddj Py/ds2 — dy2 + gVdi2 - dz2

 Vds2 - dz2 = JPdy + fQdz-C

 The second possible situation concerns the case where the force center C is also
 regarded as infinitely far away from the body M. Euler considers this case as well,
 which is, however, of minor importance for the development of his lunar theory and

 thus may be skipped here.

 Appendix Β: The content of Ms 271

 In this small treatise entitled "De Motu Luna; in Ellipsin" Euler develops a formula to

 construct lunar tables based on the Moon's elliptic motion represented by its orbital
 velocity ν at any point of the trajectory. He uses two physical principles, one of them

 implicitly, the other one explicitly. The first one concerns the equation of motion

 and the balance of centrifugal and centripetal (gravitational) force F allowing him to
 determine the Moon's velocity ν by Huygens' centrifugal formula (cf. Euler 1736,
 §630; see also Bomie 1708):

 Foc—, (55)

 v2

 r

 where r designates the curvature radius or radius of the osculating circle at each point

 of the trajectory. This formula may be reconstructed using Euler's "Mechanica" which

 he completed already in 1734. From the equation of motion, given by (cf. §157)

 cdc = ϋΐΐ, (56)

 A

 where c is the velocity of the body with mass A, d.s the line element covered by the
 body, ρ is the force acting on this body and η is a constant, Euler derives the formula
 (cf. §163)

 nprdx = Ac2ds,

 (57)

 where r is the curvature radius and dx the line element covered by the body perpen
 dicular to r, regarding d.v2 = dx2 + dy2. This is exactly Huygens formula, because
 dj = cdt and

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 If ρ is collinear with r as it is the case in central force motions, then ày — 0 and
 cLt — d.s\ so that this relation becomes (cf. §165)

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 517

 dx Ac2

 di r

 np— = . (58)

 Ac2

 np

 (59)

 Euler always expressed the velocity c by its corresponding height of fall υ, so that
 υ = c2 (cf. §202). This implies η = j (cf. §206) and thus r = From this
 formula, Euler extracts (cf. §552)

 Although this derivation is not included in Euler's treatise Ms 271, it seems to be
 part of the standard repertoire of physical principles belonging at Euler's disposal in
 that time (cf. Varignon 1707a, §ΧΧΙΠ, Corol. 2, p. 198). The second principle makes
 sure that the first one holds only if the center of force (i.e., the center of the Earth)

 is at rest with respect to inertial space, or in other words, that the Moon's motion is

 described by this approach in an earth fixed reference frame. This condition requires a

 principle which had never been used before in that context and which was developed

 as innovative element and applied here for the first time by Euler: the principle of the

 transference of forces. It became a standard method already in Euler's "Mechanica"
 (cf. Euler 1736, Prop. 97, §795). This principle, applied to Euler's determination of

 the Moon's motion, means that the force component acting on the Earth by the Sun has

 to be transferred in contrary direction to the Moon. Evidence for its first appearance

 here is given by the peculiarity that Euler had to state more precisely the way how to

 apply the inverse force by some deletions and by inserting a note referring to another

 marginal note.

 Let (see Fig. 16) C, M, and Ν be the centers of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, respec
 tively, which are assumed to be situated in one and the same ecliptic plane. AMBA
 is the Moon's elliptical orbit coplanar with the ecliptic. AB is the apsidal line, A the
 apogee, and Β the perigee. The Moon is situated in M. The straight line GMTR is
 the tangent in M. MP is the perpendicular through M on the apsidal line AB, CO
 the perpendicular through C on the straight line joining M and Ν ,TC and RN are
 the perpendicular lines through C and Ν on the tangent line GMTR, respectively.
 Euler denotes the masses of Earth and Sun, respectively, by A and 5, and defines the

 lengths of the major and minor axes of the Moon's orbit = 2a and = 2c, respectively,
 and the length of the major axis of the Sun's orbit = 2/. He sets the Earth's global
 radius = 1 and denotes the distances CM — y and CN = z, and designates the curvature

 or curvature radius in M with r. He first determines the resulting normal components

 to the tangent line GMTR of the gravitational forces acting on the Moon and the Earth.

 The gravitational forces acting on the Moon by the Earth and the Sun are given by
 A : y y and S : MN2, respectively, the one acting on the Earth by the Sun is given

 by 5 : zz- The normal components of the first two forces are given by A ■ CT : y3

 "fj Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 518 A. Verdun

 Fig. 16 The figure of Ms 271
 explaining the geometry in the
 System Earth (C), Moon (M),
 and Sun (Ν), AMBA being the

 A

 elliptic lunar orbit with C in one
 focus

 and S- NR : MN3. The normal component of the latter is given by 5 · FG : MF ■ zz,
 where the relation MF : FG = CN : NR — CT is defined by the equivalence of the
 correspondent triangles. This normal component becomes thus — S · (NR — CT ) : z3.

 Now Euler applies his principle of the transference of forces when summing up these
 normal components to the resulting centripetal forces acting on the Moon, giving
 = A · CT : y3 + S ■ NR : MN3 — S(NR — CT ) : z3. Note that the latter force actually

 is the normal component of the gravitational force acting on the Earth by the Sun,
 applied in the reverse direction on the Moon, thus making sure that its motion refers

 to the Earth resting in inertial space.

 In the next step Euler determines the orbital velocity υ of the Moon as a function

 of the curvature radius r in M. Using the first principle (cf. eq. 60) described in

 "Est vero vis gravitatis = A et cum sit vis normalis ad vim gravitatis ut altitudes

 velocitatem generans ad dimidium radii osculi

 υ = r ■ CT : 2y3 + S ■ r NR : 2A ■ MN3 - Sr(NR - CT) : 2Az3· (61)

 Without giving any derivation Euler substitutes

 CT = Cy/y : (a — y) (62)

 words by

 Euler derives

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 519

 and the curvature radius (cf. Varignon 1707b)

 r = (lay — yy)ï : ac, (63)

 and sets approximately MN = CN + MO = ζ + MO, thus yielding

 V = ^zy + S„(2a-y>_3s.r.NR.Mo..2Az4. m

 lay lAazi

 Finally, Euler substitutes the product NR ■ MO by trigonometric functions, resulting in

 ν = (la — y) : lay + Syy(2a — y) : lAaz3

 -3Syr (sin CMT+ sin[CMT+1MCN]) ■ 4Az3, (65)

 and the mass ratio S : A by S : A = 2/3 : (8795)2 —lf3-n, leading to

 ν = (la- y) : 2ay + f3yy(la - y) : naz3

 -3 fyr (sin CMT+ sin[CMT+ 1MCN]) : Inz3. (66)

 Euler remarks that the first term depends only on the Earth's attraction, but that the

 second and third depend on the Sun's gravitational force. In addition, the second term
 depends on the Moon's position in its orbit and on the Earth's distance from the Sun,

 while the third term depends on the lunar aspect, namely on the angle between Moon
 and Sun. He further notes that in υ the excess of the terms depending on the Sun over

 the terms not depending on it is always reciprocal to the cube of the Sun's distance
 from the Earth. This is why the Moon's velocity produced by the Sun is much smaller

 than that generated by the Earth. The difference in the lunar time period due to the
 Earth's and the Sun's action is thus reciprocal to the cube of the Earth's distance from
 the Sun, as well.

 Due to the fact that ζ » y, Euler approximates ζ = f, resulting in

 ν = (2a — y) : lay + yy(2a — y) : na

 -3yr · (sin CMT+ s\n[CMT+ 2MCN]) : 2n. (67)

 If the lunar orbit is considered as circle with radius a, his velocity is then given by

 ν = 1 : 2a — aa : 2n — 3aa ■ cos 2MCN : 2n.

 (68)

 Euler derives some corollaries for the elliptic orbit case, defined by the distance

 y/aa — cc — b of the focus from the center of the ellipse, the distance of the apogee

 = a + b and the perigee — a - b. If the Moon is located in the transverse axis or
 apsidal line, there are two cases: In apogee, y = a + b, r — cc : a, and sin CMT = 1,

 resulting in

 υ = (a — b) : 2a(a + b) — cc(a + b) : 2an — 3cc(a + b) cos 2MCN : 2an. (69)

 "β Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 520

 A. Verdun

 In perigee, y — a — b and r = cc : a, leading to

 υ — (a + b) : 2a{a — b) — cc(a — b) : 2an — 3cc(a — b) cos 2MCN : 2na. (70)

 If oppositions or conjunctions happen to be in the apogee (upper sign) and in the
 perigee (lower sign), then

 u = (α ψ b) : 2a(a ± b) — 2cc(a ± b) : na, (71)

 but if quadratures happen to be in the apogee (upper sign) and in the perigee (lower

 sign), then

 ν = (α ψ b) : 2α(α ± b) + cc(a ± b) : an.

 (72)

 If the Moon is located in the conjugate axis, then y = a, r = aa : c, and sin CMT =
 c : a, yielding

 υ = 1 : 2a — aa : 2n — 3aa (c cos 2MCN + b sin 2MCN) : 2cn. (73)

 If oppositions or conjunctions happen to be in the conjugate axis, the sine and cosine
 of the angle 2MCN become sin 2MCN — 0 and cos 2MCN = 1, respectively, and
 therefore

 ν = 1 : 2α — 2aa : η. (74)

 ν = (2a — y) : lay + yyÇLa — y) : na — 3yr sin CMT : n. (76)

 But sin CMT = CT : CM = c : <J(2ay — yy), so that in syzygies

 υ — (2a — y) : lay — 2yy(la — y) : na, (77)

 and in quadratures

 Ô Springer

 ν = (la — y) : lay + yy(la — y) : na. (78)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 But if quadratures happen to be in the conjugate axis, then sin 2MCN = 0 and
 cos 2MCN = — 1, therefore

 ν = 1 : aa + aa : n. (75)

 This is an important result derived by Euler, proving that in syzygies the Moon's
 velocity is always smaller, in the quadratures always larger than it's mean motion.
 Moreover, every time when the Moon in its orbit is in conjunction or opposition,
 then—due to LMCN — 0° resp. LMCN = 180°—its velocity becomes

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 521

 Euler reduces the general equation (67) by using the relations sin CMT = c :
 λ/lay — >7 and r sin CMT — (lay — yy) : a, as well as the addition theorem,
 gaining

 ν = (la — y) : lay — yy(la — y) : Ina

 —?>yy(la — y)coslMCN : Ina

 —7>yy(la — y)s/lay — yy — cc ■ sin 2MCN : Inac. (79)

 Now he tries to make this formula more handy for the calculation of lunar tables. Using

 the geometry of the ellipse and introducing the ratio Τ : t of the periods of revolution
 (i.e., the mean motions of the sidereal periods) of Sun and Moon, respectively, by
 Τ — t : Τ — 559 : 605, he is able to substitute

 sin 2MCN = sin(2D -1,118· ACM : 605),

 (80)

 where D designates the Sun's elongation from the apsidal line AD as reference line
 of these motions. Furthermore, he substitutes cosACM = q, y = cc : (a — bq),
 cc : b — g, and a : b = K, yielding y = g : (Κ — q) and 2a — y — 2a — g :
 (Κ - q). He sets sin ACM — ρ = — yy, having ■s/lay — yy — cc = and
 bcp : (a—bq) = cp : (K — q). Finally, Euler determines the Moon's angular velocity
 ("velocitates angulares lunœ") u expressed in terms of equivalent altitude of fall cor

 responding to the circular motion in M and defined by the curvature radius r in that

 point:

 cc υ

 ~ y3 (2a - y)

 = cc : lay4 — cc : 2nay — 3cc cos 2MCN : 2nay

 —3c^/2ay — yy — cc ■ sin2MCN : 2nay

 = (K -q)4 : 2g3K - (K - q) : 2nK - 3(K - q) cos2MCN : 2nK

 —3/7 sin 2MCN : 2nK

 = {K - q)4 : 2g3K - (K - q) : 2nK

 -3 cos 2MCN : 2η + 3cos(2MCN + ACM) : 2nK

 ~ (K -q)4 : 2g3K - (K - q) : 2nK - 3cos(2D - 1118 · ACM : 605) : 2n

 +3cos(2D — 513 · ACM : 605) : 2n. (81)

 In this result Euler inserts the values α = 60 and b = 3, yielding c — ^/3,591,
 g = 1,197, and Κ = 20. In order to gain practical numbers for u, he scales u,

 1,000,000,000,000 m = (1,000,000)2^(20 — q)4 : 40 · 11973 — (20 — q) : 40n

 —3cos(2D — 1,118 · ACM : 605) : In

 —3cos(2Z) — 513 ACM : 605) : 40n^, (82)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 522

 A. Verdun

 so that the final result becomes

 1,000,000V" = 3.817949 (20- qf

 , 42.3261
 v (20 -q)

 2,539.566 / 1,118 ACM\
 7T cos I 2D I
 (20 -q)2 V 605 /
 126.9783 / Λ 513ACAA
 (20 - q)2 V 605 /

 Η χ cos ( 2D I . (83)

 Euler remarks that the parameter q must successively be substituted with the cosine
 of the angles 1°, 2°, 3°, 4° etc. In this way one may construct lunar tables depending

 on the angle ACM as table argument and on the angle D between the Sun and the
 lunar apogee, measured from the apogee, which may be varied by, e.g, 30° or 45°,

 represented by different tables, as well.

 Appendix C: The content of Ms 273

 This manuscript fragment consists of six Propositions, each of them followed by

 Corollaries. Unfortunately, all thirteen figures to which Euler refers in the text margins

 are missing.

 Proposition I: Given the mass or active quantity ("quantitas activa") of a body being

 at rest, find the motion of another body rotating around the former.

 This proposition concerns the determination of the orbital (Keplerian) elements of

 the two-body-problem. Let M be the mass of the Earth, r its radius, 5 the mass of the

 central body (i.e., the Sun) located in one focus of the elliptic orbit (cf. Fig. 17, which

 was adopted from Ms 397, fol. 121 ν). Let A be the aphelion and AS = f the distance
 between A and S. Let Κ and υ be the altitudes corresponding to the velocities of the
 body in A and in M, respectively. Let further be SM = y and Μ η = dy, where η
 denotes a point infinitesimally close to M on the curve, and SP = p, where Ρ is the

 intersection between the tangent line through M and the perpendicular through S to

 this tangent. Let υ + du be the altitude corresponding to the velocity of the body in m

 infinitesimally close to the point M on the curve. Due to the dynamic relation

 Fig. 17 Euler's sketch of
 Ms 397 explaining the central
 force motion of the body M

 around the central body S, A and

 Β being the apo- and pericenter,
 respectively

 Ô Spring er

 n

 M

 m

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 523

 , . M S
 ày \ άυ — — : —, (84)

 rr yy

 and due to the fact that du decreases when dy increases, Euler starts with the
 equivalence

 whose integral is

 M dv —Sdy

 rr yy

 = -, (85)

 Mv S t

 rr y

 — —l· A, (86)

 where A denotes the integration constant (not to be confused with the aphelion). If the

 body M is located in the aphelion, then υ — Κ and y = f holds, so that

 A = --y. (87)

 rr /

 Substituting Eq. (87) into (86) gives

 Mv -MK Sf - Sy Sfrr - Srry τ

 = . or v=-+—— - + K. (88)

 rr fy Mfy

 Mf3K - MfKy2 - Sfrry + Srry2 = 0, (90)

 or, after dividing by f — y,

 MffK + MfKy — Srry = 0. (91)

 Solving this equation for the perihelion distance y = BS gives

 Β S = MttK— (92)

 Srr - MfK

 Thus, the major axis a = A Β ("axis transversus") becomes

 Sfrr

 AB = .
 Srr -MfK

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Using the relation Κ : υ = pp : //, Euler eliminates υ in Eq. (88) and solves the
 result for p:

 ρ ρ = . (89)

 Mf3Ky

 Sfrr - Srry + Mfy Κ

 If the body is situated in the perihelion, then ρ = y, and Eq. (89) becomes

 524

 A. Verdun

 Substituting this result into Eq. (89) Euler obtains

 Maf>Ky MaffKy
 Safrr — Sfrry Sarr — Srry

 The distance between the two foci is given by = S^rr^-Mf κK ' which Euler uses to
 determine the length of the minor axis c ("axis conjugatur orbitae"):

 MfK ,ΜαΚ

 C~ Ν Srr - MfK ~ 2^ Srr (95)

 Therefore

 Srrcc

 4//

 = Μα Κ (96)

 and Eq. (94) becomes

 ccffy ccy

 PP = V- (97)

 4 ff(a - y) 4 a- 4 y

 The time element used to cover the infinitesimally small distance Mm is given by

 (98)

 Using the relations ρ : ν = mn : Mm or ρ ■ Mm = y · mn and thus mn = ,pd·'' ,

 • r j -Jyy-pp

 Mm ρ■Mm

 s/v fjK

 /V K (yy-pp

 c , y

 Ρ = — (99)

 2 a — y

 1 / Aayy — 4v — ccy

 Vyy - pp = - / , (100)

 2 γ α — y

 and

 therefore

 Ô Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 py d y cy dy

 f\JΚ(yy — pp) f^/4aKy — AKyy - ccK

 (101)

 whose integral is the time of revolution. The time element is defined by the uniform
 straight line motion of the body from m ton, and thus given by . The infin

 itesimally small area covered in this time is y ■ mn = 2 MSm. Let the total aera

 Euler obtains for the time element = —p' d'v But

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 525

 of the orbit's ellipsis be A. The time of revolution ("tempus periodicum") Τ is then

 defined by

 2 A

 τ = 77ϊ· (102)

 Substituting Eq. (96) into this result, one obtains

 -ÎT7F

 najMa

 T = (l04)

 Let 1 : π be the ratio between the radius of a circle and its perimeter.4 Hence the area

 of a circle with radius a becomes βψ-. The ratio a : c between the major and minor

 axes of the ellipse may also be expressed by the equivalent fractions 3ψ- : ^ψ-, from
 which Euler infers to the area of the ellipsis A = ^ψ-. This substituted into Eq. (102)
 gives

 „ = a*,)

 May

 larJMSa^
 Srr - MaK

 4 Note that Euler's definition of "π" implies that it is twice the value of Ludolph's number used in the
 modern sense, which is the ratio between the diameter of a circle and its perimeter. He used that peculiar

 kind of definition already in Ms397, fol. 122r, and in Ms 167, § 371. This is one of the earliest appearance
 of the symbol π used in this meaning in Euler's work (cf. Mattmiiller 2010, p. 185). Some times later,
 however, Euler defined and used this symbol already in the modern sense in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler
 1736, Prop. 76, Coroll. 2, §613).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 When asking for the absolute time of revolution, the variables a and r in this formula
 have to be expressed in Rhinelandian (Prussian) feet (cf. Ms 167, Section A above),

 so that the time of revolution in seconds of time is given by

 This proposition is followed by nine corollaries. In the first one Euler solves Eq.

 (93) for Κ and substitutes the result into Eq. (88), which gives

 Naming the moving body M by "the mobile", Euler concludes from this result, that

 the square of the mobile's velocity is proportional to the distance M F from the non

 attracting focus F and reciprocal to the distance MS from the focus S, being the center

 of force. He notes in a second corollary, that ν = 0 if y ~ a. In the third corollary he

 solves Eq. (93) for / and substitutes the result into Eq. (96), obtaining thus

 In the forth corollary Euler denotes the time of revolution by T, which is—according

 to Eq. (104)—proportional to -jj- He interprets this result in the fifth corollary for
 the cases where several bodies move around one and the same center and around

 He substitutes this result into Eq. (93), so that the major axis becomes

 526 A. Verdun

 multiple centers. In the remaining corollaries he evaluates Eq. (105) numerically for
 the motions of the Earth and of Venus, and determines the mass ratio S : M between the

 Sun and Earth, obtaining 1,053,531:1. Euler adopted the time of revolution for Venus,
 "224.d.l7.h.44'.55"." (cf. Ms 273, fol. 2v), most probably from the 1726 edition of

 Gregory's book, from which he possessed a copy in his own library (cf. Gregory 1726,

 p. IV from the "Editoris praefatio").

 Proposition II: Let S be a [central] body attracting in any way, and M a mobile

 thus describing any curve located in any point M ; determine the ellipsis, in which the

 mobile proceeds, if the formers force immediately decreases according to the squared
 ratio of the distances.

 Let ν be the altitude [of free fall] corresponding to the velocity of M and S M = y.

 Let Ρ be the force acting on M by 5, and a be the major axis ("axis principalis ellipsis"),

 of which the arc element M m is an infinitesimally small part. Let the attracting central

 force Ρ be — and c be the minor axis of the ellipsis. From Eq. (106) of Corollary
 I it follows

 »= no»)

 Ma

 Euler reformulates Eq. (96) using the relation Kff = vpp and obtains

 Srrcc = AMaffK. (109)

 When y changes into y + dy, the major axis increases by the element

 Prry — Μ υ

 Ρ Pr4yydy + PMrryydv — 2P Mrrvy ây — MrryyvdP

 (Prry — Μυ)2 (1")

 Euler inserts the relation Kff = vpp into Eq. (109) and obtains the parameter of the
 orbit ("paramétra orbitae"):

 cc 4M vpp
 — = —. (112)
 a Prryy

 If y increases, then this parameter will also increase by the element (as first derivative

 of 4pr"yy , where vpp is assumed to be constant)

 —AMrrvppyy dP — 8A/ Prrvppy ày ,,,-,ν
 ' ppr4V4 ^' (113>

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 527

 Euler concludes from this result, that the apsidal line will move according to the order

 of the signs ("in consequentia"), if the major axis a increases by this element. Anal
 ogously, if this element decreases, the major axis decreases as well. But if the major
 axis either increases or decreases, this element decreases or increases, respectively,

 and the apsidal line will retrograde against the order of the signs ("in antecedentia").

 This is why a motion of the apsidal line can be recognized in any case.

 This proposition is followed by seven corollaries. In the first one Euler inserts the

 relation d)> : dt> = ^ : Ρ or du = ~Pr^d^ into Eq. (Ill) and obtains

 —IPMrrvydy — MrryyvàP

 (Prry — Mv)2

 This element increases the major axis when y increases its element dy. In the second

 corollary he relates the increments of the parameter and the major axis to each other.

 The ratio of these increments is as 4 to çprryl_Mv^i > which is as 4pp(Prry —
 Λ/υ)2 to PPr*y4 or as 4pp to aa. In the third corollary he introduces—probably for

 the first time in his works on celestial mechanics—a "generalized law of gravitation",

 defining

 ρ = -, (115)

 Ν

 y"

 where Ν denotes an arbitrary constant of proportionality. The first derivative of
 Eq. (115) is given by

 Euler substitutes these Eqs. (115) and (116) into the increment of the major axis
 (Eq. 114) and of the parameter (Eq. 113), obtaining

 η — 2 ■ MNrrydy η — 2 ■ PMrrvyày η-2-Maavây (J17)
 yn~l(Prry ~ Mv)2 {Prry — Mv)2 Pr2y3

 and

 η — 2 · AMppvày

 Pr2y3

 respectively. He is thus able to infer important consequences from these results, which

 are also relevant for the motion of the lunar apses. He concludes in the forth and fifth

 corollary that, if η > 2 and y increases or decreases, then the major axis will increase

 or decrease as well, respectively. If the force Ρ decreases in a ratio larger than the
 square of the distances, then the major axis of the ellipsis increases with increasing

 distances of the mobile from the focus, and decreases with decreasing distances from

 it. The contrary is the case if η < 2. If therefore the central force Ρ decreases in

 (»®

 (118)

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 528

 A. Verdun

 a superior ratio than in the squared, then—so Euler continues in corollary VI—the
 apsidal line moves according to the order of the signs ("in consequentia")· In the other
 case, it moves against the signs ("in antecedentia"). In corollary VII he determines
 the ratio between the orbit's velocity, i.e., the velocity of the apsidal line, and the
 angular velocity of the mobile. Let PMQ be the tangent line through the mobile Μ,
 SP and FQ perpendiculars through the foci S and F to this tangent. Let m be a point
 of the ellipsis infinitesimally close to M achieved by the body while proceeding in his

 motion on the curve and while the major axis is moving from F to / by the element
 Ff. Thus the apsidal line progresses around S by the angle FSf. Let F g and MR be
 the perpendiculars through F and M to the apse SF. Therefore, the ratio between the
 angular motion of the body and the progressive motion of the apsidal line is given by

 Mn Fg _ PS mn MR- Ff
 SM ' SF ~ PMSM ' FM- SF'

 Let SM + FM = a be the length of the major axis, SM = y, SP = ρ, PM — q, and
 thus FM = a — y. From Eq. (117) Euler concludes

 n-2-Maavdy n-2-aabdy

 pf= p^Ty3 = JpTy · <12°)

 where b denotes the parameter defined by b — 7^7^· He expresses the ratio of
 Eq. (119) by

 M η F g PS η — 2 ■ aab ■ MR
 SM ' SF PMSM ' 4 SP2 ■ PM ■ FM SF

 = 4 PS ■ SF ■ FM : m — 2 · aab ■ SM ■ MR. (121)

 Using the relation SF:SP = 2MQ :MR, the ratio between the angular velocity of
 the mobile and the angular velocity of the apsidal line becomes (regarding mn = dy)

 4 PS3 · SF2 ■ FM : ~2 · 2aab ■ SM ■ MQ ■ SP

 = 2PS2 ■ SF2 ■ FM : n~^~2 ■ aab ■ SM ■ MQ. (122)

 Considering the fact that

 ab = — = —-, (123)

 4pp{a-y) ASP2 ■ FM
 y SM

 the ratio of Eq. (122) finally becomes

 Moon's motion.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 = 2PS2 ■ SF2 ■ FM : n~^2 ■ 4a SP2 ■ FM ■ MQ

 = SF2 : 2n - 4 ■ aMQ = SF2 : 2n - 4 · FM ■ PQ. (124)

 Proposition III: One asks for the force of the Sun causing the perturbation of the

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 529

 In order to determine the Moon's motion in an adequate manner, it has to be
 described with respect to an immobile location. Thus suppose the Earth to be immo

 bile, and therefore consider the total motion impressed to the system of bodies always
 to be equal and inverse directed to the Earth's motion. The forces acting on the Earth

 have to be considered as acting in reverse direction on the whole system. Actually,

 Euler neglects the Moon's mass and does not consider the force acting on the Sun by
 the Earth. Let Τ be the Earth, ALB a part of the Moon's orbit, S the Sun, L the Moon,

 and LT, LS its distances from the Earth and Sun, respectively. Let TS be the distance
 between the Earth and the Sun. Let M and S be the masses of the Earth and the Sun,

 respectively. The forces acting on the Moon L by the Earth Τ and the Sun S are given

 by and jjj, respectively. The force acting on the Earth by the Sun is given by .

 To consider the Earth to be. at rest means that this force has to be applied to the
 Moon in the reverse sense along the direction parallel to TS (Euler wrote erroneously

 TL). The force, with which the Moon is attracted to the Sun along the direction LS has

 to be decomposed into the two directions LT and TS. Therefore, the forces acting on the
 Moon by the Sun along LT and along TS (Euler wrote erroneously TL) become

 and respectively. Taking into account all these force components, the resulting
 forces acting on the Moon along LT and TS becomes

 and

 M S TL

 M -LS3 +S TL3

 TL? + LS3

 TL2 ■ LS3

 S-TS

 S-TS3 -S- LS3

 LS3 TS2

 TS2 ■ LS3

 Due to Corollary EX of Proposition I, the ratio of the masses between the Sun and the
 Earth is 5 : M = 1,053,531 : 1 or 5 = 1,053,531 · M. Euler substitutes this relation

 into Eq. (125) and obtains the force acting on the Moon along the Earth's direction
 = + 1,053,531 · TÛ). He knew approximately the ratio between the
 distances as TS : LT — 572 : 1. As an approximation he assumes LS ~ TS and obtains
 for this force

 (125)

 (126)

 (127)

 The ratio between the force acting on the Moon by the Earth when disregarding the

 Sun's action and the force when regarding the Sun's action is as 177-178.

 Euler adds four corollaries to this proposition which, however, are of minor impor

 tance and thus will be skipped here, because they concern only numerical estimations

 and comparisons of the forces determined for different characteristic points of the
 lunar orbit.

 Proposition IV: Suppose the force acting on the Moon by the Sun is decomposed
 into two components: one component which attracts the Moon towards the Earth,
 and one which attracts the Moon along the direction parallel to the conjugation line

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This result may now be substituted into Eq. (114) to determine the variation of the

 major axis. In addition, Eq. (108) may be written as

 530

 A. Verdun

 between the Sun's and the Earth's center. One asks for the perturbation of the Moon's

 motion caused by the force component attracting towards the Earth.

 Let the Moon be attracted towards the Earth by the force M ^Li+^IL according to

 Eq. (125). Euler denotes LT-y and LS=z. Thus this force becomes

 Λ/ζ3 + Sy3

 y2z3

 (128)

 If y goes over into y 4- dy and ζ into ζ + dz, the increment of the major axis—let us
 call it da—may be determined using Corollary I of Proposition II. The first derivative
 of Eq. (128) is given by

 , „ Sz3y4dy-2Mz6ydy-?>Sy5z2dz Szy3 dy-2Mz4 dy-3Sy4 dz
 d P= = — 3~4~ · (129)

 y*z° y^z

 Prry - Μ υ = Prry}\ (130)

 a

 so that the increment or variation of the major axis da becomes

 3Saay — 3 Sayy

 iFWr""-'1"· <I3I)

 ldb]=M7Tsyh{yil-zày)· <l32)

 To find out how the apsidal line moves when y increases by the element dy, one has

 to investigate the power of y defining the decrease of the (gravitational) force. Let η

 be this exponent. According to Eq. (117) the increment of the major axis becomes

 η-2-Maavây η-2-aa-ay-ày 3Sy ■ (aa—ay)

 [de| = = ? = ÏÏTTSyh ^iz~zày)·

 (133)

 from which it follows

 - SSy^dz -zày)

 η — 2= τ τ—. (134)

 zàyiMz* + Sy3)

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Euler denotes the major axis of the orbit by a, and the orbit's parameter by b. Due
 to Corollary II of Proposition II the ratio between the increment of the parameter
 (let us call it db) and the increment of the major axis da is AT Ρ2 to aa, i.e., by to
 aa—ay. He substitutes this relation into Eq. (131 ) and obtains for the increment of the

 parameter

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 531

 Fig. 18 Reconstruction of
 Fig. 2 in Ms 273

 In Proposition II, Corollary VII, Eq. (124), it was already shown that the ratio between

 the angular velocity of the Moon and the angular velocity of the apsidal line is given
 by SF2 to 2n — 4 ■ a ■ MQ. The distance between the foci of the ellipse is given by
 SF2 = aa — ab. From the geometry of Fig. 18 Euler concludes that

 PM-MF a-y■ PM

 MQ = r. w

 SM y

 y y/A a — Ay

 y/{lay - 2yy)2 - aby ■ a - y

 a — y ■ jAayy — 4y3 — aby

 Therefore,

 5F2 : η — 2 · aMQ = aa — ab : -———J(2ay — 2y2) — by a — y

 y

 = ay — by : η — 2 ■ yj(2ay — 2yy)2 — aby ■ a — y.

 Using these results, (η — 2) can be substituted to obtain the ratio between the Moon's
 angular velocity and the angular velocity of the apsidal line, representing—according

 to Euler—the solution of the problem:

 b ■ ζ dy(Mz3 + Sy3) : 35y2(y dζ - ζ dy)yj{lay — 2yy)2 — aby ■ a — y.

 This proposition is followed by eleven corollaries and one scholium. In Corollaries

 I—III Euler discusses the location and motion of the major axis according to the result

 achieved in Eq. (131) for special cases, depending on the values of ày and dz. He uses
 the results obtained from these conclusions in Corollaries IV-VI to quantify them,

 assuming the ratio between the masses of Sun and Earth as S = 1,053,531 M, which

 (135)

 (136)

 (137)

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 was derived in Corollary IX of Proposition I. In addition, he supposes ζ = 572 y as
 a result gained in Corollary IV of Proposition III, and uses the force ratio 177 : 178
 as main result of that Proposition. He approximates the distance between the Earth Τ

 and the empty focus F of the lunar orbit by FT = 5 in units of the Earth's radius. The

 numerical results are not an important issue for the reconstruction of the development

 of Euler's lunar theory and may be skipped here. In the remaining four corollaries
 Euler analyzes the consequences which may be drawn from the ratio between the
 Moon's angular velocity in any place of its orbit and the angular velocity of the lunar

 apses, using and interpreting Eq. (137), again in terms of the values of d_y, dz, y, and

 z. For this purpose he considers the infinitesimally small angular sector defined by

 532 A. Verdun

 MSm = y

 SP dy
 MPSM'

 The first factor of the denominator is given by

 J2ay — 2yy2 — aby a — y

 MP = -— — -,

 2a - 2y

 and of the nominator by

 He substitutes the last two equations into Eq. (138) and obtains

 SP =

 λ/aby

 2-Ja-y

 MSm- iyJfya-y

 vjl ay -  2yy — aby ■ a — y

 Using the relation (137), the angular element covered by the apsidal line—let us call
 it d&>—thus becomes

 [cm = isnyiz-zW*byï=ï (142)

 a - b ■ z(Mz3 + Sy3)

 whose integral yields the motion of the lunar apse. To prepare this integration, Euler
 reformulates Eq. (142) to obtain

 [<M = Hggï ϋΞ| (j^£îî) . (143)

 a — b(Mz3 + Sj3)

 Assuming the first factor to be constant, the integration gives

 [·ι^;··:;ι---ι. <■«)
 (f-f )·
 α - y(Mz3 + 5j3)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 533

 where ^ is the constant of integration with e denoting the distance between Sun
 and Moon, measured when the latter is in perigee. If the direction of the apsidal line

 happens to be in quadrature, so he concludes from Eq. (144), then [ω] =41' per month.
 The apsidal line thus regresses with 82' = 1°22' per anomalistic month against the
 series of the signs ("contra signorum seriem"). Euler does not comment on this result

 with regard to that one obtained by Newton (cf. Newton 1687, Lib. I, Prop. XLV,
 Coroll. II). In the Scholion that finishes this proposition, he states:

 Vis haec de qua egi in nodos nullum habet influxum sed eos immutatos et immotos

 sinit. directior [sic!] enim ejus in ipso piano orbite lunae sita est, efficitque ut
 Luna in eadem semper piano immoto moveatur. Motus autem nodorum ut et
 motus lineae absidum in consequentia debetur alteri vi partiali derivate a vi
 solis, agenti secundum parallelas rectae Solem et terram jungentis.
 (This force I have mentioned has no influence on the nodes, but leaves them

 unchanged and immobile. Its direction coincides with the plane of the Moon's

 orbit and causes the Moon to move always in one and the same immobile plane.

 Consequently, the motion of the nodes and the motion of the apsidal line is due
 to the other force component, which comes from the Sun's force acting along

 the parallel to the straight line conjoining the Sun and the Earth.)

 Proposition V: Suppose the Moon moving in an ellipse and another force is acting
 on it, which may be derived from the Sun acting along the straight line conjoining

 the centers of the Sun and Earth; find the perturbation of the Moon's orbit due to this
 force.

 Let S be the Sun, Τ the Earth, and L the Moon. Let CT be the line conjoining the

 Earth and the quadrature points of the lunar orbit. Let further Ν be the intersection
 between the lines CT and LS. The force repelling the Moon along the line CN is,
 according to Eq. (126) of Proposition III, given by

 S ■ (LS3 - TS3)

 TS2 ■ LS3

 (145)

 Denoting LS — TS — LN, Euler approximates LS3, — TS3 by 3 · TS2 ■ LN, so that the
 force becomes

 Because LS may be considered constant with respect to LN, the force acting on
 the Moon varies everywhere with its distance from the straight line conjoining the

 quadratures. And consequently, the Moon is steadily departing from its orbit when

 moving on the upper side of the quadratures, which is why the orbit becomes prolonged

 in opposition; in the same way it is pulled away from the line conjoining the quadratures

 and attracted towards the Sun in the lower part of the orbit, which is why the orbit is

 also prolonged in conjunction. These prolongations cause the apsidal line to change
 its position and to retrograde continuously; however, its progression dominates the

 retrogression easily, as will be shown later on. From the fact that all points of the

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 534 A. Verdun

 Fig. 19 Reconstruction of
 Fig. 11 in Ms 273

 orbit are pushed away from the line conjoining the quadratures and attracted along
 the straight line conjoining the centers of Earth and Sun, one may conclude that the
 line conjoining the nodes has to change, as well as the inclination of the Moon's orbit

 with respect to the ecliptic. The angle of inclination must decrease when the Moon is

 located in the syzygies, because the Moon is then retracted by the Earth and its distance
 increases while the arc measuring the angle of inclination remains unchanged. This
 proposition is followed by eleven corollaries which are skipped here.

 Proposition VI: Due to the Sun's force the Moon is everywhere repelled away from

 the straight line connecting the quadratures; find how far the Moon is at any point
 dislocated from its orbit.

 Suppose this force to act on a third body (which we would call today a "massless test

 body") and investigate the effect which is produced on it. Let us begin by assuming,

 for the sake of simplicity and facility, that the apsidal line coincides with the syzygies
 (cf. Fig. 19). While the Moon proceeds from C to A, the Sun's force begins to repel

 the Moon away from the straight line CD due to the transference of the force acting on
 the Earth by the Sun to the Moon as explained in Proposition III. The resulting forces
 act along the parallels to the apsidal line and vanish in the line CD due to the Earth

 considered at rest by the transference of forces. Euler assumes that one of these forces

 •fj Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 He assumes that the distances Ρ ρ and LI are covered simultaneously, hence

 LI : Pp = y/υ : *Ju> or LI2 : dx2 — ν : w. (148)

 Euler denotes LR — q (not to confuse with the point ρ on the major axis), and
 concludes from the equivalence of triangles that LI — Therefore,

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 535

 act not on the Moon but on another body a and attract it along the straight line aP.
 Suppose the Moon has arrived at L and the body at P, and while the Moon proceeds to
 /, the body—starting from Ρ—arrives at p. Euler denotes LT = y and α Ρ — χ. Let w

 be the altitude (i.e., the height of fall) corresponding to the velocity of the body in P.
 Then Ρ ρ = dx. Let ζ be the distance between the Sun and the Moon; from L, I take

 the perpendiculars LQ, Iq to the (major) axis, defining thus TQ = t and Qq = d/. The
 force moving the body in Ρ is given by Eq. (145). Starting again with Eq. (84) and
 using the same meaning for the symbols M and r as at the beginning of his treatise,
 Euler obtains

 M 3 St ,
 — : dx = —5- : dw or 3Srrt dx = M ζ dw. (147)
 rr zâ

 7 wyy d ν2 -, -,

 vdx —— or vqq dx = wyy dy. (149)

 qq

 Let a and c be the length of the major and minor axes (not to confuse with the test

 body a), b the parameter of the ellipse or "latus rectum", and / the distance between

 the foci. From properties of the geometry of the ellipsis, he derives

 T0=2a,-m + ff ^ md LQ = (150)
 2/ 4 aa — 4 cc

 Euler rewrites Eq. (100) as

 \4ayy - 4y3 - ccy

 « = <I—j—y— (151>

 to obtain for Eq. (149) the equation

 2 {4a - 4y)wy2 dy Srr ■ (a - y) dx2
 vdx = —; = — , (152)

 4 ayy — 4 y3 — ccy May

 and consequently

 Srr dx2 Awyydy2 ΓΊΓ 2ydyjw

 = or rdxJ = =. (153)

 Ma 4ay — 4yy — cc V Ma °J4ay — 4yy — cc

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 536

 A. Verdun

 Euler then substitutes Eq. (150) for t intoEq. (147) and solves the result for χ to obtain

 2Mfz3 dw

 ?>Srr(2ay — cc)

 2 Mz3 dw*Jaa — ab

 3Srr(2ay — ab)

 2y ày^/Maw

 r y/S ■ (4 ay — Ay y — ab) '

 (154)

 (155)

 (156)

 from which he concludes

 2Mz3 dw^/a — b 2y dy(2ay — ab)

 3Sr ■ JMw JS ■ 4ay — 4yy — 4b

 He integrates this equation, assuming the denominator as constant, and obtains

 2z3^/Mw ■ a - b §ay3 - \aby2 - \aCT3 + jab ■ CT2

 3 rjS sj a a — ab

 which is, when setting CT = |, equal to

 Iz^-a-b ,Mw 2 -, 1 2 1 , 1 , 2 ■> 1, 2 1 ,·?

 ^—3y ~iby ~Έ" 8 3 — 2 24 ■ (,57)

 He derives from Eq. (153)

 ,Mw rdx ,a — b

 - —rV · (158)

 Sa y ay a

 2z3 dx(a - b)i 2 3 1 2 ' ,3
 3ydyja 3" 2 J 24

 -y — -by + — b , (159)

 the integral of which is

 2z3x(a — b)i 2 r 1 4 1 ^ , 1 s
 ^ — = — v5 - -by4 + — b3y2 b5 (160)
 3 Ja 15 8 48 640

 and therefore

 â Springer

 3> (2 5
 x = I —y

 27? · (α — b)i V

 -by4 + — b3y2 - — b5\ (161)
 8 48 640 /

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 which may be substituted into Eq. (157) to obtain the differential equation for dx,

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 537

 Euler sets y — \b + s, where s denotes the exzess over jb, thus obtaining

 ^5-^4 + ^ν-^5 = >Λ (162)

 which may be substituted into Eq. (161) to obtain the rectangular distance of the
 dislocated position of ρ from the line CD:

 bbs3^/a

 χ =

 8 ζ3 (a -6)2

 (163)

 where s contains the accumulation of all "d_y", taken either as positive or negative. If

 it is introduced by LI ■ d_y, it has always to be taken as affirmative due to LI.

 Euler provides an alternative solution based upon the distance LQ = t. He refor
 mulates the right hand side of Eq. (155) using Eq. (150): from the first one he derives

 2y,«c+/Vcc~4» (1M)

 and from the second one

 y4 ay — Ayy — cc = —(165)

 c

 The first derivative of Eq. (164) gives

 -2 ft At

 d>> = J (166)

 c^/cc — 4 tt

 Euler solves Eq. (165) for y to obtain

 b = ffc + afV^n (m

 c

 All these results are substituted into Eq. (155), which becomes

 2 A/z3 dw^/a — b —fdt(fc + a-Jcc — 4 tt){ac + fy/cc — 4ff)

 (168)

 3Sr^/Mw cc^/S ■ cc — 4tt

 He introduces ρ and sets

 Vcc — 4tt = ρ or 21 = -Jcc — pp, (169)

 from which he gains the first derivative

 = .no

 2v^c - pp

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 538

 A. Verdun

 He substitutes Eqs. (169) and (171) into Eq. (168), which becomes

 2ccz3 àwy/M ■ a—b ρ dp(fc+ap)(ac+fp)

 3/r^/Sw 2 pyjcc — ρ ρ

 accf dp+aacpd p+cffp d p+afpp d ρ
 (171)

 η dn4-a fr>nAr>

 lyjcc — pp

 The integration of the left hand side gives

 4ccz^ M w ■ a — b

 3 frjS

 (172)

 The integral of the term js — t (^^+//)^cc _ ^ Euler prepares the
 remaining term for integration by the reformulation

 cc dp + pp dp 2ccdp2 — ccdp + ppdp

 af ■ ~ , = af

 ly/cc - pp 2^/cc - pp

 = = 073)

 V s/cc - ρ ρ 2 /

 The integration is straightforward if the ellipse is approximated by a circle:

 where DCM denotes the sector composed of the straight lines DC and CM, which
 inclose the arc MD of the semi-circle ADB. Euler obtains thus the result

 4ccz?\lMw ■ a — b 3 1 ,. 1 1 ,, Π, 7 ^

 ?)frjs = 2af ' DCM-^afP~2aac ~ 2^CVC Ρ + Const

 (174)

 (175)

 (176)

 (177)

 Euler tries to "construct" this result in such a way that the areas involved in Eq. (175)

 can easily be computed, which is equivalent with an appropriate series expansion of
 this result. He substitutes Eqs. (164)—(166) into Eq. (153) and obtains

 S —dt{ac + f *Jcc — 4tt Mw -cr dx*Jcc — 4tt

 rdxy/ = == or ,/

 Maw cy/cc — 4 tt S d t(ac + fjcc — 4 tt)*]a

 Using this result, the term (172) becomes

 4ccz^s/Mw ■ a — b —4c3z3 dx ■ *Jcc — 4tt ■ a — b

 SfrJS 3/ dt{ac + f Vcc — 4tt)*Ja

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 539

 Setting Vcc — 4tt = ρ and substituting Eq. (171), this term is ready for integration
 by series expansion:

 8cV dXy/cc - pp f accf dp + aacpdp + cffpdp + afppdp

 3adp(ac + fp) J 2^/cc — pp

 -/■

 U'oJ

 Euler develops the integrand into a series that he can integrate term by term:

 - J accf dp + aacp dp + cffp dp + afpp dp ■
 (\ , pp , 1-3·/ , 1-3-5·/ fl\
 \c + 2c3 + 22 · 1 · 2c5 23 ■ 1 ■ 2 · 3 · c4 )
 - nrfn A- 4- 1 ' 3 " ^ , 1 ' 3 ' 5 ' α/Ρ? η

 3 · 2 · 1 · c 5 · 22 · 1 · 2 · c3 7 · 23 · 1 ·2·3 · c5

 afp3 a/»5 af ■ 1 · 3 · ρ1 n οσ
 3 · c 5-2-1 · c3 Ί -21 ■ 1 · 2 · c5 2c

 +T^ + C 0 1 3 + -7 Λ2 1 / 5 &c <+aac + //c> ο

 c/?4 1-3-/76 1 - 3 - 5 - /7s

 + 4-2-l-c3 + 6 · 22 · 1 ■ 2 · c5 + 8 · 23 · 1 · 2 · 3 · c7 ~ '

 (179)

 where the value of the integration constant has to be determined in such a way that

 the whole series vanishes if the Moon is located in the quadratures or if y — \b or if

 ρ = is subtracted. The resulting series becomes thus

 8c3z3 dx*Jcc - pp _
 3adp(ac + fp) a° ^

 3q/P3 , 7 · afP5 , 33 · afp1
 5 · 21 · 1·c 5 · 22 · 1 · 1 · c3 7 · 23 · 1 · 2 · 3 · c5
 pp 1 · σ4 1 · 3 · ρ6

 +(αα + //) * γ + 4 . 2 . j . c2 + 5 . 22 . j . 2 . c4 &c
 , ^ , 3cc/4 7cc/6
 +«// + ——— + 2 —4 &c

 3 · 2 · 1 · aa 5 · 2Z · 1 · 2 · cr

 —4 . 21 ■ 1 ■ a4 6 ■ 22 ■ 1 ■ 2 - a6 (180)

 , 1 -cc/4 , 1 · 3 ■ cc/6 /lom

 and therefore

 8c3 ζ3 d Xy/cc — ρ ρ _
 ~iadp(ac + fp) ° ^

 3 afp3 lafp5 33afpl

 3 · 21 ■ 1 · c 5 · 22 · 1 ■ 2 · c3 7 · 23 · 1 · 2 · 3 · c5

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 540

 A. Verdun

 ρρ σ4 1-3 · ρ6

 +<<"■ + /ΛΤ + 4 ■ 2 -1 - c2 + 5 · 22 ■ 1 ■ 2 ■ c*

 ^ &c
 2 4 · 2 ■ 1 · α2 80 · α4 896 · α6

 Before Euler proceeds with the investigations of this equation he considers the case
 where the Moon is orbiting in a circle, i.e., if / = 0 and/or a = b = c. In this case

 8 a3z3 AxJaa - pp 8 z3 dx Jaa — ρ ρ α3

 3~^Tp 3dp — =~γ^αα~ ΡΡ + const. (182)

 If this constant is set to be = then

 4

 71 Aa 3 ρ Ί\Αα — 4068p

 (187)

 16 - 1356 ■ (572)3 16· (572)3 16 · 1356 - (572)3 '

 16z3dx = _^=^_3û3d/,5

 Jaa — pp

 and consequently

 16z3x = 3aA I ^ : — 3a3p.

 = 3"7

 *Jaa - pp

 Let a be the circle's radius and sin ρ = A in degree. Eqn. (184) becomes

 ^ 3 HAa4 „ 3
 'fe ' = W " 3 'P.

 71Αα4 3a3 ρ
 16 · 1356 · ζ3 16ζ3

 hence

 But if ζ = 572a, then

 At this point the manuscript ends abruptly.

 Appendix D: The content of Ms 276

 This unfinished manuscript is well prepared for publication. Euler formulated the para

 graphs carefully. The first three introductory paragraphs reveal that Euler became fully

 aware of the difficulty involved in developing an accurate lunar theory, which is only

 possible by approximation. The use of series expansions of trigonometric functions

 appears here probably for the first time and thus represents a further innovation. Due

 to the importance of Euler's statements, which reflect his insight and new approach,

 I will not only paraphrase but translate them in full length:

 "£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 541

 "That the motion of the Moon—however perturbed—does agree very well with the
 Newtonian hypothesis of attraction is proved more than sufficiently both by obser
 vation and by the conclusions drawn from this hypothesis. Even if this principle of
 attraction is burdened with such difficulties, that one has to keep it strictly away from
 a rational way of philosophy, its usefulness—particularly for astronomy—is anyway
 considerable when considered as phenomenon; and without its help no important
 things could have been achieved in the theory of celestial motions until now. Observa

 tions make clear that planets and comets move in the same way as if they are attracted

 by the Sun and by each other in the ratio given by Newton. From this, two completely

 different questions emerge, which should by no means be confused with each other:
 the first one concerns physics and demands a mechanical reason for this phenom
 enon consisting of the mutual attraction of the celestial bodies. The second question,

 however, concerns the determination of the motions caused by this force of attraction

 in order to complete the theory of astronomy itself, and to calculate and predict the

 particular phenomena most accurately.5

 Concerning the second question, by which astronomy has achieved its biggest
 progress, it has been accomplished so far by its first discoverer Newton that hardly

 something remains to be added, in particular with regard to the primary planets, the

 theory of which is no longer fraught with difficulties, apart probably from the tables of

 the motion of Saturn which need some correction when it is staying near conjunction

 with Jupiter, because then one observes that its motion is perceptibly perturbed. The

 motion of the Moon, however, caused by the twofold force of the Sun's and the Earth's

 attraction, is so much difficult to determine, that nothing else than approximations

 could be done. By appraising the question very carefully Newton showed after all not

 only that his theory matches with all irregularities of the Moon, but he had completed

 the lunar theory itself prodigiously, even if the complexity of the driving forces does

 not allow an analytic approach to the calculation.6

 5 Motum lunae quantumvis perturbatum appri me congruere cum Hypothesi attractionis Newtonniana, cum
 observationes turn conclusiones ex hac hypothesi deducts satis superque testantur. Etsi autem istud attrac
 tionis principium tantis laborat difficultatibus, ut a sana philosophandi ratione longissime arceri debeat,
 tamen si instar phasnomeni spectetur, ejus in Astronomia praecipue maximus est usus; neque sine ejus
 subsidio quicquam solidi in theoria motuum cœlestium adhuc est praestitum. Per observationes igitur cer
 tissimum est planetas et cometas perinde plane moveri, quasi cum a sole turn a se mutuo attraherentur,

 idque ea ratione quam Newtonus indicavit. Ex quo duae prorsus divers® quaestiones nascuntur minime inter
 se permiscendœ; quarum prima ad Physicam pertinet atque istius phaenomeni in attractione mutua cor
 porum cœlestium positi causam mechanicam postulat. Altera quaestio autem versatur in definitione exacta

 motuum, qui ab hac attractionis vi resultare debent, ut hinc ipsa theoria astronomia perficiatur, atque singula

 phenomena exactissime per calculum supputari ac praedici queant (cf. Ms 276, fol. lr, § 1).

 6 Quod ad posteriorem qusstionem attinet, unde Astronomia maxima adepta est incrementa, ea a primo
 inventore Newtone simul eo usque perfecta esse videtur, ut vix quicquam addendum supersit: praecipue
 si ad planetas primarios respiciamus, quorum theoria nullis amplius difficultatibus involvitur, nisi forte
 tabula: motuum Saturni emendatione indigent turn, cum circa conjunctionem Jovis versatur; quo tempore

 ejus motus notabiliter perturbari deprehenditur. Lunae autem motus, qui a duplici vi attractiva solis et terra

 oritur, tantopere fit determinatu difficilis, ut prater approximationes nihil praestare liceat. Newtonus quidem

 rem vero proxime aestimando non solum suam theoriam omnibus anomaliis lunae convenire ostendit, sed

 etiam ipsam theoriam motuum lunae mirifice perfecit. etsi complicatio virium sollicitantium non permittet,
 ut calculo analytico accessus concedatur (cf. Ms 276, fol. lr-lv, § 2).

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 542

 A. Verdun

 If we consider the question in its own rights, which demands the [determination

 of the] motion of a body like the Moon caused by a twofold driving force, the power

 of the analysis known until now seems to be insufficient to describe such a motion
 with confident rules; and it would not have been possible even now to accomplish
 anything going in that direction, if one would not have called the approximation for

 help. It is convenient that the force emerging from the Sun is less of a multiple than

 the force of the Earth driving the Moon, and this is why it becomes possible to treat

 initially the Moon's motion in such a way, as if it is driven only by the Earth, but
 then one had to investigate the deviations from this quite regular motion occurring
 from the Sun's force; this would not have been possible if the forces of Earth and
 Sun would not come close to the ratio of unity. Furthermore, the orbit of the Moon's

 motion makes the approximation easier and more accurate at the same time, because

 it does not much deviate from a circle. Using these resources I tried to find out how
 much could be achieved by means of calculations."7

 In the following paragraphs 4 and 5 Euler treats first the two-body-problem of the

 Earth-Moon system, then (in the remaining) the three-body-problem of the Sun-Earth

 Moon system. He assumes the lunar orbit to be coplanar with the ecliptic. Let A be the

 perigee, Τ the Earth, and AT = a. Let b be the velocity corresponding to the altitude
 (=hight of free fall) of the Moon at perigee directed along the straight line AT. The

 Earth is considered to be at rest, while the Sun is revolving around it contrary to its

 annual motion. Let the Moon be moving from A to any position L, thus describing the

 arc AL or the angle ATL = χ during the time interval T. Euler denotes the distance
 between the Earth and the Moon by LT = y. Let LN be the tangent through L and
 TP = ρ the perpendicular from Τ to LN intersecting the tangent in P. Let ν be
 the velocity corresponding to the altitude of the Moon in L, and let Ip = dy be an
 infinitesimally small radial element of the distance between Earth and Moon. Due to

 LP = J {y y - ρ ρ),

 (188)

 and due to the equivalence of the triangles TPL and Lpl (do not confuse the point ρ
 with the distance ρ = TP), the distances Lp and LI covered in the time element di
 become

 Lp =

 pdy

 J(yy - pp)

 and LI =

 J(yy - pp) '

 (189)

 7 Quodsi enim quaestionem in se perpendamus, qu[a] motus corporis requiritur, qui a duplici vi sollicitante
 veluti luna producitur, vis analyseos adhuc cognita minime sufficere videtur ad ejusmodi motum certis
 regulis circumscribendum. neque quicquam in hac parte etiamnunc praestare licuisset, nisi approximatio in
 subsidium vocari potuisset. Commode scilicet usu venit ut vis a sole oriunda multoties minor sit vi terrae

 lunam sollicitante, ex quo motum lunae primum ita tractare licuit, quasi a sola vi terra oriretur, turn vero

 aberrationes ab hoc motu, satis regulari a vi solis oriundas investigari oportebat; quod fieri non potuisset,
 si vires terra; et solis magis ad aequalitatis rationem accederent. Prsterea vero ipsa motus lunae orbita ideo
 quod a circulo non multum recedit approximationem turn faciliorem turn accuratiorem reddit. His igitur
 subsidiis, quantum calculi ope effici queat, periculum faciam (cf. Ms 276, fol. lr, § 3).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 motion driven only by the Earth's gravitational force, Euler applies the equation of

 motion as given in his "Mechanica" (cf. Euler 1736, Def. 15, Corol. 5, § 207: gf = ^,

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 543

 This time element dΤ itself, and the corresponding angular element djt, are given by

 dT = yJi a„d i, = . (190)

 Jv(yy - pp) yViyy - pp)

 Euler sets both the accelerative gravitational force on the Earth's surface and the
 Earth's radius = 1. The force acting on the Moon by the Earth along the direction
 LT then is = which he decomposes into the tangential and normal components.

 Thus the former becomes = —an(j the latter = Λ. To determine the Moon's

 y3 y3

 _ 2Av

 and §209: r = =ψ·, where A = 1), considering that the tangential component is a
 retarding force:

 du du J(yy - pp) J{yy - pp)
 Ll yéy y3

 -Ύ7Γ ' Ψ = 4 <192>

 rad. Ose. y dy y0

 But Eq. (191) simply is du = ^, which can easily be integrated:

 v = b-- + ~. (193)

 a y

 This result, inserted into Eq. (192), gives

 2(„-Ι + Γ)ί£ = ίϊ or (194)
 V a y J P yy Ρ y(l+by- £)

 which can be integrated as well:

 2tp = t—i y+C, (195)

 l+by-i

 C = 2ta-t^~ =2la + tb. (196)

 ab

 This constant, inserted into Eq. (195), gives

 2ep = t^y, <197}

 t+by-z

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where I denotes the logarithm to the base 10 and C the constant of integration. Euler

 determines this constant by setting y = a and ρ = a, so that C becomes

 and substitutes it into Eq. (198), obtaining

 544

 and therefore

 A. Verdun

 »-7&Τ

 This equation contains the nature of the Moon's orbit. Denoting the latus rectum
 tentatively with CT = c, Euler derives the relation

 which represents the equation for an ellipse with major axis c. Because the Moon's
 orbit does not much differ from a circle, one may approximately use the value c = 2a,
 otherwise α = where η is a big number. Likewise, if y does not much deviates

 from \c, Euler finds

 = (199)

 a c

 a(c~a)y /0Am
 ρ ρ = , (200)

 c - y

 1 ω

 υ = - +

 c c

 (nn — 1 )cc

 ρ ρ = .
 4nn(l + ω)

 (201)

 (202)

 where ω is a very small value, and thus

 With these results the two-body-problem is solved, and Euler passes on to the three
 body-problem considering also the Sun's force.

 Let the ratio between the forces of the Sun and the Earth be as m to 1 (at equal

 distances). Let the distance between the Sun S and the Earth Τ be ST = h, and the

 angle ATS = k. This angular argument has to be considered as variable. The Earth is

 attracted towards the Sun along the direction TS by the force = jg-, which has to be
 transferred with inverse direction to the Moon and parallel to the direction TS, if the

 Earth has to be considered at rest. This statement seemed to be quite self-evident for

 Euler at that time when writing this manuscript:

 Attrahetur ergo terra ad solem in directione TS vi = quae quia terram qui
 escentum spectamus transferri debet in lunam contrarie, ita ut luna sollicitata
 considerari debeat in directione LM parallela directioni TS vi =

 It proves that the principle of the transference of forces had been fully established by

 him at that time. The procedure following that statement underlines this conjecture.

 The force acting on the Moon by the Sun along the direction LS is given by ~y. Let the

 geocentric angular distance of the Moon from the Sun be the argument LTS = k — x.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 —τ = (hh — 2hy cos A{k — x) + yy) ?
 LSi

 1 3ycosA (k — x) 3yy lS^cos A(k — jc))2

 ~ Λ3 + h* 2h$ + 2p etC"

 1 ( 3jcosA (k-x) _ 9 yy _ 15yy cosA2(& - χ) /r>n^

 ~ h3 Λ4 + 4h5 4Λ5 ' { '

 We see Euler here introducing approximations by series expansions into celestial
 mechanics. Using this result, the forces acting on the Moon along the directions LT
 and LM become, respectively,

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 545

 Euler derives the distance between the Sun and the Moon from the geometry of the
 system:

 LS2 — hh + yy — 2 hy cos A(k — x), (203)

 where A has no mathematical meaning, but has the task to indicate that A: — λ: is the
 Argument or Arc ("Arcus"). Euler decomposes the force into components acting

 along the directions LT and LV, and denotes it with the same symbols: LT = and

 h

 LV = ~x. The direction LV is identical with LM mentioned in the quotation above. In

 the following calculations he uses only LM instead of LV for the direction parallel to

 TS. To consider the Earth at rest means, that the force component acting on the Moon

 along the direction LM becomes ^ ^. He expands into a trigonometric series,
 probably for the first time in the context of lunar theory:

 1 3

 my 3myy cos A(k — χ) 9my
 Ρ"+ h4 + 4h5

 + 4ÂS +etC·

 \5my3 cos A2(k — y)

 and

 7>my cos A(k — jc) 9myy 15myy cos A2(k — x)

 Λ3

 4 h4

 4 h4

 [+] etc. (205)

 Due to the parallelism of the lines TS and LM, the angle k — χ is also defined by
 MTL — k — x. Furthermore, the sine and cosine of the angle TLP is given by

 c sin TLP — —

 \y-pp) <206)

 cos TLP = ,

 y

 respectively, and the sine and cosine of the angle MLN = MLT — PLT is given by

 c sin MLN — sin A(k — x) — — cos A(k — x)

 cos MLN = — sin A(k — χ) H ——cos A(k — x),

 y /( - \ (207)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 546

 A. Verdun

 respectively. From the force acting along LM results the normal force

 3mjiyy-pp) . Imp 3mp

 —3 sin A2 (t -x)-w-w cosA2(A - x),

 neglecting small terms, and the accelerating tangential force becomes

 ^sinA2 +

 And from the force acting along LT results the normal force

 and the accelerating tangential force

 πιρ

 J- (210)

 m-J(yy - ρ ρ)

 h*

 (211)

 4 (212)

 y3

 But the force acting on the Moon by the Earth produces the normal component

 and the accelerating tangential component

 _V07_££)
 y

 The resulting tangential force accelerating the Moon thus is given by the combination
 of Eqs. (191), (209), (211), and (213):

 dvV(yy-pp) -J(yy-pp) | mj(yy-pp)

 ydy y3 2h3

 from which Euler concludes

 2vd ρ ρ mp
 y d y _y3 2 Λ3

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 3°"' sin A2(t—,)+ cosA2(A—jr). (214)
 2Λ3 v ' 2Λ3

 _ d_y mvdy 7>mpydyûnA2{k—x) 3mydycosA2(k—x)

 yy~^~ 2Λ3 ^ Itfjiyy — pp) 2Λ3 ' (215)

 The resulting normal force acting on the Moon is given by the combination of
 Eqs. ( 192), (208), (210), and (212):

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752

 547

 + Wto - „) sin A2(t _ f) _ imp cosA2(t _ ^ (216)

 Euler substitutes Eq. (190) into Eq. (215) and obtains

 dy my dy 3myy dx sin A2(k—x) 3mydycosA2(k—x)
 dti = h -I —-τ 1 —-τ , (217)
 yy 2 Λ3 2/i3 2 Λ3

 which he can integrate immediately:

 1 myy 3myy cos A2(k — x)

 V = C + - + ^T+ 4P

 1 I myy 3myy cos A2(k - χ) ,Λ]0λ
 V==y"c+4P+ 4P * (218)

 "This equation defines the absolute velocity of the Moon at any position in its orbit,
 which can be determined from the Moon's distance from the Earth, from the angular

 separation between Sun and Moon given by k — x, and from the Earth's distance from

 the Sun, whose variation does not affect the velocity considerably."

 On the remaining folios of this manuscript Euler tries to prepare the equation of

 motion (216) due to the normal force for the integration. For that purpose he has first

 to figure out the items p, v, 2vdp, etc. If the Moon's motion is driven only by the
 Earth, then Eq. (200) holds, as shown above, representing the unperturbed Keplerian
 motion. Using the abbreviation a(c — a) = bb, this equation becomes

 P = bJ-L-. (219)

 c-y

 But due to the additional action of the Sun, this parameter needs to be corrected. The
 results obtained above gives Euler the idea of a general ansatz:

 y ,mP mQ cos A2(k - x) mR sin A2(k - x)

 "-b^— + W + ^3 + ρ ■ <220>

 where P, Q, and R are coefficients to be determined. We observe here Euler's very

 early use of the method of undetermined coefficients for solving differential equations

 in lunar theory. The first derivative of Eq. (220) is given by

 be Ay mdP

 P 2(c~y)J(cy - yy) + h3

 mdgcosA2(£ - x) ImQpày .

 + Ρ + ^V(yy-PP)&mA2ik ' x)

 mdRsmA2(k — x) 2mRpdycosA2(k — x)

 + h3 h3yj(yy - pp)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 548

 A. Verdun

 Using Eq. (219), the distance PL becomes

 ν(„-ρρ)=νί22_Ζΐ1^2,

 v(c - y)

 and therefore, approximately,

 Ρ

 V(yy - PP) Jcy-yy-bb'

 (223)

 Euler substitutes Eqs. (219), (220), and (223) into the equation of motion (216) to
 obtain

 2vap = 1 ~

 bdyjy , mP dy
 yyj(c - y) hsyy

 +

 mQdycosA2(k—x) mR dy sin A2(k — x)
 h}yy h3yy

 mb y lmydyj(cyy - y3 - bby) .

 ~v?y + WTTc - y) sm A2<< " x)
 - ϊψΑΐΑ cosA2(jÎ — χ) - (224)
 2h3y/(c - y) h3yy/(yy - pp)

 On the other hand, the product 2v dp is also given by Eqs. (218) and (221 ), resulting in

 „ , bdy 2m(c — y)dP 2m(c — v) dQ cos A2(£ — x)
 2vd ρ = — 1 r 1

 y.s/(cy — yy) hôcy hàcy

 4mb(c — y)QdysinA2(k—x) mbcydy^/y

 h3cyy^(cy - yy - bb) 4h*(c - y)$

 4mb(c — y)R dy cos A2(k — x) 2m(c — y) dR sin A2(k — x)

 h3cyy^/(cy — yy — bb) h3cy

 3mbcyy dy cos A2(k — x)

 H ~ ^ . (225)

 4h3(c - y)ïy/y

 Bernoulli, Johann. 1712. Extrait de la Réponse de M. Bernoulli à M. Hermann, datée de Basle le 7. Octobre

 1710. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris) 12(1710): 521-533.

 References

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 At this point (§ 10), the fragment of the manuscript ends. It is quite possible that Euler
 determined the coefficients P, Q, and R on the lost folios. It is therefore not clear

 whether he already applied the method of undetermined coefficients in full length and

 whether he was already able to solve the differential equation approximately. Evidence

 for the former assumption is given by the way of his approach presented above.

 Leon hard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 549

 Bertoloni Meli, Domenico. 1993. The emergence of reference frames and the transformation of mechanics

 in the Enlightenment. HSPS 23(2): 301-335.

 Bomie, ?. 1708. Des forces centripetes et centrifuges, Considérées en général dans toutes sortes de Courbes,
 & en particulier dans le Cercle. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris) 9 (1707), Ail-Ail.

 Boulliau, Ismael. 1645. Astronomia philolaica. Parisiis: Simeonis Piget M.DC.XLV.
 Bredekamp, Horst, and Wladimir Velminski. 2010. Mathesis <6 Graphé. Leonhard Euler und die Entfaltung

 der Wissenssysteme. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.

 Burkhardt, Heinrich. 1908. Entwicklungen nach oscillirenden Functionen und Integration der Differential
 gleichungen der mathematischen Physik. In Mathematiker-Vereinigung, vol. 10, ed. Jahresbericht der
 Deutschen. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Burckhardt, Johann Jakob, Emil A. Fellmann, and Walter Habicht (eds.). 1993. Leonhard Euler 1707-1783.

 Beitràge zu Leben und Werk. Gedenkband des Kantons Basel-Stadt. Basel: Birkhàuser Verlag.

 Cantor, Moritz. 1901. Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der Mathematik. DritterBand, von 1668-1758, Zweite

 Enestrôm, Gustaf. 1906. Der Briefwechsel zwischen Leonhard Euler und Daniel Bernoulli. Bibliotheca

 ed. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Mathematica 1: 126-156.

 Enestrôm, Gustaf. 1910. Verzeichnis der Schriften Leonhard Eulers. Jahresbericht der Deutschen

 Mathematiker-Vereinigung, Ergânzungsband IV. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1736. Mechanica sive motus scientia analytice exposita. Tomus I. Petropoli: Ex

 Typographie Academiae Scientiarum.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1750. De novo genere oscillationum. Comment, acad. sc. Petrop. 11(1739): 128-149.
 Euler, Leonhard. 1750. Methodus facilis computandi angulorum sinus ac tangentes tam naturales quam

 artificiales. Comment, acad. se. Petrop 11(1739): 194-230.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1750. De seriebus quibusdam considerationes. Comment, acad. se. Petrop. 12(1740):

 Euler, Leonhard. 1750. Emendatio tabularum astronomicarum per loca planetarum geocentrica. Commend,

 acad. se. Petrop. 12(1740): 109-221.

 Fellmann, Emil A. 1983. Leonhard Euler-Ein Essay iiber Leben und Werk. In: [Burckhardt et al. 1983],

 53-96.

 13-98.

 Fellmann, Emil Α., and Gleb K. Mikhailov. 1998. Leonhardi Euleri Commercium Epistolicum. Commercium
 cum Johanne (I) Bernoulli et Nicolao (I) Bernoulli. Leonhardi Euleri Opera Omnia, Series quarta A,
 Volumen secundum. Basileae: Birkhàuser.

 Fellmann, Emil A. 2007. Leonhard Euler. Translated by Erika Gautschi and Walter Gautschi.

 Fraser, Craig G. 1994. The origins of Euler's variational calculus. Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 Basel/Boston/Berlin: Birkhàuser.

 47(2): 103-141.

 Goldstine, Herman H. 1980.A History of the Calculus of Variations from the 17th through the 19th Century.
 (Studies in the History of Mathematikcs and Physical Sciences, Vol. 5). New York/Heidelberg/Berlin:
 Springer-Verlag.

 Gregory, David. 1726. Astronomiœ physicœ & geometricœ elementa. Secunda Editio revisa & correcta.

 Genevae: Bousquet M.DCC.XXVI.

 Guicciardini, Niccolô. 1999. Reading the Principia. The Debate on Newton's Mathematical Methods for

 Natural Philosophy from 1687 to 1736. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Hermann, Jacob. 1716. Phoronomia, sive de Viribus et Motibus corporum solidorum et ftuidorum libri duo.

 Amstelaedami: Apud Rod. & Gerh. Wetstenios M.D.CCXVI.

 Jammer, M. 1957. Concepts of Force. A study in the foundations of dynamics. Cambridge: Harvard Uni

 Katz, Victor J. 1987. The Calculus of Trigonometric Functions. Historia Mathematica 14: 311-324.
 Keill, John. 1708. De legibus virium centripetarum. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of

 versity Press.

 London 26: 174—188.

 Kopelevii J.C., M.V. Krutikova, G.K. Mikhailov, N.M. Raskin. 1962. Rukopisnye materialy L. Ejlera ν
 Archive Akademii Nauk SSSR/Manuscripta Euleriana Archivi Academiae Scientiarum URSS, Tomus
 I, Descriptio scientifica. (Acta archivi academiae scientiarum URSS, Fasc. 17). Moskva/Leningrad:
 Akademija Nauk.

 Kutschmann, Werner. 1983. Die Newtonsche Kraft—Metamorphose eines wissenschaftlichen Begriffs. Stu

 dia Leibnitiana, Sonderheft 12. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Machin, John. 1729. The Laws of the Moon's Motion. According to Gravity. In [Newton 1729], Vol. 2,

 550 A. Verdun

 Maltese, Giulio. 2000. On the Relativity of Motion in Leonhard Euler's Science. Archive for History of

 289-292.

 Exact Sciences 54: 319-348.

 Mattmiil 1er, Martin. 2010. Eine neue Art Mathematik zu schreiben. In [Bredekamp et al. 2010], 177-188.
 Mikhailov, Gleb K. 1965. Rukopisnye materialy L. Ejlera ν Archive Akademii Nauk SSSR/Manuscripta
 Euleriana Archivi Academiae Scientiarum URSS, Tomus II, Opera mechanica. (Acta archivi academiae
 scientiarum URSS, Fasc. 120). Moskva/Leningrad: Akademija Nauk.

 Moivre, Abraham de. 1717. Proprietates quaedam simplices Sectionum Conicarum ex natura Focorum
 deducts; cum Theoremate generali de Viribus Centripetis; quorum ope Lex Virium Centripetarum ad
 Foco Sectionum tendentium, Velocitates Corporum in illis revolventium, & Descriptio Orbium facillime
 determinantur. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: 30, 622-628.

 Newton, Isaac. 1687. Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica. Londini: Jussu Societatis Regiae ac

 Typis Josephi Streater MDCLXXXVII.

 Newton, Isaac. 1729. The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Translated into English by
 Andrew Motte. To which are added, The Laws of the Moon's Motion according to Gravity. By John
 Machin. In Two Volumes. London, Printed for Benjamin Motte MDCCXXIX.

 Taton, René, and Curtis Wilson (eds.). 1989. Planetary astronomy from the Renaissance to the rise of
 astrophysics. Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. (The General History of Astronomy, Vol. 2). Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1703a. Maniéré generale de determiner les Forces, les Vitesses, les Espaces, & les Tems,

 une seule de ces quatre choses étant donnée dans toutes sortes de mouvemens rectilignes variés à
 discrétion. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris) 2( 1700): 22-27.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1703b. Du mouvement en général par toutes sortes de courbes; et des forces centrales, tant
 centrifuges, que centripetes, nécessaires aux corps qui les décrivent. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale
 des Sciences (Paris): 2(1700): 83-101.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1703c. Des forces centrales ou des pesanteurs nécessaires aux Planetes pour leur faire
 décrire les orbes qu'on leur a supposés jusqu'ici. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris):
 2(1700): 218-238.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1704. Autre Regie Generale des Forces Centrales. Avec une maniéré d'en déduire &
 d'en trouver une infinité d'autres à la fois, dépendemment & indépendemment des Rayons osculateurs,
 qu'on va trouver aussi d'une maniéré infiniment generale. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences
 (Paris) 3(1701): 20-38.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1705. Des Courbes Décrites Par le concours de tant de Forces centrales qu'on voudra,
 placées à discretion entr'elles, & par rapport aux plans de ces mêmes Courbes. Mémoires de l'Academie
 Royale des Sciences (Paris) 5(1703): 212-229.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1707a. Comparaison Des Forces centrales aves les Pesanteurs absolues des corps mûs de

 vitesses variées à discrétion le long de telles Courbes qu'on voudra. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale
 des Sciences (Paris) 8(1706): 178-235.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1707b. Différentes manières infiniment generales De trouver les Rayons osculateurs de
 toutes sortes de Courbes, soit qu'on regarde ces Courbes sous la forme de Polygones, ou non. Mémoires
 de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris) 8(1706): 490-507.

 Varignon, Pierre. 1712. Des Forces Centrales Inverses. Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris)

 12(1710): 533-544.

 Verdun, Andreas 2010. Entwicklung, Anwendung und Standardisierung mathematischer Methoden und

 physikalischer Prinzipien in Leonhard Eulers Arbeiten zur Himmelsmechanik. [Development, Applica
 tion, and Standardization of Mathematical Methods and Physical Principles in Leonhard Euler's Works

 on Celestial Mechanics.] Habilitationsschrift (written in German), Bern: University of Bern (Switzer
 land).

 Verdun, Andreas. 2011. Die (Wieder-) Entdeckung von Eulers Mondtafeln. [The (Re-) Discovery of Euler's

 Lunar Tables.] N.T.M. 19: 271-297. doi:10.1007/s00048-0l 1-0053-6.

 Verdun, Andreas. 2012. Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752. Part 1: first approaches, 1725—

 1730. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, published online 02 December 2012, doi:10.1007/
 s00407-012-0112-y.

 Westfall, Richard S. 1971. Force in Newton's Physics. The Science of Dynamics in the Seventeenth Century.

 London/New York: MacDonald/American Elsevier.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leonhard Euler's early lunar theories 1725-1752 551

 Wilson, Curtis. 1970. From Kepler's Laws, So-called, to Universal Gravitation: Empirical Factors. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 6: [89]—170.

 Wilson, Curtis. 1989. Predictive astronomy in the century after Kepler. In: [Taton et al. 1989], Chap. 10,

 [161]—206.

 Wolfers, Joseph Philipp. 1848. Leonhard Euler's Mechanik oderanalytische Darstellung der Wissenschaft

 von der Bewegung, mit Anmerkungen und Erlauterungen. Erster Theil. Greifswald: C. A. Koch's
 Verlagshandlung.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:57:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

