 

 

 

 

"Local-Global": the first twenty years
Author(s): Renaud Chorlay
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 1 (January 2011), pp. 1-66
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134338
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:28 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2011) 65:1-66
 DOI 10.1007/800407-010-0070-1

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years

 Renaud Chorlay

 Received: 9 January 2010 / Published online: 17 November 2010
 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract This paper investigates how and when pairs of terms such as "local-
 global" and "im Kleinen-im Grossen" began to be used by mathematicians as explicit
 reflexive categories. A first phase of automatic search led to the delineation of the
 relevant corpus, and to the identification of the period from 1898 to 1918 as that of

 emergence. The emergence appears to have been, from the very start, both transdis-

 ciplinary (function theory, calculus of variations, differential geometry) and interna-

 tional, although the AMS-Göttingen connection played a specific part. First used as an

 expository and didactic tool (e.g. by Osgood), it soon played a crucial part in the cre-

 ation of new mathematical concepts (e.g. in Hahn's work), in the shaping of research

 agendas (e.g. Blaschke's global differential geometry), and in Weyl's axiomatic foun-
 dation of the manifold concept. We finally turn to France, where in the 1910s, in the

 wake of Poincaré's work, Hadamard began to promote a research agenda in terms of
 "passage du local au general."

 0 Introduction

 All mathematics is more or less "in the large" or "in the small." It is highly
 improbable that any definition of those terms could be given that would be sat-
 isfactory to all mathematicians. Nor does it seem necessary or even desirable
 that hard and fast definitions be given. The German terms im Grossen and im

 Kleinen have been used for some time with varying meanings. It will perhaps be

 Communicated by Jeremy Gray.

 R. Chorlay (El)
 Equipe REHSEIS, laboratoire SPHERE, UMR 7219 - Université Paris Diderot, 5 rue Thomas Mann,
 case 7093, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France
 e-mail: renaud-chorlay@noos.fr

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 2 R. Chorlay

 interesting and useful to the reader to approach the subject historically by way

 of examples. (Morse 1989, p. 259)

 With these words, the old Master of differential topology and "calculus of variations

 in the large" introduced his talk at a 1967 conference on "global differential geom-
 etry." Given the social context, no definitions of "global" were needed: both Morse
 and the members of the audience already knew what "global" meant; tacit knowledge,

 subdisciplinary boundaries and professional identities were in play.

 In this paper, our goal is to go beyond the tacit by means of a historical investi-

 gation. The meaning and role of the concepts of "local" and "global" in mathematics

 can be investigated from a great diversity of viewpoints. One could set out to iden-

 tify a core-meaning, a conceptual invariant that would shed light on the various uses;

 although history could serve as a tool for such an endeavour, its pursuit is probably
 either mathematical, or philosophical (as part of an epistemological investigation into

 fundamental concepts of mathematics). From a more historical viewpoint, at least two

 investigative lines can be followed. Along the first line, one would study the emergence

 of global results, the accumulation of mathematical knowledge in emerging subdis-

 ciplines (e.g. "global differential geometry"), etc. For this study, the corpus of texts
 and the list of mathematicians to be considered would probably have to be delineated

 with the benefit of hindsight, relying on more contemporary understanding of what

 global and local results and theories are. Another line of investigation would focus on
 the concepts of "local" and "global" themselves, concepts which, as Morse's quote
 illustrates, are used by mathematicians to expound and discuss mathematics. Along
 this line, the "local-global" pair is seen as a reflexive category used (or not) by the
 actors. These two historical lines of investigations are clearly related. We feel, how-

 ever, that they should be analytically distinguished, for at least two reasons. First, the
 lists of texts to consider need not be the same, since the criteria for corpus-building

 differ significantly. Second, distinguishing between the two questions seems to be a

 necessary prerequisite for the study - as a second phase - of the interplay between the
 rise of "global mathematics" and the spread of "local-global" as an actor's category.

 The goal of this paper is to tackle the second question: we aim at identifying those

 mathematicians who first made explicit use of pairs of terms such as "local-global"
 or "/m Kleinen - im Grossen? thus promoting a new conceptual distinction within
 mathematics. This focus on the explicit will lead us to include in this study several
 mathematicians who also contributed to the rise of global mathematics - such as Weyl,
 Blaschke and Hadamard; but to exclude from our core-corpus several mathematicians

 who, in spite of their proofs of numerous global results and their clear understanding
 of the local-global distinction, did not promote this distinction quite as actively. For
 instance, the cases of Poincaré and Hubert will be discussed in the first section of this

 paper.

 Hence, we will endeavour study the emergence of the "local-global" pair1 within

 printed mathematical texts. In order to capture the range of uses and meanings which

 1 We will occasionally use the word "articulation" instead of the merely descriptive term "pair." In some
 semantic theories (Courtes 1991), an "articulation" is a pair of terms which define the two directions on a
 semantic axis. We will use this notion with this specific but rather neutral meaning, independently of Bruno
 Latour's use of Greimas' semiotics (Latour 1999).

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 3

 Morse pointed to, we do not want to start from any explicit definition of these terms.

 It turns out that such a definition is not necessary to gather empirical data, on the basis

 of which these terms - and those to which qualitative sampling showed they were, to

 some extent, equivalent - can be studied in terms of both meaning (semantic aspect)
 and use (pragmatic aspect).

 To put it in a nutshell, we shall show that "im Kleinen-im Grossen" was first

 used at the turn of the twentieth century, in several disciplinary contexts, with
 a specific and stable meaning, with a growing range of uses in the period from
 1898 to 1918, and within a specifiable social context - that of the "special rela-
 tionship" between the Göttingen school and the emerging American mathematical
 research community. Alongside these aspects, to which the bulk of this essay will
 be devoted, we will also come across occurrences of "im Kleinen" denoting the
 infinitely small (infinitesimal meaning); we will show that this use is marginal (at
 least in pure mathematics), and that one of the goals of the mathematicians who pro-
 moted the use of "im Kleinen"-Hm Grossen" was to distinguish the local from the
 infinitesimal.

 Finally, the use of the word "local" will be studied in the French context, the empha-

 sis being laid on Hadamard's analysis of the current state of mathematics, in the wake

 of Poincaré's manifold work. In his own work and as a pillar of the French mathe-
 matical community, Hadamard would, in the 1910s, begin to promote a new research
 agenda in terms of "passage du local au general."

 To reach these conclusions, some methodological issues will have to be tackled. In

 the introductory quote, Morse stressed the fact that expressions such as "in the small -

 in the large" or "local-global" were poorly localised, both in disciplinary terms (they
 concern virtually all mathematics) and in time ("used for some time"). This sounds

 like a pretty elusive object for the historian to track down! Since we want to study how

 expressions like these can spread (or not) and stabilise (or not) through examples only,

 and in spite of the fact that no definitions are given, it sounds unwise to start from our

 own definition. But this raises the question of how to start without making a decision
 about either what to look for, or where to look.

 It seemed to us that a reasonable way out of this predicament is to try to make use
 of the vast amount of retrodigitised mathematical literature that has become available

 in recent years. For historians of science working on the modern period in particular,
 the systematic use of word-search for corpus building (among other possible uses)
 has expanded investigative possibilities. However, this technique raises thorny meth-

 odological questions of its own; in particular, relying on it - even for a preliminary
 phase of corpus building - heavily influences the type of historical objects that can be
 captured.

 This is why the first part of this essay is devoted to the deeply intertwined questions
 of the nature of the historical investigation and of the modus operandi for automatic

 corpus analysis. In particular, we will endeavour to spell out more precisely the differ-

 ence between a history of "global mathematics" - global theorems, subdisciplines such

 as global differential geometry, etc. - and the history of "local-global" as expressions
 used in printed mathematical texts. As we shall see, this work is devoted to "local-

 global," not only because this is what word-searches help us capture, but also because

 ß Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4 R. Chorlay

 the explicit use of new classifying terms in mathematical communities is a specific

 historical phenomenon that deserves a study of its own.

 This work is part and parcel of a more general research program on the historical

 development of "global mathematics," and complements two former papers: one on

 the creation of the sheaf structure in the context of the theory of functions of several

 variables (Chorlay 2010) and one on the advent of global issues and techniques in

 Elie Cartan's work in the 1920s, both in differential geometry and in the theory of Lie

 groups (Chorlay 2009).

 1 Setting the problem

 1.1 "Local-global" or global mathematics?

 Two quotations should help us define the scope of this study. The first one is taken
 from the introduction of Poincaré's first paper on curves defined by a differential

 equation:

 Looking for the properties of differential equations is a task of the highest inter-

 est. Along this line, a first step is taken by studying the given function in the

 neighbourhood of one of the points of the plane. Today we are to proceed further

 and study this function in the whole spread of the plane. In this investigation,

 our starting point will be what is known already about the function studied in a

 given area of the plane.

 The complete study consists in two parts:

 1 . The qualitative part (so to speak), or the geometric study of the curve defined

 by the function.

 2. The quantitative part, or the numerical calculation of the values of the function.

 (Poincarél881,p. 3)2

 In this series of papers on curves defined by first order differential equations with

 rational coefficients, Poincaré proved, among other global results, the formula linking

 the number singular points (assumed to be isolated and of a generic type) and the

 genus of the surface on which the differential equation is studied.

 The second quotation is taken from Hubert's 1901 paper on the embedding of

 surfaces of constant negative curvature into ordinary space:

 2 « Rechercher quelles sont les propriétés des équations différentielles est donc une question du plus haut

 intérêt. On a déjà fait un premier pas dans cette voie en étudiant la fonction proposée dans le voisinage d'un
 des points du plan. Il s'agit aujourd'hui d'aller plus loin et d'étudier cette fonction dans toute l'étendue du
 plan. Dans cette recherche, notre point de départ sera ce qu'on sait déjà de la fonction étudiée dans une
 certaine région du plan.
 L'étude complète d'une fonction comprend deux parties:
 1. Partie qualitative (pour ainsi dire), où étude géométrique de la courbe définie par la fonction;
 2. Partie quantitative, ou calcul numérique des valeurs de la fonction.»

 All quotations are freely translated by the author of this paper.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 5

 Finally, for our investigation, it is necessary to realise that formulae (1 ) represent

 every point of the surface by a pair of values w, v' that is, that the mapping (1) of

 our surface on the wv-plane must be univocally invertible not only in sufficiently
 small domains, but taken as a whole.

 (Hubert 1901b, p. 91).3

 In this celebrated paper, Hubert proved that the hyperbolic plane cannot be globally

 smoothly embedded into E3, in spite of the fact that the embedding is locally possible.
 Both papers present significant mathematical results which Morse could have used
 as examples of "analysis in the large" without causing any puzzlement in a mathe-

 matical audience of 1961. 4 Actually, these two examples had been used for the very
 same purpose for quite some time, as is shown by Struik (1933) and Kasner (1905).

 Furthermore, these two quotations show that both mathematicians were completely

 explicit about their purpose to go global, the local results being mere starting points.

 However, we will not include these two texts in our core corpus, for several reasons

 which need to be spelled out.

 Were we to include these two texts in our corpus, two thorny questions would arise:

 Where to look? What criteria should be used to delineate the corpus? If early (say:
 nineteenth century) global results were to be identified and accounted for, we should

 certainly read all of Poincaré and Hubert. Probably Riemann's work - and Klein's -

 should also be studied closely. But why Riemann and not Weierstrass? Why Poincaré

 rather than Picard? And if number theory is not to be left aside, probably Dedekind

 and Kronecker should be taken on board too. To prevent indefinite corpus expansion,
 it seems advisable to select the works (and the places in the works) where we know

 some global result is proven. However, this "we know" has a history and is the result

 of history: As we shall see later, whether or not Lie's theory of invariants of algebraic
 curves belongs to the corpus of nineteenth century global theories was a disputed
 issue at the turn of the twentieth century; likewise, if number theorists had been asked

 whether or not the concepts "local" and "global" were relevant in their research field,

 the answer in 1910 would probably have been very different from the answer in 1940.

 Even if the issue of the historical process of selection of the relevant corpus could

 be left aside, writing the history of "local" and "global" as reflexive concepts in mathe-

 matics requires that some criterion be devised to distinguish between results that "we"

 (whoever that may be) consider to be of a global nature in spite of the fact that those

 who proved them never used anything even barely reminiscent of these concepts, from

 results that were - to some extent - originally described in terms of local and global.
 Yet, what "to some extent" might mean in the absence of terms such as "local," "im

 kleinen" or "in the small" is, again, a thorny question. The presence of these terms pro-

 vides an easy criterion for saying that something is explicitly here. We do not know the

 right tools for drawing of a line between the still too implicit and the explicit enough,

 3 „Endlich ist es für unsere Untersuchung notwendig, einzusehen, daß die Formeln (1) jeden Punkt der
 Fläche nur durch ein Wertepaar u , v darstellen, d. h. daß die gefundene Abbildung (1) unserer Räche auf die

 MV-Ebene nicht bloß für genügend kleine Gebiete, sondern im ganzen genommen eine umkehrbar-eindeutige
 sein muß."

 4 He actually used examples from Poincaré's work (Morse 1989).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 6 R. Chorlay

 and we doubt these could be used without assuming an a-historical definite notion of

 what "local" and global" means. In doing so, the very tools would destroy that which

 they are meant to capture from a historical viewpoint. Moreover, setting the problem

 in terms of an ever more explicit use of concepts rests on the dubious notion of an
 implicit concept, and might lead to a narrative centred on successive eye-opening,

 epoch-making papers written by mathematicians who eventually understood what it
 was all about (and had always been).

 In this paper, we chose to focus on the use of expressions such as "im kleinen"

 in order to build the core corpus. Further, the extended corpus consists of the texts

 which are explicitly referred to in the core corpus. Accordingly, neither Poincaré's

 paper on curves defined by differential equations nor Hubert's paper on the Euclidean

 embedding of the hyperbolic plane belong to the core corpus; but they do belong to the

 extended corpus, and this of course cannot be seen by reading Hubert and Poincaré's

 papers themselves. This focus on explicit terms could be seen as a cheap way to bypass

 (and not tackle) the two problems, that of corpus building, and that of the criteria for

 assessing degrees of explicitness; pusillanimity wearing the mask of positivism, so to

 speak. However, we claim that not only does this focus help us avoid some methodo-

 logical traps; it is also the background against which several important questions can
 be studied.

 First, we chose to focus on the explicit use of a small list of terms because our

 study does not bear on local and global mathematics, but on the use of "local" and

 "global" in mathematics; in other words, we aim at studying how and when "we" came
 to "know" that, for instance, in these two papers, Poincaré and Hubert proved global
 results on the basis of well-known local results. To say that the history of how "we"

 came to "be aware" of such a thing is deeply linked to the historical emergence of new

 proof methods, of new results and theories, and of specific research agendas, etc., is

 merely stating the obvious; to confuse the two is to miss our target.

 Indeed, what is at stake here is a matter of agency. Leaving Poincaré's and

 Hubert's papers out of the core corpus does not mean that we consider that they
 did not know what they were really doing; such a statement would be preposterous,
 and the quotations we gave clearly contradict it. Hibert's and Poincaré's papers are
 left out of the core corpus because, from a pragmatic viewpoint, proving a global
 theorem (say Poincaré's) and referring to this theorem to explain what mathematics
 in the large is (as Morse did) belong to quite different categories of "doing." As we
 shall study in detail in the next parts of this paper, "local" and "global" can be used to

 clarify the expository structure of a proof or a lecture, to warn against an all-too-com-
 mon mistakes (beware, you're trying to draw global conclusions from local theorems),

 to sort out problems and point to the relevant tool-boxes, to devise completely new
 definitions for familiar objects, to mark disciplinary boundaries around an emerging
 research area, etc. All these will be exemplified in the 1898-1918 period to which this

 paper restricts its investigations. Reflexive terms such as "local" and "global" emerge
 somewhere and for some reason; they circulate in some networks and not in some

 others; they are given a definite meaning by some but another definite meaning (or
 some loose meaning) by others ... all these questions are specific to the historical

 study of "local" and "global," and distinguish it quite clearly from a history of global
 mathematical theories.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 7

 Finally, this investigation can be seen as apart of a more general study of the emer-

 gence of global theories and disciplines in mathematics; a preliminary part that looks

 tractable and should be instrumental in paving the way for the much larger task. This

 is not, however, the only potential context for a historical investigation into "local"

 and "global." As we shall see below, it could just as well be seen as a new tool to study

 the formation of an international mathematical community at the turn of the twentieth

 century or to study the role of the doctoral or post-doctoral journey to Germany in

 the making of the American mathematical community. To point to a third potential

 context, it could be part of a study of the emergence and competition of several reflex-

 ive categories, the case of "qualitative-quantitative" being exemplified by Poincaré's

 quotation. Of these three possible contexts, only the first two will be dealt with in this

 paper.

 1.2 A 1930s sample

 Given the question that we set out to address, it should seem clear that our raw material
 will be a set of occurrences of terms such as "local," "/m kleinen" or "in the small"

 within printed mathematical texts; it is likely that the gathering of these occurrences

 can only be performed through automatic procedures, using digital documents. Hence,

 before the qualitative study can even begin, some more methodological problems need

 to be tackled regarding a variety of issues such as: the choice of terms, the digitised
 corpus to investigate, the reliability of the automatic investigation, the restriction to

 "printed" and "mathematical texts." These issues are very different in nature, ranging

 from the technical problem of character recognition to deep questions such as that of
 the elusiveness of oral transmission in small mathematical communities, or that of the

 historical variations of the thresholds between the oral and the written down, between

 written and printed.

 To flesh out these arid questions, let us look at a simple-minded example; needless
 to say its role is merely heuristic. As is well known, the Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte

 der Mathematik (JFM) is available in digital form, making the titles and reviews of
 mathematical research papers and books published between 1868 and 1942 available

 for word-search.5 What do we get if we search for either "im kleinen" or "im grossen"

 in the title of research papers? A total of 35 hits, starting in 1917.

 This first sample is striking for the number and variety of the research fields involved.

 They include quite a lot of point-set topology, the titles mentioning technical notions

 built on the very same template: local connectivity {Zusammenhang im Kleinen in the
 German6 titles, connectedness im Kleinen in English), local convexity (Konvexheit
 im Kleinen), local compactness (im Kleinen kompakt topologischen Räume). Some

 papers deal with topological aspects of problems which are not strictly topological,
 for instance, Schreier's Die Verwandtschaft stetiger Gruppen im Grossen (Schreier

 1927), where the notion of a covering space is used to study the global continuation of

 Groups of words can be searcher as "expressions," the upper/lower case distinction is not taken into

 account, and the ß was systematically turned into a double s.

 "German" and "English" refer to the language used, not to the nationality or location of the author(s).

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 8 R. Chorlay

 Hits for "im kleinen" or "im grossen" in the title

 (source: Jarhbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik)

 local homomorphisms of topological groups. In this sample, number theoretic papers

 appear in 1930, with Schmidt's Zur Klassenkörpertheorie im Kleinen (Schmidt 1930)
 and Hasse's Die Normenresttheorie relativ-Abelscher Zahlkörper als Klassenkörper-
 theorie im Kleinen (Hasse 1930) and account for a significant proportion of the hits

 from then on. In this case, "im kleinen" is used to delineate a specific theory or field

 of research within number theory. Same for Rinow's use, but in differential geometry:

 Über Zusammenhänge zwischen der Differentialgeometrie im Grossen und im Klei-

 nen (Rinow 1932). Analysis is not left out, with some qualitative theory of differential

 equations (Sur la stabilité des intégrales des équations différentielles "im Grossen"
 (Halikoff 1938); partial differential equations (Über das Dirichletsche Problem im
 Grossen für nichtlineare elliptische Differentialgleichungen (Schauder 1933)); the
 calculus of variations, with Über minimalflächen im Grossen (Wernick 1934), Über

 eine neue Methode zur Behandlung einer Klasse isoperimetrischer Auf gaben im Gros-
 sen (Schmidt 1942), and of course Seifert and Threlfall's book on Variationsrechnung

 im Grossen (Morsesche Theorie) (Seifert and Threlfall 1938); complex analysis is here

 too [Zur Theorie der Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderlichen. Konvexität in

 bezug auf analytische Ebenen im kleinen und grossen (Behnke and Ernst 1935)].

 Searching for "in the small" and "in the large" yields similar results in terms of
 dates and variety of research fields, with a lot of calculus of variation in the large

 (starting, of course, with (Morse 1925), differential topology, and a few papers on the

 theory of Lie groups, such as G. Birkhoff 's (1936) Lie groups isomorphic in the large
 with no linear groups (Birkhoff 's 1936). The only striking difference would be that
 "in the small" and "in the large" are used in the English language only (and mainly
 by American mathematicians), whereas "im kleinen" and "im grossen" were used in
 papers in German, English, and in one paper in French (by a Russian mathematician,
 in a Russian journal).

 Again, this merely has a heuristic value. On the basis of this rather superficial search

 in the titles, and crude classification by research field, two things can be remarked.

 First, the state of affair which Morse described in 1967 seems to apply to the 1930s:

 "in the small," "im kleinen? etc. seem to be used in "more or less" all mathematics. But

 this very fact makes it suspicious that these terms started being used in the late 1920s,
 in spite of what the word-search seems to show. The time period appearing here is
 probably the artifactual outcome of a clumsy search and not the period of emergence.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 9

 In this paper, we want to try to go as far back in time as our means permit, in order to

 study the emergence of these reflexive terms. To go back in time, it seems necessary

 to do a little more work, by using a larger corpus (even though, by its very nature, the

 Jahrbuch provides a nice overview), and by searching full texts and not mere titles.

 However, as we shall see, doing so creates its own difficulties.

 Along with the variety of research fields, another feature of this first sample points

 to a bundle of interesting questions. In addition to the multiplicity of research fields,

 theories and disciplines, there is a multiplicity of terms, often but not always linked

 to a difference in the languages in which the papers are written. To what extent is
 "in the small" synonymous with "im kleinen" and "local" for mathematicians in the

 1930s? At this point, we do not want to actually read the texts to try to decide whether
 meanings are identical or equivalent; in some cases, this endeavour would be highly
 problematic: who is to tell if "im kleinen" and "in the small" have the same meaning
 in "Klassenkörpertheorie im Kleinen" and "calculus of variations in the small?" Even

 if a reasonable answer could be given from an early twenty-first century viewpoint, it

 would leave undecided whether these terms were regarded and used as equivalent by

 mathematicians in the 1930s. For now, we shall use inter-translatability as criterion
 for equivalence.

 A small but significant example seems to indicate that in this somewhat later phase

 of our story (leaving undecided for the moment the dates of our early phase), equiva-

 lence is not problematic. When Seifert and Threlfall wrote a book to present Morse's

 theory to the German public, they translated "calculus of variations in the large" by
 "Variationsrechnung im Grossen," and "calculus of variation in the smair by "Varia-

 tionsrechnung im Kleinen"; the French text derived from a 1938 talk by Threlfall, and

 published in L'Enseignement Mathématique, reads "le calcul des variations global"
 (Threlfall 1939). For a second example: in 1932, when Georges de Rham translated

 into French a talk by Hopf on the relation between infinitesimal geometry and topol-
 ogy, he used "structure globale" (Hopf 1931, p. 233) and "géométrie globale" (Hopf
 1931, p. 234); although the German text is not available, in the numerous papers by

 Hopf on this topic which are available in German, "im grossen" is systematically used.

 Many more examples could be given, and would be well worth studying, were we to

 focus on the 1930s. For now we just need to point out that this inter-translatability
 testifies to the fact that some degree of equivalence was tacitly agreed upon in the
 1930s, in spite of the variety of disciplines and languages.

 This leads to a bundle of questions for anyone who sets out to study the emergence

 of these terms. An obvious question is which came first. The mere multiplicity of terms

 seems to point to multiple sites of emergence. If it turned out that these terms began to

 be used in several poorly connected contexts, the later history of inter-translatability

 would have to be studied. (A detailed methodological discussion of the corpus-building
 phase of our work is given in the Appendix.)

 Before engaging in qualitative analysis, it should be remarked that the bulk of this

 paper will be devoted to "im kleinen" -"im grossen." As far as our zero corpus shows,

 "in the small"-"in the large" were not in use before the 1920s. It is quite possible that
 Morse chose these expressions to avoid of "im kleinen" -"im grossen" (which were of
 common use in the US, as we shall see); German expressions may not have sounded

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 as appealing to the WWI veteran as they had to Göttingen trained Osgood. The case

 of "local" will be dealt with in the last section of this paper.

 10 R. Chorlay

 2 William Fogg Osgood

 Born in Boston in 1864, W.F. Osgood graduated from Harvard in 1887 and, taking
 the advice of Frank Nelson Cole, left for Germany (Göttingen 1887-1889, Erlangen

 1889-1890). He got his Ph.D. in Erlangen, under the supervision of Max Noether, for
 a work on the theory of Abelian functions associated to the "algebraische Gebilde"
 ym = R(x) on which he had started to work in Göttingen, under the supervision of
 Klein. Back in the U.S., he started teaching in Harvard in 1890, was appointed as
 full professor in 1903 and worked there until he retired, in 1933.7 There, he taught
 analysis to generations of American mathematicians.8 He was a prominent member
 of the recently established American Mathematical Society, serving as president in
 1904-1905 and as AMS Colloquium lecturer in 1898 and in 1913. These lectures, as

 well as his early papers, demonstrate his command of the latest trends in mathematical

 analysis, both in real analysis and the theory of Punktmannigfaltigkeiten (tricky con-

 vergence problems, Cantor sets, space-filling curves, abstract definition of the integral,
 existence theorems in the calculus of variations), and in the theory of complex func-
 tions (of one variable in 1898, of several variables in 1913). His 1898 lectures show

 that, in spite of his Göttingen training, he was well aware of the various approaches

 to complex function theory; his exposition is of a syncretic style, using and contrast-

 ing Riemannian and Weierstrassian definitions and proof-methods. His knowledge of

 recent developments in function theory was not limited to the German-speaking world,

 his presentations include works by Picard, Hadamard and Poincaré (in particular his
 1883 general uniformisation theorem for analytic functions; Poincaré 1883). As we
 shall see, he published textbooks and research papers both in English and in German.

 Although Osgood occasionally used "im kleinen" and "im grossen" in research

 papers (e.g. Osgood 1898), most of the texts in which the expressions appear are
 of a didactic - at least an expository - nature: the six lectures on Selected Topics
 in the General Theory of Function delivered at the AMS Cambridge Colloquium
 in 1898 (Osgood 1899); the general introductory article in the second Band of the
 Encyclopädie der mathematischenWissenschaften mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendun-
 gen (Encyclopädie), entitled Analysis der komplexen Größen. Allgemeine Theorie
 der analytischen Functionen (a) einer und (b) mehrerer komplexen Größen (Osgood
 1901a); his German textbook, Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie (first edition in 1906,
 second edition in 1912; Osgood 1906, 1912); finally, the lectures on Topics in the
 Theory of Functions of Several Complex Variables, delivered at the AMS Madison
 Colloquium in 1913 (Osgood 1914).

 7 He also taught in Beijing in 1934-1936. This move may not have been motivated by academic reasons
 only. In 1932, Osgood married Celeste Phelpes, who had recently divorced Marston Morse; this apparently
 created quite a stir. For biographical elements on Osgood, see, for instance, (Archibald 1938, pp. 153-158),
 (Koopman 1944), (Parshall and Rowe 1994), (Walsh 2002).

 8 As G. Birkhoff recalled, Osgood's "(...) course on functions of a complex variable remained the key
 course for Harvard graduate students until World War II" (quoted in (Parshall and Rowe 1989, p. 13)).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 1 1

 A selection of quotes will give us some clue, both to the semantic and pragmatic

 aspects: what does Osgood mean by "im kleinen" and "im grossen"! How and for

 what purpose do those terms appear in the texts? If, as the automatic search seems to

 indicate, "im kleinen" and "im grossen" were not widely used at that time - and that's

 an understatement -, a close look at the texts is necessary to capture this intriguing

 emergence phenomenon.

 2.1 Meta use: contrasting theorems

 The first of the six 1898 lectures is devoted to Picard' s theorem, and the application

 ofRiemann's geometric methods in the general theory of functions. Osgood presented

 and proved two "forms" of the theorem, a "restricted form" and a "more general form."
 First comes the restricted form:

 Any function G{z) which is single valued and analytic for all finite values of z

 takes on in general for at least one value of z any arbitrarily assigned value C.
 There may be one value, a, which the function does not take on. But is there is

 a second such value, b, the function reduces to a constant. (Osgood 1899, p. 59)

 After its proof:

 We now turn to the more general form of Picard's theorem:

 If F(z) is any analytic function of z which in the neighborhood of a point A is

 single valued and has in this region no other singularities than poles, and if A is

 an essential singular point of F(z), then there are at most two values which F(z)

 does not take on in every neighborhood of the point A. (Osgood 1899, p. 63)

 The statement of the general form of the general theorem is immediately followed by
 a comment:

 This theorem, it will be noticed, is concerned with the behavior of a function

 im Kleinen, i.e. throughout a certain arbitrarily small region; while the earlier

 theorem was one im Grossen, the domain of the independent variable being there

 the whole finite region of the plane. (Osgood 1899, p. 63)9

 No such comment was made by Picard, who, however, remarked that the second the-

 orem was an easy consequence of a more general form of the first theorem, the more

 general form being the polynomial form of the first (global) theorem.10 Consequently,
 the emphasis in Picard was by no means on anything like local and global (Picard
 1880).

 It should be noticed that Osgood used these terms in German, in the English text

 of a talk delivered before an American audience (of twenty-six11). He did not pause
 and make an aside to explain what he meant by these unusual (and foreign) terms,

 9 Italics in the original text.

 11 (Osgood 1899, p. 58).

 1U What Picard called the general theorem says that if, for an entire function G, the equation G(z) = a
 {a finite) has a finite number of roots for more than one a, then G is a polynomial.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 12 R. Chorlay

 and it is not entirely clear whether the short descriptions (i.e. throughout a certain

 arbitrarily small region) are here to help understand what "im kleinen" means, or to

 point to what makes the second theorem a theorem on the behaviour of functions "im

 kleinen." They actually serve both purposes. This has to do with the type of discourse
 to which these terms belong in Osgood's writings. As is clear in this example, "im
 kleinen" and "im grossen" are used to say something about a pair of theorems; some-

 thing that is optional; something that does not have to do with proof and does not affect

 the mathematical validity of the statement. It simply points to some aspects of what

 has just been said or proved, thus performing a meta function in the mathematical
 discourse.12 Stepping back from the specific case studied in this paper, many other
 examples can be mentioned, all of which could be well worth investigating from a

 historical viewpoint. In mathematical texts, many words or expressions perform sim-

 ilar meta functions: emphasising logical relations (e.g. "theorem B is the converse of
 theorem A"), pointing to disciplinary boundaries (as in "proof A is more algebraic

 than proof B"), classifying theorems by type (e.g. existence theorem, uniqueness the-

 orem, convergence theorem, . . .), expressing epistemic values (e.g. rigour, purity, gen-

 erality, ability to convey understanding, etc.). We actually encountered a few other

 terms performing a meta function in the few quotes given so far: general/particular
 in Osgood and Picard, qualitative/quantitative in Poincaré. Needless to say, the fact
 that these words or expressions play a meta function doesn't mean that they play the

 same function in the text. In this paper, our goal is not to classify the variety of such

 functions, but to study the case of "local"-"globar from close.

 A case in which Osgood repeatedly used "im kleinen" and "im grossen" is that

 of inversion. As in the case of Picard's theorems, these terms are used to compare

 and contrasts two theorems. Both in the Encyclopädie and in the Lehrbuch, these

 expressions appear in paragraphs titles, testifying to its importance for the whole
 architecture of function theory. In the Encyclopädie, for instance, the title of §5 reads

 "Die konforme Abbildung im Kleinen"; in §18, entitled "Die Umkehrfunktion und die

 konforme Abbildung im Großen," Osgood pointed to the difference between local and
 global inversions and mentioned a global theorem:

 18. The inverse function and conformai mapping im Grossen
 An analytic function w = f(z) in a domain T defines a one-to-one mapping

 of a domain T[ on a domain %[ of a Riemann surface spread over the w-plane.
 If f'(z) vanishes nowhere in T[, then the mapping of the neighbourhood of
 an arbitrary point zo of T[ on the neighbourhood of the corresponding point
 wo will be conformai. However, this fact is not sufficient to conclude that %[

 does not overlap itself, i.e. that the inverse function z(w) is one to one for the
 values of w being considered. A sufficient condition to this effect is given by
 this proposition: Let w = f(z) be a function of z which is continuous on a

 12 By "meta," we certainly do not mean here anything like metamathematics nor any mathematical study
 of formal languages. Neither do we mean anything like what Caroline Dunmore (after Michael Crowe, or,
 in a more philosophical context, Philip Kitcher; Kitcher 1984) called the "meta-level" in her macro-histor-
 ical reflections on "revolutions" in mathematics, a "meta-level" where values and beliefs of mathematical

 communities are to be found (Dunmore 1992). Our approach is more local (no pun intended) and proceeds

 through textual analysis.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "

 (Osgood 1901a, p. 52)

 domain B' (No.l), analytic in the interior of B' , and which never takes on the
 same value at two different points of the boundary C of B' , then C goes into a

 closed and non-intersecting Jordan curve F of the w-plane; the simple domain
 of the tu-plane which F bounds will be correlated in a continuous, one-to-one
 and onto manner to B' , so that, moreover, its interior is conformally correlated

 to the interior of B' . (Osgood 1901a, p. 52)13

 In Osgood's Encyclopädie chapter, the letter T denotes domains (i.e. connected

 open parts of the complex plane, usually bounded), B denotes the closure of a
 7 -domain (the boundary of which is usually assumed to consist in a finite num-
 ber of analytic arcs), T' denotes a domain of type B, chosen at will within a given
 T-domain.

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 13

 The fact that domain %[ might be self-overlapping, even if domain T[ is simply
 connected and the derivative /' (z) never vanishes, is illustrated by the following figure:
 The proof of Osgood's global inversion theorem is given in his Lehrbuch: injec-
 tivity on the boundary of the simply connected domain B' implies that its image is a

 Jordan-curve (the Jordan curve theorem was proved as the Fundamentalsatz of Men-

 genlehre in the fifth chapter of the Lehrbuch); the fact that the mapping is one-to-one

 and onto between the bounded Jordan-domains is proved with a standard argument in
 complex analysis: the number of solutions to an analytic equations f(z) = 0 which

 lie within a domain bounded by closed curve V is expressed by the line-integral of the

 13 „18. Die Umkehrfunktion und die konforme Abbildung im Grossen.
 Eine in einem Bereich T analytische Funktion w = f(z) definiert eine ein-eindeutige Abbildung eines

 Bereiches T[ auf einen Bereich 1^ einer über die w-Ebene ausgebreiteten Riemann'schen Fläche. Vers-

 chwindet f'(z) in 7j nirgends, so wird die Abbildung der Umgebung eines beliebigen Punktes zq von r[
 auf die Umgebung des entsprechenden Punktes wq konform sein. Dieser Umstand reicht jedoch nicht zum

 Schlüsse aus, das îj nicht über sich selbst greift, m.a.W. dass die Umkehrfunktion z(w) für die in Betracht
 kommenden Werte von w eindeutig ist. Eine dazu hinreichende Bedingung gibt der Satz: Ist w = f(z) eine

 in einem Bereich B' (Nr.l) stetige und innerhalb B' analytischer Funktion von z, die auf der Begrenzung
 C von B' ein und denselben Wert in zwei verschiedenen Punkten niemals annimmt, so geht C in eine
 geschlossene sich selbst nicht schneidende Jordan 'sehe Kurve F der w-Ebene über; der von F abgegrenzte
 schlichte Bereich der w;-Ebene wird ein-eindeutig und stetig auf B' , das Innere dieses Bereiches ausserdem
 noch konform auf das Innere von B' bezogen."

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 14 R. Chorlay

 logarithmic derivative, hence by the number of loops of the image of V around any
 given point (Osgood 1912, p. 378).

 In this case, "im kleinen" and "im grossen" are not used only to show that there is

 an interesting connection between the theorems that are more than a hundred pages

 apart in the textbook. They help draw the attention to the fact that, in spite of their

 similarities (as inversion theorems), these theorems are of a different nature and must

 not be confused one for the other. Applying the "im kleinen" theorem to draw "im
 grossen" conclusions is an all too common mistake, as Osgood points out in a foot-
 note in §18 of the Encyclopädie. The footnote mentions Briot and Bouquet's faulty

 exposition of the inversion of elliptic integrals, and Klein's criticism of Fuchs' uni-

 formisation results for special classes of ordinary differential equations of order two

 with algebraic coefficients. It should be noted that Klein's criticism was by no means

 worded in terms of local and global; there are several ways to describe that mistake.
 Klein wrote that Fuchs mistook non-ramified functions (which the inverse of / indeed

 is, if /' does not vanish) for single-valued functions (Klein 1883, p. 214). The same
 confusion had been pointed out to Fuchs by Poincaré in their exchange of letters of
 1880 (Poincaré 1951-1956, vol. 11, pp. 14-17); Poincaré's explanation is of a more
 geometric flavour than Klein's, and deals with self-overlapping domains, but again,
 the criticism was not articulated in terms of something like local and global.

 2.2 Meta use: exhibiting proof patterns and theorem patterns

 Leaving the sorting of theorems for a while, we can also find "im kleinen" and "im

 grossen" in the wording of theorems and proofs.

 As far as proofs are concerned, one example will suffice. Chapter 13 of the Lehr-

 buch deals with logarithmic potentials. Its 6th paragraph presents Schwartz's symmetry

 principle and a series of applications; the straightening of analytic curves plays a key
 part here: "4th Proposition. Let C be an analytic curve. Then the neighbourhood of
 C can be correlated in a one-to-one, onto and continuous manner with the neighbour-

 hood of a segment f, so that curve C goes into segment F." (Osgood 1912, p. 669). 14

 After proving that the straightening is possible in the neighbourhood of any point of

 the curve, Osgood paused and remarked: "Here we have reached im Kleinen, for the
 neighbourhood of point (jco, yo), what the proposition requires im Grossen for the
 whole curve C" (Osgood 1912, p. 670). 15 He thus inserted a meta comment, pointing

 to the two phases of the proof of a global theorem, while expounding this proof. It

 exemplifies the general strategy: when proving a global theorem, first state and prove
 a local version of it, then try to go global (in this particular case, using compactness
 and reductio ad absurdum).

 Another case is more intriguing, that has to do with the wording of theorems and

 the exemplifying of general proof strategies. Although the Lehrbuch deals mainly

 14 „4. Satz. Sei C eine analytische Kurve. Dann läßt sich die Umgebung von C auf die Umgebung ein-
 er geraden Strecke F ein-eindeutig und konform beziehen, dergestalt daß die Kurve C in die Strecke F
 übergeht."

 15 "Hiermit ist im Kleinen für die Umgebung des Punktes (jco, yo) das erreicht, was der Satz im Großen

 für die ganze Kurve C verlangt."

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 15

 with complex function theory, its first five chapters (which means about 200 pages)

 consist in a state-of-the-art exposition of real analysis, Weierstrass style and including

 a good share of point-set topology. The first chapter presents the elementary notions

 of function of a real variable, limits, continuity, derivatives, etc.; none of these came

 as a surprise for the 1906 reader (at least in Germany). The 10th paragraph of this first

 chapter, however, contains more unexpected material. It deals with multi-valued func-
 tions, in the real context, and since it is the first time in the textbook that multi- valued

 functions are considered, Osgood presented a standard strategy for dealing with these

 unfriendly functions: "To deal with a multi-valued function, it is often advisable to
 strive to represent it by means of single-valued functions" (Osgood 1912, p. 44).16

 Then comes the first of three theorems on the separation of branches for multi- valued
 real functions:

 1 st Proposition. Let it be required that, for every point xo of the domain of defini-

 tion of a multi- valued function, the following be given: (a) a given neighbourhood
 'x - jcol < S, (b) a series of single- valued functions y' = f' (jc), yi = /2OO, . . .
 defined without exceptions in these very neighbourhoods 'x - jco| < S, so that
 in the given neighbourhood a one-to-one and onto relation holds between these

 functional values and those of the given multi- valued function. Then, a similar

 aggregation of the values of the multi-valued function is also possible im Gros-

 sen, which yields the stock of values of the multi- valued function once and only
 once. (Osgood 1912, p. 44)17

 Again, the proof relies on reductio ad absurdum: working on a bounded closed inter-
 val, if the conclusion did not hold for the interval, then it would not hold for at least

 one of its half-intervals ... a contradiction would arise at the point of intersection of

 the nested intervals. The next proposition is a corollary:

 2nd Proposition: Let us add the two following hypotheses to those of the first
 proposition: (c) at all points of T the values of the multi-valued function all

 differ one from the other; (d) the functions /*(*) have been chosen so that they

 are continuous. Then the single-valued functions into which, according to the
 first proposition, the values of the multi-valued function can be split, can be

 determined so as to be continuous on the whole interval (and, actually, in only
 one way, disregarding the order of the series). (Osgood 1912, p. 45)18

 16 "Zur Behandlung einer mehrdeutigen Funktion empfiehlt es sich meist, eine Darstellung derselbe mit-
 telst eindeutiger Funktionen anzustreben."

 17 "1. Satz. Jeder Stelle xq des Definitionsbereiches T einer mehrdeutigen Funktion sollen sich (a) eine
 bestimmte Umgebung 'x - xq' < 8 (b) eine Reihe je in derselben ausnahmlos definierter eindeutiger
 Funktionen y' = f'(x),y2 = fi(x), . . . , 'x - xo' < 8, so zuordnen lassen, daß zwischen diesen Funk-
 tionswerten und den Werten der vorgelegten mehrdeutigen Funktion in der gennanten Umgebung eine
 ein-eindeutig Beziehung statt hat. Dann wird eine ähnliche Zusammenfassung der Werte des mehrdeutigen
 Funktion auch im Großen möglich sein, deren Werte geradezu den Wertvorrat der mehrdeutigen Funktion
 einmal, aber auch nur einmal, liefern.,,

 18 "2. Satz. Zu den Voraussetzungen des 1. Satzes füge man noch die beiden weiteren hinzu: (c) in jedem
 Punkte von T sollen die Werte der mehrdeutigen Funktion sämtlich voneinander verschieden sein; (d) die

 Funktionen /¿(*) sollen so gewählt werden können, daß sie stetig sind. Dann lassen sich die eindeutigen
 Funktionen, auf die sich nach dem 1. Satze die Werte der mehrdeutigen Funktion verteilen, so bestimmen

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 16 R. Chorlay

 These two propositions clearly do not belong to the standard list of elementary propo-

 sitions of real analysis,19 as a quick look at any other late nineteenth or early twentieth

 century analysis textbook would confirm. Moreover, these theorems are not inserted

 in the first chapter because of their deductive value; actually, they are not used as

 lemmas in later parts of the book where the separation of branches of functions of a

 complex variable is investigated. Does that mean that these propositions are of no use,

 save maybe for showing yet another (rather convoluted) application of the principle of

 nested intervals? In the 8th chapter, which is the first chapter dealing with multi-valued

 functions of a complex variable, a central theorem reads:

 Proposition. Let several values f{z) be associated to every inner point of a sim-

 ply connected domain T of the extended plane. Were the number of values to be

 infinite, it should however be countable. Let these values be such that to every

 inner point of T there corresponds a given neighbourhood on which the whole
 stock of values of the function can be aggregated into a series of one- valued
 analytic functions. Then, the given values can also be aggregated im Grossen,
 that is in the whole of domain T, into one- valued functions f' (z), fi{z), . . ., all

 of which are analytic in 7' and which, taken as a whole, exhaust the values f(z)
 exactly once. (Osgood 1912, p. 396)20

 In Osgood's textbook, this theorem on the separation of branches stands in
 the more standard monodromy theorem for the analytic continuation of a func-
 tion element in a simply connected domain. This theorem was already men-
 tioned in the Encyclopädie, where a footnote remarked that analyticky was not
 the heart of the matter: continuity "/m kleinen" was enough (Osgood 1901a,
 p. 29). Actually, Osgood borrowed21 this investigation of the separation of con-
 tinuous branches of functions (on a simply connected domain) from the second
 volume of O. Stolz's textbook Grundzüge der Differential- und Integralrechnung
 (Stolz 1893). In the paragraph Über eindeutige und stetige Zweige vieldeutige
 Functionen einer complexen Veränderlichen (Stolz 1893, pp. 15-24), Stolz dealt
 with functions of a complex variable, but first studied them on a curve in the
 domain; dividing that into a real analysis part and a complex analysis part, as
 Osgood did, was merely a matter of presentation. Something that did not come
 from Stolz, however, is the wording of both the real and complex theorems in

 Footnote 18 continued

 stetig ist."

 (und zwar, von der Reihenfolge abgesehen, nur auf eine einzige Weise), daß auch sie im ganzen Intervalle

 19 By the first decade of the twentieth century, the list of theorems which belong to the general exposition
 of "modern" analysis was already quite standardised.

 20 "Satz. Jedem inneren Punkt eines einfach zusammenhängenden Bereichs T der erweiterten Ebene mögen

 mehrere Werte f{z) zugeordnet werden. Im Falle die Anzahl der Werte nicht endlich ist, soll sie jedoch
 abzählbar sein. Diese Werte sollen so beschaffen sein, daß jedem inneren Punkte von T eine bestimmte
 Umgebung entpricht, in welcher sich die ganze Vorrat der Funktionswerte zu einer Reihe eindeutiger ana-
 lytischer Funktionen zusammenfassen läßt. Dann können besagte Werte auch im Großen, also im ganzen
 Bereiche 7' zu eindeutigen Funktionen f' (z), /2(z), • • • zusamenfaßt werden, deren jede sich in T analyt-
 isch verhält und deren Gesammtheit die Werte f(z) gerade erschöpft."

 21 A hint is given by Osgood's footnote 44 (Osgood 1901a, p.29).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 17

 terms of "im kleinen'9 and "im grossen99 Thanks to this rewriting, the central

 analytic theorem now clearly displays a general form, a general theorem-pattern,
 namely: in some well-behaved domains (here: simply connected), if a property
 holds locally at every point, then it also holds globally. The relationship between
 real the propositions of the first chapter and the complex theorem of the 8th chap-
 ter is by no means a deductive relationship. Considered in terms of their role
 in the deductive structure of the book, the real theorems of Chap. 1- §10 are
 null and void; they could be called dummy theorems. The absence of a deduc-
 tive role does not imply, however, that they are useless. They have a purely meta
 role, displaying the same theorem-pattern for the reader to memorise and, later,

 identify.

 2.3 Neumann made rigorous

 Both the theorem on the separation of branches and the global inversion theorem deal

 with the behaviour of analytic functions on simply connected domains. They play a
 significant role in Osgood's exposition of the theory of functions of a complex var-
 iable, which, when it comes to algebraic functions, is a variant of Carl Neumann's
 "cut-and-paste" approach to Riemann surfaces. The procedure is well known: once

 the ramification points have been identified, choose a system of cuts that links them
 and chop the domain into simply connected sub-domains over which the function

 is unramified (but multi-valued); consider that these simply connected components
 consist of several independent layers (one for each branch of the specific function

 you want to study), then glue the layers along the borders according to the permuta-

 tions rules derived from the study of the ramification points. As Osgood pointed out

 in the Encyclopädie (Osgood 1901a, p. 29), the standard presentation starts with the

 study of the ramification points, then proceeds through analytic continuation. Both in

 the Encyclopädie and in the Lehrbuch, he changed the order of presentation, starting
 with the two general theorems on analytic functions on simply connected domains
 and then presenting the standard cut-and-paste procedure. These theorems provide a

 rigorous justification for the "paste the simply connected sub-domains along the bor-

 ders to get a well-behaved function"-step of the Neumann procedure; before Osgood,

 this step was usually dealt with in a purely intuitive, hand-waving, diagram-drawing
 manner.

 Not only these two global theorems, but the very notions if "im kleinen9' and "im

 grossen99 are central for Osgood's revamping of the Neumann-style introduction to
 Riemann's theory of algebraic functions of one complex variable. As in Neumann,
 Osgood presented both general theorems and a series of examples showing how the
 surface is to be constructed in ever more complicated cases; the theorems play an ancil-

 lary role, establishing either that some construction step is possible, or that it actually

 yields what is expected. In spite of its didactical value, this presentation lacks general-
 ity, in two senses. First, there is no general description of what a Riemann surface is; a

 Riemann surface is what you get when you apply a given procedure (whose steps can

 be accounted for) to particular cases. Second, when applying the procedure, arbitrary
 choices have to be made (the cuts), which lead to theoretical problems, for instance,

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 18 R. Chorlay

 when questions of isomorphism (or worse, describing parameter spaces for Riemann

 surfaces22) are to be tackled. Osgood was well aware of this problem, and, after pre-

 senting the construction of the Riemann surface for w (defined by w3 - 3w = z) he

 took a step back and paused for a meta comment:

 Let us again clear up what is essential and what is adventitious in the Riemann
 surface. The following facts are essential, (a) that three simple leaves run over

 the neighbourhood of any point zo i=- -2, 2, oo that serve as bearers for three

 functions which are analytic and one- valued in this neighbourhood; (b) that one

 simple leaf runs in the neighbourhood of the points z = -2, 2, while two others
 are connected in a cycle; similarly, all three leaves are connected in the point
 z = oo. So much for the im Kleinen part; to this one should add (c) that the

 leaves join together as the course of the several determinations of the function
 im Grossen requires. (Osgood 1912, p. 374)23

 This classification of the essential pieces of information in terms of "im kleinen" and

 "im grossen" clearly echoes the wording of the theorem on the separation of branches:
 (a) is its local version, and the two global theorems warrant step (c).

 The goal of the construction of the Riemann surface is to replace a multi-val-

 ued function defined on a domain of the complex sphere, by a single- valued function

 defined on a new domain which is a surface over the complex sphere. If a single- valued

 parametric representation for the Riemann surface can be found (using a function of

 an ordinary complex variable), then complex uniformisation of the original function
 has been achieved. The general uniformisation theorems, either for algebraic func-

 tions or for general analytic functions, were beyond the scope of the Lehrbuch, but

 they were central to Osgood's 1898 AMS talk on the latest issues in function theory.

 Osgood actually played a part in that story as a researcher: in his 1898 talk, he pointed
 to one of the flaws in Poincaré's 1883 proof of the general uniformisation theorem

 (Osgood 1898, pp. 69-74); he would later give a proof of the missing fundamental
 lemma, as Poincaré would acknowledge in his revised proof (Poincaré 1908). It comes

 as no surprise (to us) that Osgood introduced the general problem of uniformisation
 to his audience in terms of "im kleinen" and "im grossen" To quote one of several

 examples24:

 22 These issues are explicitly dealt with by Klein and Poincaré in their attempts at proving general unifor-
 misation theorems for algebraic functions (in terms of automorphic functions).

 23 „Machen wir uns noch klar, was an der Riemannschen Fläche wesentlich und was nur zufallig ist.

 Wesentlich ist, (a) daß über der Umgebung eines jeden der Punktes z0 # -2, 2, °° drei Blätter schlicht
 verlaufen, welche als Träger dreier in dieser Umgebung eindeutiger, sich analytisch verhaltender Funktio-

 nen dienen; (b) daß in der Umgebung der Punkte z = -2, 2 ein Blatt schlicht verläuft, während zwei andere
 dort im Zyklus zusammenhängen; sowie daß im Punkte z = oo alle drei Blätter zusammenhängen. So viel
 im Kleinen; dazu kommt noch, (c) daß die Blätter so miteinander verbunden werden, wie es der Verlauf der
 verschiedenen Bestimmungen der Funktion im Großen verlangt."

 24 Also, in the 1898 talk: "3. Next may be mentioned the representation of the coordinates of an algebraic

 curve by the elliptic functions when p = 1, and, generally, by automorphic functions. Here the relation
 between (jc, v) and z continues to be one-to-one im Kleinen, but is one-to-infinity im Grossen." (Osgood
 1899, p. 70)

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 19

 When dealing with multi-valued functions, it is often advisable to represent
 them by single-valued functions. Thus, for instance, the Riemann surface first

 of all serves this purpose of providing a domain on which a given multi- val-

 ued function becomes one- valued. Another case is dealt with in Chap. 8, §14,
 where an analytic function w = f(z) has a ramification point of finite order
 in z = a. Here, we are to express the components of the pair of values (w, z)

 belonging to the function by means of two single- valued functions of a param-

 eter t : z = a + tm,w = cp(ř). But this holds only im Kleinen, that is, for a
 restricted part of the domain of definition of the function. In contrast, we already

 know from integral calculus certain classes of functions by means of which
 it is possible to represent the function in its entire course through one-valued

 functions - to uniformise it, as is customarily said. (Osgood 1912, p. 710)25

 Checking against Poincaré's or Koebe's introduction to uniformisation theory

 shows that this description in terms of local and global was by no means standard

 in the first decade of the twentieth century.26

 2.4 Defining "im Grossen" and "im Kleinen": the syntactic view

 After this review27 of the ways and contexts in which Osgood used "im kleinen" and

 "im grossen" the question of meaning somehow remains. A semantic analysis could
 very well be carried out, which would show connections between "im kleinen"-"im

 grossen" and pairs such as small-large, whole-part, neighbourhood-domain, etc. None

 of this would come as a surprise for the early twenty-first century reader, nor would the

 fact that the meaning is conveyed in context, in the title of chapters or paragraphs, in

 the names of theorems, in the wording of theorems, in the laying out of a proof, in the

 introductory setting of a problem that a specific theorem solves, etc. This is ascribable
 to the fact that these terms perform a meta function in the mathematical discourse:

 they appear along that material which they describe or a feature of which they help

 underline; they are instrumental in the organising and shaping of some more primitive

 contents. A philosophically minded historian could describe this in Wittgensteinian
 terms, with meaning conveyed through use only, in some language game that can be

 25 „Wenn wir es mit einer mehrdeutigen Funktion zu thun haben, empfiehlt es sich meist, dieselbe durch
 eindeutige Funktionen darzustellen. So dient beispeilweise die Riemannsche Fläche vor allem der Zweck,

 einen Bereich zu schaffen, in welchem eine vorgelegte vieldeutige Funktion eindeutig wird. Ein anderer Fall
 ist der Kap.8, §14 behandelte, wo eine analytische Funktion: w = f(z) einen Verzweigungspunkt endlicher
 Ordnung in z = a hat. Hier gelang es uns, die Bestandteile eines der Funktions zugehörigen Wertepaares
 (w,z) vermöge zweier eindeutiger Funktionen eines Parameter t auszudrücken: z = a + tm,w = <p(í).
 Doch galt diese Darstellung nur im Kleinen, also für einen beschränkten Teil des Definitionsbereiches der
 Funktion. Dagegen sind schon von der Integralrechnung her gewisse Klassen von Funktionen bekannt,

 wobei es möglich ist, die Funktion in ihrem Gesamtverlaufe durch eindeutige Funktionen zur Darstellung
 zu bringen,- zu uniformisieren, wie man sich wohl auzudrücken pflegt.,,

 26 (Poincaré 1883); (Poincaré 1921); (Poincaré 1908); (Koebe 1909).

 We left out a few interesting instances, in particular in the theory of functions of several complex vari-
 ables. Osgood called Weierstrass' preparation theorem the local divisibility (Teilbarkeit im Kleinen) theorem
 (Osgood 1901a, p. 105), (Osgood 1914, p. 83). The Cousin problems are mentioned in the Encyclopädie
 in a paragraph entitled "Einige Sätze über das Verhalten im Großen." (Osgood 1914, p. 1 1 1).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 20 R. Chorlay

 located within history (first decade of the twentieth century), within mathematics (at

 the meeting of Weierstrass' rigorous analysis based on point-set topology, and Neu-

 mann style presentation of Riemann surfaces) and in terms of textual genres (didactic

 and expository texts). However, we feel that in the case of terms which perform a meta

 function, that type of description probably always fits. Moreover, it so happens that it

 is not the case that meaning was conveyed through use only. Osgood did once give a

 definition - at least a precise explanation, abstracted from the immediate context of
 use - of what he meant by "im kleinen" and "im grossen."

 In the second paragraph of the Encyclopädie article, Osgood discussed the very

 notion of an analytic function:

 The concept of analytic continuation is part and parcel of the complete definition

 of the analytic function (No. 13). It could be said that the definition used up to

 this point bears on the behaviour of the function im Kleinen (indeed, nothing
 more was known before Weierstrass); a stipulation regarding the behaviour im
 Grossen is still missing (footnote 8). (Osgood 1901a, p. 12)28

 For their first appearance in the text, the terms are italicised, and footnote 8 reads:

 The concept of behaviour of a function im Kleinen and im Grossen plays an
 important role in Analysis, and concerns all part of mathematics (in particular

 Geometry as well) where a continuous set of elements form the substrate for the

 configuration to be studied. In the theory of functions, the behaviour of a func-

 tion im Kleinen resp. im Grossen means its behaviour in the neighbourhood of a

 given point a, (a' ,ai,..., an), or a point-set P (N° 40) [for the sake of brevity,
 one incorrectly speaks of the behaviour in a, (a' , ai, . . ., an), or in point-set P],

 resp. in a domain T, T' X, T', etc., the extent of which is set from the start [von

 vornherein feststeht] and not determined afterwards to meet the requirements of

 the given problem. In many cases, in domains T', X' the corresponding uniform
 (N° 6) behaviour im Grossen stems from the behaviour im Kleinen. (Osgood

 1901a, p. 12)29

 It turns out that "im kleinen" and "im grossen" are not, in Osgood's use, metaphor-

 ical terms (even though they may convey intuitive grasp as well). We call this the

 syntactic view of "im kleinen" and "im grossen." Being local or global is a property of

 28 „Zur vollständigen Definition der analytischen Funktion gehört noch der Begriff der analytischen Forts-

 etzung (No. 13). Man darf wohl sagen, die bisherige Definition bezieht sich auf des Verhaltens der Funktion
 im Kleinen (weiter war man ja vor Weierstrass nicht gekommen); es fehlt noch eine Festsetzung bezügl.
 des Verhaltens der Funktion im Grossen."

 29 „Der Begriff des Verhaltens einer Funktion im Kleinen und im Grossen spielt in der Analysis einer
 wichtige Rolle und erstreckt sich auf alle Gebiete der Mathematik (namentlich auch auf die Geometrie),
 wo eine stetige Menge von Elementen das Substrat für die in Betracht zu ziehenden Gebilde bildet. In
 der Funktionentheorie versteht man unter dem Verhalten einer Funktion im Kleinen resp. im Grossen ihr

 Verhalten in der Umgebung eines festen Punktes a, (a' , 02»- -^n) oder einer Punktmenge P (No. 40) [der

 Kürze halber spricht man dann schlechtweg von ihrem Verhalten im a, (a' , ai

 enge P] resp. in einem Bereich 7' T',%1? u.s.w., dessen Ausdehnung von vornherein feststeht und nicht
 erst hinterher den Bedürfnissen des vorgelegten Problems entsprechend bestimmt wird. In vielen Fällen

 folgt aus einem gegebenen Verhalten im Kleinen in jedem Punkt eines Bereiches T' 'S? das entsprechende
 gleichmässig (No. 6) Verhalten im Grossen."

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 21

 mathematical statements (be they definitions or propositions) which refer to domains.

 The key distinction is between "set from the start" {von vornherein feststeht) and

 "afterwards" or "in retrospect" (interher): if the domain over which the conclusion

 holds is the very domain that was referred to in the hypotheses, then the proposition

 is "im grossen"', if the domain which is referred to in the conclusion is not the one

 mentioned in the hypotheses, but some new domain which has to be determined so as

 to meet some extra requirements, then the position is "im kleinen'9 The case of local

 versus global inversion theorems is a perfect example; so is the case of the basic the-

 orem on the convergence of power series, the convergence being locally uniform (on

 any compact subsets of the convergence disc). What matters here is the strength of the

 coupling between domains referred to in different parts of a complex mathematical
 assertion. To some extent, it expresses in terms of domains what formal, Weierst-

 rass style, propositions or definitions in analysis express completely syntactically in

 terms of quantifiers, be it through the introduction of a new quantified variable (e.g.

 in the definition of a local maximum), or by the order of quantifiers (as in everywhere

 pointwise versus uniform continuity).

 The fact is, Osgood spelled that out once and just once, as far as our core corpus
 shows.30 However, his use is consistent with this quite specific meaning, and that
 is specific enough to allow for comparison with the use of the same terms by other
 mathematicians.

 It should be noted that Osgood's precise and context-free explanation of what he

 meant by "im kleinen" and "im grossen" is unique in our core corpus.

 3 "im Kleinen"-"im Grossen" in the U.S.

 Besides, and after, Osgood, we find "im kleinen" and "im grossen" used by members

 of the American Mathematical Society, in texts written in English, with a meaning
 and a use which are similar to Osgood's.

 3.1 Kasner's problems of "Geometry im Grossen"

 The terms are used in Edward Kasner's address delivered before the section of Geome-

 try at the International Congress of Arts and Science, in Saint Louis, in 1904. As men-

 tioned earlier, several distinguished foreign mathematicians attended that Congress,
 among them Picard, Darboux and Poincaré. Kasner presented a general overview of

 the "present problems in Geometry"; he aimed at presenting "a survey of the leading
 problems or groups of problems in certain selected (but hopefully representative) fields

 30 Some passages are very reminiscent of this explanation, in spite of the fact that they are "in context." For
 instance, in the Lehrbuch, the theorem on global analytic inversion is introduced as follows: ,3isher haben

 wir uns im allegemein Falle bloß mit der konformen Abbildung im Kleinen beschäftigt, indem wir zeigten,
 daß unter gewissen Bedingungen die Umgebung eines Punktes zo» deren Ausdehnung also von vornherein

 nicht feststand, ein-eindeutig und konform auf eine Umgebung eines Punktes wq bezogen wird. Jetzt wollen

 wir ein Kriterium kennen lernen, wonach ein vorgelegter Bereich inkl. Der Berandung ein-eindeutig und
 stetig, und im Innern konform auf einen zweiten vorgegebenen Bereich abgebildet werden kann." (Osgood
 1912, p. 377).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 22 R. Chorlay

 of contemporary investigation" (Kasner 1905, p. 87)), from foundational issues to the

 birational geometry of algebraic surfaces and the geometry of transformation groups.

 The seventh of the nine groups of problems he called "Geometry im Grossen":

 The questions we have just been considering, in common with almost all the
 developments of general or infinitesimal geometry, deal with the properties of

 the figures studied im kleinen, that is, in the sufficiently small neighborhood
 of a given point. Algebraic geometry, however, on the other hand, deals with

 curves and surfaces in their entirety. This distinction, however, is not inherent

 to the subject matter, but is rather a subjective one due to the limitations of our

 analysis: our results being obtained by the use of power series are valid only in

 the region of convergence. (. . .) Only the merest traces of such a transcendental

 geometry im Grossen are in existence, but the interest of many investigators is

 undoubtedly tending in this direction. (Kasner 1905, p. 304)

 Three families of problems were identified as "im grossen". First the study of geode-

 sies on a given surface, in particular closed geodesies and those which are asymptotic
 to these; Kasner referred his audience to Hadamard's papers on the geodesies on a

 surface of negative curvature (Hadamard 1898). At the very same Congress, Poincaré
 gave a talk on the geodesies on a surface of positive curvature; a topic on which he
 published a paper in the Transactions oftheAMS in 1905 (Poincaré 1905). The second

 family of "im grossen" problems deal with "the determination of applicability criteria
 valid for entire surfaces"; he mentioned the case of surfaces of constant positive curva-

 ture (for which applicability on a sphere is locally trivial) and, more generally, results

 of rigidity for convex surfaces (Lagrange, Minding, Jellet and Liebmann). The third

 problem is that of the models for non-Euclidean geometry; of course, the only result

 "im grossen" is Hubert's proof to the effect that the whole hyperbolic plane cannot be

 represented by an analytic surface of ordinary Euclidean space. The Hubert quote we

 gave in the first part of this paper was from this proof. Kasner finally mentioned some

 problems which he did not choose to list under the heading "problems of geometry im

 grossen" but which are strongly related:

 Other theories belonging essentially to geometry im Grossen are the questions of

 analysis situs or topology to which reference has been made on several occasions,

 and the properties of the very general convex surfaces introduced by Minkowski
 in connection with his Geometrie der Zahlen. (Kasner 1905, p. 306).

 We could remark in passing that the connection described here between "im
 grossen" problems and analysis situs is not specific to Kasner. In our zero corpus,

 several hits appear in texts of point-set topology, but none in texts that bear directly on

 analysis situs, at a time when it is gaining autonomy as a research field. Pioneers of
 analysis situs such as Poincaré (1895) or Dehn and Heegaard (1907) did not describe
 this discipline as that which is necessary to pass from local to global31; but, as we
 shall see, several among those who use "im kleinen" and "im grossen" or similar

 3 1 A survey of the literature would show general descriptions of analysis situs in terms of groups of trans-
 formation (usually "general point transformations," i.e. diffeomorphisms), or as qualitative hypergeometry
 (for instance, in Poincaré), etc.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 23

 terms in other theoretical contexts stress the fact that analysis situs is of fundamental

 importance when striving for global results.

 3.2 "im Kleinen"- Hm Grossen" in the calculus of variations and the theory of PDEs

 Still on American ground, we find "im kleinen" and "im grossen" in another theo-
 retical context, namely the calculus of variations. There is one and only one hit for
 "im kleinen" in Oskar Bolza's Lectures on the Calculus of Variations (Bolza 1904);

 the 27th paragraph is devoted to the study of several necessary or sufficient conditions

 involving the second variation, the last in the list being:

 (e) Existence of a minimum "im Kleinen": We add here an important theorem

 which has been used, without proof, by several authors in various investigations
 of the Calculus of Variations, viz., the theorem that under certain conditions two

 points can always be joined by a minimizing extremal, provided only that the
 two points are sufficiently near to each other. (Bolza 1904, p. 146)

 This use of "im kleinen" in the labelling of theorems in a textbook that has many of
 these is exactly the same as Osgood's. The latter, however, used "im kleinen" and "im

 grossen" is a much more systematic way, and it played a central part in his take on

 function theory as a unitary whole. When we said that Bolza used "im kleinen" just
 once in the text, we meant the body of the text; if we take the index into account,

 something new comes up. Of course, the theorem presented on p. 146 is mentioned

 in the final index (as existence theorem for a minimum "im kleinen" in appears twice
 in the index, under "existence theorems" and "minimum); but in that index, another

 theorem is referred to as 'existence theorem for a minimum "im grossen"' (Bolza
 1904, pp. 269-270). No theorems, however, were described as "im grossen" in the
 body of the text. The index does not actually refer to a specific theorem, but to the
 final chapter of the book, whose introduction reads:

 Chapter VII. Hubert's existence theorem

 §43 Introductory remarks
 If a function f(x) is defined for an interval {ab), it has in this interval a lower

 (upper) limit, finite or infinite, which may or may not be reached. If, however,

 the function is continuous in {ab), then the lower (upper) limit is always finite
 and is always reached at some point of the interval: the function has a minimum
 (maximum in the interval).

 Similarly, if the integral

 t'

 to

 J = j F{x,y,x',yf)àt

 is defined for a certain manifoldness M of curves, we can, in general, say a
 priori whether the values of the integral have a minimum or a maximum. But the

 question arises whether it is not possible to impose such restrictions either upon

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 24 R. Chorlay

 the function F or upon the manifoldness M (or upon both), that the existence of
 an extrémům can be ascertained a priori. (Bolza 1904, p. 245)

 The content of this chapter is based on Hubert's recent works in the calculus of

 variations,32 in which he provided new and general methods for tackling problems of
 absolute maxima or minima, problems which were usually beyond the reach of the

 ordinary tools. The proof of Dirichleťs principle was, of course, a prominent exam-
 ple. Remaining closer to classical calculus of variations, Bolza only gave the details

 of Hubert's proof for the existence of a line for which a well-behaved integral reaches
 its absolute minimum, the "manifoldness" being that of lines with fixed end-points.
 In the introductory passage quoted above, Bolza presented this family of existence
 theorems with the same terms that Hubert used, that is, in terms of whether or not

 some upper bound is actually attained (which was the gist of Weierstrass' criticism
 of Dirichlet and Riemann's proof method in potential theory); which means, neither
 Hubert nor Bolza described it as a family of problems "im grossen." It is possible

 that this feature struck Bolza a little later, when writing the index: Hubert's theorem

 was listed under "existence theorems," just after the "existence theorem Hm kleinen''9

 mentioned above; it probably seemed natural, at that point, to label Hubert's theorem

 "existence theorem 'im grossen'," since the two end-points are set from the start.
 In 1909, Bolza published the German edition of his American textbook. In this

 much more comprehensive work, "im kleinen" and "im grossen" are used more sys-

 tematically. When "im kleinen" appears for the first time in the book, it appears in

 quotation marks, indicating that the expression was being introduced as a neologism
 or a metaphor in the German (mathematical) language (Bolza 1909, p. 270); a few
 pages down, the quotation marks are gone (Bolza 1909, p. 294). New results appear,
 for which Bolza considered that "im kleinen"- Hm grossen" provides relevant descrip-
 tive means. In §34, Bolza presented theorems proved by Osgood (Osgood 1901b,
 p. 173); he called the first one "Der Fall eines Extremums Hm Großen"' (Bolza 1909,
 p. 280), and the other one "Der Fall des Extremums 'im Kleinen'" (Bolza 1 909, p. 283).
 Osgood, Bolza wrote, discovered that, in the calculus of variation, a property holds
 which is similar to the following property of elementary analysis: if a function/ of a
 real variable has a relative (i.e. local) minimum for x = a (value f(a) being reached

 in a only), and is continuous in [a - k, a + k], then for any / such that 0 <l <k there
 is a positive 6/ such that f(x) - f(a) > e, on [a - k, a - 1] and [a + /, a + k]. What
 Bolza called the "im grossen" theorem in the calculus of variation says that (skipping

 several hypotheses) if curve L is a simple extremal33 joining two points Pi, P2, then
 there is a neighbourhood34 S of L such that, for any neighbourhood U of L that is

 strictly contained in S, there is a positive sv such that for any curve L' which joins Pi

 and P2 in S but does not lie entirely in U, J'L - Jl > Z'j (Bolza 1909, p. 281). Upon
 first reading it, it is not striking what makes this an "im grossen" theorem. The fact

 32 See, for instance, Hubert 1900, 1901a.

 33 Following Kneser, Bolza called extremals the curves for which the first variation vanishes. Thus, they

 need not yield either a maximum or a minimum of the integral, even a relative one.

 34 In Bolza's textbook, the neighbourhood of a curve is just an ordinary neighbourhood in the plane, no
 conditions on the derivative are imposed.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 25

 that the theorems deals with extremals, which may be local mimina or maxima, is not

 what Bolza takes into account to label it "im grossen" ' as far as maxima and minima

 are concerned, Bolza consistently used the adjectives "relative" and "absolute," never

 "im kleinen'9 and "im grossen." What makes it an "im grossen" theorem is that it deals

 with extremals which have fixed end-points; by contrast, the "Fall des Extremums 'im

 Kleinen"' says that a similar conclusion holds for those extremals which are known to

 exist by an "im kleinen" existence theorem, i.e. extremals whose end-points, wherever

 they may be, are not too far apart (Bolza 1909, p. 283).

 The very same year, Gilbert Bliss served as AMS Colloquium lecturer in Princeton

 (Bliss 1913), the other lecturer being Kasner. Bliss' talks dealt with "Existence theo-

 rems," for implicit function problems and then for differential equations. The phrase

 "im kleinen" is used just once, in the introduction, to summarise the general goal of

 the last part of the exposition (§17 and fol.):

 One of the principal purposes of the paragraphs which follow, however, is to free

 the existence theorems as far as possible from the often inconvenient restriction
 which is implied by the words "in a neighborhood of," or which is so aptly
 expressed in German by the phrase "im Kleinen". (Bliss 1913, p. 3).

 We can find several other American hits for "im kleinen" or "im grossen" in our zero

 corpus, although slightly later and in research papers or dissertations rather than survey
 talks and textbooks. For instance, Earl Gordon Bill defended at Yale in 1908 a disserta-

 tion on An A Priori Existence Theorem for Three Dimensions in the Calculus of Varia-

 tions. At the AMS annual meeting of 1908, he gave two talks, the first one was entitled

 Existence "im Kleinen " of a curve which minimizes a definite integral, the summary of

 the second talk reads: "In the second paper, Dr. Bill proves the existence "im grossen",

 by a method whereby the minimising curve is obtained by applying the existence the-

 orem "im kleinen" to a "finite" number of points which are defined as limiting points
 of the points lying on a sequence of approximating curves" (Cole 1909, p. 285). The

 expressions were used by Bill himself, and not only by the secretary of the AMS who
 wrote the report (Frank Cole), as Bill's paper shows (Bill 1912). The terms are used
 exactly as in Bolza's textbook, and Bill refers to several papers of Osgood and Bliss.

 Finally, we should mention the case of Wallie Hurwitz's book's Randwertaufga-
 ben bei Systemen von Linearen Partiellen Differentialgleichungen erster Ordnung
 (Hurwitz 1910). The book is actually his dissertation, which this American, Harvard

 trained mathematician defended in Göttingen under the supervision of Hubert.35 The

 terms "im kleinen" and "im grossen" are used in the introduction only, where he
 presents the various types of PDE and classifies the existence theorems and proof
 methods:

 In the general study of linear partial differential equations, two types of prob-
 lems [Problemstellungen] are of particular import. In the initial value problem
 or Cauchy problem, one seeks to determine a solution by giving its values, and
 that of some of its derivatives, along a curve; there, all the functions that occur
 are supposed to be analytic in a small neighbourhood of the curve, and so are

 35 A biographical note is included at the end of the book.

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 the curve itself and the given values; and the solution sought will be analytic

 in a possibly even smaller neighbourhood: it is therefore perfectly described as

 an analytic problem im kleinen. In contrast, the boundary condition or Dirichlet

 problem requires of the given and sought for functions only continuity, and exis-

 tence and continuity of a limited number of derivatives; it prescribes the values

 on a complete curve given from the start, and seeks the solution in the whole

 given domain; the problem is a non-analytic problem im grossen. (Hurwitz 1910,

 26 R. Chorlay

 p. 7)36

 The theoretical context is quite far from that of Osgood's general function theory,

 but the meaning is of the "im kleinen!" -"im grossen" distinction is the same. In spite

 of the variety of contexts, a network of problems can clearly be identified which links

 most of the texts read so far: the Dirichlet problem is fundamental both for the theory

 of PDEs (as a paradigm for the theory of elliptic PDEs) and the general theory of
 functions (for Riemann-style theory of functions of a complex variable, and later, for
 Poincaré's uniformisation theorems); the calculus of variation depends on existence
 theorems for ODEs and PDEs; Hubert's new methods for variational problems deal

 with both line-integral problems (as in standard calculus of variations) and surface-

 integral problems (as in Dirichlet's problems); the latter context is that of Hurwitz's
 dissertation:

 In recent years, the investigations into equations of the second order, in the
 several cases which necessarily occur, have taken a unified shape through the

 methods of integral equations. (Hurwitz 1910, p. 8)37

 Hurwitz then wrote that he endeavoured to apply the new methods of integral equa-

 tions to the theory of first order PDEs, following the suggestion of his dissertation
 supervisor, namely Hubert. Only Kasner's collection of problems "im grossen" in

 differential geometry is not so clearly related to this network.

 3.3 The Göttingen connection

 Of course, the case of Hurwitz shows the extent to which the use of "im kleinen"

 and "im grossen" is more an AMS-Göttingen phenomenon than a strictly American

 36 „Bei Untersuchungen allgemeinen Charakters über lineare partielle Differentialgleichungen sind zwei
 Problemstellungen von besonderer Wichtigkeit. Die Anfangswertaufgabe oder das Cauchysche Problem
 versucht, eine Lösung durch Angabe ihrer Werte und der Werte gewisser Ableitungen auf einer Kurve zu
 bestimmen; dabei werden alle vorkommenden Funktionen in einer kleinen Nachbarschaft der Kurve, sowie

 die Kurve selbst und die vorgeschriebenen Werte in einer kleinen Nachbarschaft eines Punktes als analytisch

 vorausgesetzt; und die Lösung wird als analytische Funktion in einer eventuell noch kleinern Nachbarschaft

 gesucht: das Problem ist hervorragend als analytisches Problem im kleinen zu bezeichnen. Dagegen fordert
 die Randwertaufgabe oder das Dirichletsche Problem von den gegebenen und gesuchten Funktionen nur
 Stetigkeit und die Existenz und Stetigkeit einer geringen Anzahl von Ableitungen, schreibt die Werte auf
 einem ganzen vorgegebenen Kurvenstück vor, und sucht die Lösung in einem ganzen vorgegebenen Gebiet;
 das Problem ist ein nicht-analytisches Problem im großen."

 37 „In den letzten Jahren haben die Betrachtungen für Gleichungen zweiter Ordnung in den verschiedenen

 Fällen, welche notwendig vorkommen, durch die Methode der Integralgleichungen eine einheitliche Gestalt
 angenommen."

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 27

 phenomenon. As mentioned earlier, Osgood had studied in Göttingen and Erlangen
 and remained in close contact with the Göttingen people, as his involvement in the

 Encyclopädie shows. As for German Oskar Bolza, he trained in Berlin (attending
 Weierstrass' lectures on the calculus of variations in 1879) but did his dissertation
 under Klein's supervision; after 22 years in the states (1888-1910, in Chicago as
 from 1892), he would return to Germany in 1910. Kasner spent a postdoctoral year in

 Göttingen in 1899-1900. After a dissertation under Bolza's supervision, Bliss spent
 his post-doctoral year in Göttingen in 1902-1903. Wallie Hurwitz studied in Missouri

 then in Harvard; in the Lebenslauf dX the end of his dissertation, he thanked Harvard

 Professors Osgood and Bôcher for sending him to Göttingen for his doctoral work.

 The role of this German tour in the making of the first two generations of American

 mathematicians - in particular to Klein's and then Hubert's Göttingen - is well doc-

 umented by qualitative (Parshall and Rowe 1989, 1994) and quantitative (Fenster and
 Parshall 1994) reference works.

 When studying the use of "im kleinen" and "im grossen" the roles of the AMS and

 Göttingen are not symmetrical, however. Our zero corpus included the Mathematische
 Annalen as well as Klein's and Hubert's collected papers (and several other works,

 see Appendix A); we found no hits for these expressions in the collected papers, and
 none in the Mathematische Annalen before 1904. In the theory of PDEs, W. Hurwitz
 sorted the problems in terms of "im kleinen" -"im grossen" ' Hubert did not. In dif-

 ferential geometry, Kasner gathered several problems under the heading "differential
 geometry im grossen," problems which neither Hubert nor Hadamard had described
 in these meta terms (nor any of similar meaning). Hubert's theorems in the calcu-
 lus of variations were labelled "im grossen" by Bolza, not by Hubert. Within the
 still small American Mathematical Society (think of the 26 participants mentioned in

 the report of the 1898 meeting), Osgood's systematic use of these expressions had a

 strong impact. All the more since, being foreign terms, they could not go unnoticed by

 the American audience; as foreign expressions they immediately rang like technical
 terms rather than metaphors, and were used by other mathematicians with no varia-

 tions, hence with a greater stability than in the German-speaking context. In contrast,

 a native German speaker could find many ways to express the same thing.38 At least

 for early members, the AMS such as E.B. Van Vleck, "im kleinen" and "im grossen"
 were clearly identified as Osgood's pet expressions. In his presidential address to the

 society, in 1915, entitled The Rôle of Point-Set Theory in Geometry and Dynamics,
 we can read:

 I was much interested to find that one of my well-informed colleagues had
 thought of point-set theory as a tool especially adapted for use "im Kleinen" -

 to use a significant term of Osgood. To me, on the other hand, it had appealed
 because of its power "im Grossen." (...) I doubt not that much of the character-

 istic strength of the point-set theory lies precisely in the union of consideration
 im Kleinen and im Grossen. (Van Vleck 1915, p. 330)

 38 To give a chronologically much later example: in a letter to Weyl, Hasse spoke of "Schluß vom Kleinen
 aufs Große" (Schweriner 2007, p. 171).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 It will be noticed that the quotation marks disappear after the first occurrence of the
 terms.

 28 R. Chorlay

 It could be argued that Osgood started using in print expressions which were used

 only in informal talks in the Klein and Hubert circles. What our word-search based

 inquiry recorded could just be a minute shift of the threshold between what can be

 said and printed, and what can be said but not printed. The problem of documenting
 local oral traditions, or diagram-drawing practices, is well known in the history of
 science.39

 However, several pieces of information make it not so likely that what we cap-

 tured is a mere shift of threshold. The fact that Göttingen-trained Van Vleck identified
 these expressions as Osgood's and not Klein's is an indication already (Parshall and
 Rowe 1994, p. 213). In Göttingen, Osgood attended Klein's lecture and participated
 in Klein's seminar along with fellow American doctoral students H.W. Tyler, H.S.
 White, M.W. Haskell and H.D. Thompson; they even took turn writing down Klein's
 lectures, under the master's close supervision (Parshall and Rowe 1994, p. 209). As

 far as our core corpus shows, none but Osgood used "im kleinen"- Hm grossen."

 Another indication comes from a memory of Grace Chisholm Young,40 in a 1926
 review for L'Enseignement Mathématique. Discussing the validity of non-Euclidean
 geometry, she mentioned in passing: %..) comme s'exprimait Klein, im Kleinen ist
 jede Geometrie Euklidisch" (Young 1926, p. 326). It seems to be the only evidence
 of an oral use of "im kleinen" around Klein, but it is all the more interesting since the

 meaning differs significantly from that of Osgood's "im kleinen". It is not likely that

 Klein thought all (Riemannian) geometries were locally Euclidean; he more probably

 expressed the standard idea that they were infinitesimally Euclidean. This infinites-
 imal meaning of "im kleinen" corresponds to a few (actually two) hits in the core
 corpus, which are both connected to Klein's views on geometry. In a 1911 paper
 On the Analytical Basis of Non-Euclidean Geometry, William Henry Young wrote
 in the introduction: "Other writers have made the assumption that Euclidean Geom-

 etry holds in the smallest parts (im kleinen)" (Young 1911, p. 250). In Gino Fano's

 Encyclopädie 1907 chapter on Kontinuirliche Geometrische Gruppen, there is one hit.

 In the list of the most usual groups, Fano mentioned the group of conformai transfor-

 mations of the real plane; these transformations are defined as those which preserve

 angles; Fano then reformulated: "These transformations therefore behave im Kleinen,

 in the neighbourhood of a regular point, like conformai transformations" (Fano 1907,

 p. 343).41 These traditional descriptions in terms of "smallest parts" or the behaviour
 in the infinitely small (im unendlich Kleinen) are exactly what Osgood would not use
 in his modern, Weierstrass-style take on elementary analysis. Ironically, a few lines
 after his description of conformai plane transformations as similitudes im Kleinen,
 Fano referred his reader to Osgood's Encyclopädie chapter for the interpretation in
 terms of complex functions. In the passage the Lehrbuch where he discussed these

 39 For the Göttingen case, see Rowe (2004).

 40 Grace Chisholm got her PhD in Göttingen in 1895, under Klein's supervision. The Youngs (Grace
 married William Henry in 1896) visited Göttingen several times, and lived there from 1899 to 1908.

 41 „Diese Transformationen verhalten sich also im Kleinen, in der Umgebung regulärer Stellen, wie
 Ähnlichkeitstransformationen. "

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 29

 aspects, Osgood avoided all talk of "smallest parts" or "infinitesimal elements"; when

 discussing the differential properties of functions of two real variables he clearly dis-

 tinguished between the plane transformation associated to the function and the linear

 transformation (of the whole plane) associated to a point; their actions on curves (not

 infinitesimal lines) are compared, and tangency is the key notion (Osgood 1912, pp. 70

 & fol.). In these few texts in our core corpus where "im kleinen" was used merely as a

 new way to express the old, pre-Weiersrassian (and now seen as merely metaphorical)

 infinitesimal meaning, "im grossen" is not used; the opposite of infinitesimal is finite
 (which is usually only local).

 All the other hits have a clearly non-infinitesimal meaning and use "im kleinen" with

 the same non-metaphorical meaning as in Osgood's texts. For instance, the first system-

 atic use of both "im kleinen" and "im grossen" in a text written in the German42 context

 is Ludwig Schlesinger's 1905 paper in the Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathemati-
 ker-Vereinigung (JDM-V) entitled Über eine Darstellung des Systems der absoluten

 Geometrie (Schlesinger 1905). The paper contains a short exposition of the intrinsic
 Riemannian geometry of surfaces; after introducing as2 = Edp2 + IFápáq + Gdq2
 to measure the length line-elements, he remarked:

 As long as E, F, G are seen as defined only in a given neighbourhood of a point

 determined by the nature of the study, we have the geometry of M2 im kleinen. In

 contrast, if E, F, G are given for all values, or even for a domain of values of p

 and q which is limited by a priori given inequalities, then we have the geometry

 of M2 im grossen. To the latter belong in particular the extension relations and
 domains relations (Analysis situs). (Schlesinger 1905, pp. 562-563)43

 The distinction is nearly word for word that of Osgood's definitional footnote.

 Another element must be mentioned here, which is of Göttingen origin. A distinc-

 tion which clearly rings like "im kleinen"-Hm grossen" was repeatedly used by Felix

 Klein in his lectures on geometry. For instance, in his 1 892-1 893 introduction to higher

 geometry, the introductory part dealt with the notion of function. After presenting the

 two fundamental notions of (analytic) function, that of function element and that of

 Gesamtfunction derived from a function element by maximal analytic continuation,
 he presented the main division in the geometrical sciences:

 2. Main division of Geometry.

 Along these lines, we can also divide geometry itself in two different parts,
 namely: 1) Geometry in a limited portion of space, corresponding to the use
 of function elements only. 2) Geometry in the whole space [Gesamtraum], cor-
 responding to the use of whole functions [Gesamtfunktionen]. Nearly all the
 applications of diff. and integral calculus to Geometry belong in the first part.

 42 Hungarian/German, actually.

 43 „Solange die E^F.G nur als in einer durch die Natur der Untersuchung bestimmten Umgebung einer
 Stelle definiert angesehen werden, haben wir Geometrie der M2 im kleinen, sind dagegen die E,F,G für
 alle Werte oder doch für Wertgebiete der p,q, die durch a priori gegebene Ungleichheitsbedingungen bes-
 chränkt sind, gegeben, so haben wir Geometrie der M2 im großen. Der letzteren gehören namentlich die
 Ausdehnungs- und Gebietsverhältnisse (Analysis situs) an."

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 30 R. Chorlay

 (...) On the other hand, the theory of algebraic curves and surfaces belongs for

 its greater part in the second part. (Klein 1893, pp. Ó-7)44

 This distinction would remain unchanged through the various reprints [1907, 1926

 (with Blaschke)]. In terms of meaning, the connection between this distinction and

 Osgood's articulation is clear, in spite of the fact that Klein's distinction gets its precise

 meaning only in the realm of analytic functions, whereas Osgood's syntactic distinc-

 tion does not depend on analyticity. This closeness of meanings may account for the

 fact that, in his definitional footnote, Osgood noted that the "im kleinen" -"im grossen"

 distinction was relevant for analysis and geometry, in a context where no geometry
 would be touched upon.

 4 "im Kleinen" -"im Grossen" in Germany

 With Schlesinger, we have already left the American Mathematical Society. The AMS

 hits for "im kleinen" -"im grossen" showed stability in meaning through several dis-

 ciplinary contexts (general function theory, calculus of variations, differential geom-

 etry); they also showed a similar use of these expressions, a use which we called meta
 to stress the fact that it stands in direct connection with some specific primary con-

 tent: labelling theorems, associating theorems in pairs, grouping apparently unrelated

 theorems under one heading, spelling out the steps of a long proof, emphasising the

 scope of a theorem (and warning the reader against a common mistake). The German
 hits for "im kleinen" or "im grossen" in the core corpus come after the AMS hits, the

 meaning is the same as in Osgood, Bolza and Kasner (save for the few infinitesimal
 cases mentioned above), but, from a pragmatic viewpoint, they show a greater diver-

 sity of uses. We shall discuss three of these uses: introducing a new technical property

 by localisation; setting disciplinary boundaries; selecting axioms in the reshaping of

 a well-known theory.

 4.1 Definition by localisation

 In 1 9 1 3 , Hans Hahn gave a talk at the Versammlung deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte
 zu Wien, which was published as a paper in the 1914 volume of the JDM-V (Hahn
 1914). Dealing with point-set topology, it tackled the already well-known problem of
 characterisation of the subsets of the plane which are the image of a segment by a
 continuous function. Hahn started by mentioning three simple necessary conditions:

 if a Punktmenge M is a such image, then it is bounded {geschränkt), closed (abgesch-
 lossen) and connected [zusammenhängend, i.e. the set is not the disjoint union of two

 44 „2. Haupteinteilung der Geometric
 Entsprechend der entwickelten Auffassung können wir auch die Geometrie selbst, in zwei verschiedene
 Teile spalten, nämlich: 1) Geometrie im begrenzten Raumstück, entsprechend der Verwendung allein von
 Funktionselementen. 2) Geometrie im Gesamtraum, entsprechend der Verwendung von Gesamtfunktionen.

 Zu dem ersten Teile gehört fast die ganze Anwendung der Diff.- und Integralrechnung auf Geometrie. (...)
 Anderersteits gehört die Theorie der algebraischen Kurven und Flächen grösstenteils zu dem zweiten Teile"

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 31

 non-empty closed subsets (Hahn 1914, p. 318)]. He then proved that M also enjoys a

 fourth property, which he defined as follows:

 Let P be a point of M; to every positive number e corresponds a positive number

 x' such that, for any point P1 of M in the Ti-neighbourhood of P there is a closed
 and connected part of M containing both points P and P' , and lying entirely

 within the ¿-neighbourhood of P.

 (Hahn 1914, p. 3 19)45

 A set in which every point has this property, we shall call connected im kleinen.

 He then proved that these four conditions are also sufficient for any subset M of the

 plane to be the continuous image of a segment. This technical notion of local connec-
 tivity was soon taken up and used (under the names "Zusammenhang im kleinen" and

 "connectedness im kleinen") in point set topology, wherever these questions of Jordan

 continua were studied: by Mazurkiewicz, Sierpinski and Kuratovski in Poland; in the
 U.S. by R.L. Moore, J.L. Kline in the US, and, later, W.A. Wilson and G.T. Why-
 burn; by Tietze (in Vienna, then Erlangen). A citation network would show that these

 form a strongly connected network in a well-identified research field. Local connec-

 tivity would account for the greater part of the hits, where we investigate the use of
 "im kleinen" the 1914-1925 period. Since local connectivity is technically defined,
 and "Zusammenhang im kleinen" is a closed syntagm, we do not consider using this
 expression as way of performing a meta role in the mathematical text.

 Before introducing the notion of local connectivity, Hahn had used "im kleinen"

 several times in a context that is already familiar to us, that of the calculus of variations.

 He had written several works in that field, starting with his dissertation on the second

 variation of simple integrals (1902, supervised in Vienna by G. Ritter von Escherich).
 His use of "im kleinen" and "im grossen" followed Bolza's model, for instance, in

 his review for the JFM of a paper by Hadamard on the isoperimetric problem (1913);

 after his summary of Hadamard's proof: "Once the possibility of the Weierstrass con-
 struction im Kleinen has been demonstrated, the existence of the absolute extrémům

 im Grossen can be established by a well-known method." (Hahn 1913).46 It should be

 noted that his definition of "Zusammenhang im Kleinen" is not a simple localisation of

 the notion of connectivity (as in: every neighbourhood of point P contains a connected

 neighbourhood of P), but follows the two-neighbourhood pattern of Bolza's wording
 of Osgood's theorems in the calculus of variations. The many notions that would then

 be introduced in point-set topology would follow a more straightforward localisation

 45 „Sei P ein Punkt von M; zu jeder positiven Zahl e gehört dann eine positive Zahl tí derart, dass es zu
 jedem in der Umgebung x' von P liegenden Punkt P' von M einen die beiden Punkte P und PJ enthaltenden

 abgeschlossenen und zusammenhängenden Teil von M gibt, der ganz in der Umgebung e von P liegt.
 Eine Menge, die in jedem ihrer Punkte diese Eigenschaft hat, wollen wir zusammenhängend im kleinen
 nennen."

 "Nachdem so die Möglichkeit der Weierstraßschen Konstruktion im Kleinen dargetan ist, kann einer
 bekannten Methode die Existenz des absoluten Extrems im Großen dargetan werden." Same in (Hahn
 1912). The fact that for the "general isomeperimetric problem" (to minimise or maximise an integral, while
 another remains constant), the theorem "im Kleinen" may fail to hold had already been pointed out by
 Hadamard a few years earlier (1907); this was described using "im Kleinen" in Haussner's review for the
 JFM. (Haussner 1907).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 pattern, as for "Kompaktheit im Kleinen" (Alexandroff 1924) or "Konvexheit im Klei-
 nen" (Tietze 1928).

 4.2 "im Kleinen"- Hm Grossen" in the defence or creation of disciplinary
 boundaries

 32 R. Chorlay

 A quite different use of "im kleinen" -"im grossen" can be found a little earlier and in a

 completely different theoretical context. In 1908 Eduard Study published his Kritische

 Betrachtungen über Lies Invariantentheorie der endlichen kontinuirlichen Gruppen

 in the JDM-V (Study 1908). Starting from an erroneous statement that he spotted in
 Lie and Scheffers' Vorlesungen über Continuirmichen Gruppen mit geometrischen
 und anderen Anwendungen, Study presented a strongly worded but detailed analysis
 of what he considered to be a fundamental and systematic flaw in Lie's reasoning.

 For instance, Study argued, Lie systematically relies on the counting of constants
 (Konstantenabzählung); whenever he is faced with a system of parameters or a system

 of equations, he relies on dimensional arguments (counting arguments) to eliminate
 "dependent" parameters or equations47 (Study 1908 p. 130). His quest for a general

 treatment of all groups leads to a fundamental error (Grundirrtum):

 At this point, one should remember that in his general theory of finite continuous

 groups, Lie wanted to deduce the properties that are common to all of them. But,

 by the very nature of things, that could only be achieved by renouncing to grasp

 the whole space studied in each case, and, as a rule, by renouncing to take into

 account the totality of the transformations of a group. (Study 1908, p. 137)48

 As to the formation of invariants, when geometric objects are to be classified under

 the action of a given Lie group, Lie's theory may lead us astray. For instance, Study

 wrote, they cannot help us distinguish between the action of a continuous (i.e. con-

 nected) group such as that of direct isometries, and the action of a mixed group (i.e. with

 multiple connected components) such as the general group of isometries (Study 1908,
 p. 133). Likewise, when faced with multi- valued invariants, Lie usually arbitrarily
 chooses one branch and, for instance, passes from r2 = ra to r = r'; hence, Study
 went on, he mistakes sufficient equivalence conditions for necessary and sufficient

 conditions (Study 1908, p. 135). About halfway through his paper, Study summarised

 his manifold criticisms by saying that Lie's theory is a wonderful local theory, but that

 it is not likely that it is a tractable starting point when global results are sought for:

 47 For instance, the group of fractional linear transformations of the complex projective line (i.e. homog-
 raphies zf = (az + b)/(cz + d)) has three essential parameters, since (a, b, c, d) is determined up to an
 arbitrary (non null) factor. Hence, Lie chose to write these as zf = (z + b)/(cz + d). This looks like mere
 tidying up, and reflects the fact that the group is 3-dimensional indeed, but it implies (Study argues) that
 only a neighbourhood of the identity is taken into account.

 48 „Hier dürfte nun zunächst daran zu erinnern sein, daß Lie in seiner allgemeinen Theorie der endlichen

 kontinuirlichen Gruppen die Eigenschaften entwickeln wollte, die allen diesen gemeinsam sind. Das aber
 konnte der Natur der Sache nach durchaus nur dann erzielt werden, wenn gleichzeitig darauf Verzicht

 geleistet wurde, den ganzen jedesmal in Betracht kommenden Raum zu umfassen, und in der Regel auch
 darauf, die Gesamtheit der Transformationen einer Gruppe mitzunehmen."

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 33

 (. . .) wherever a complete theory of invariants for a specific group is to be devel-

 oped, Lie's invariants provide an essential component.

 But it is a quite different question, whether or not it is a tractable path to nec-

 essarily refer back to Lie's general theory; whether or not in concrete cases one

 will be able to proceed by starting from a theory of invariants "im kleinen," and

 then extend it to a theory of invariants "im grossen." (Study 1908, p. 138)49

 Lie's complete systems of local invariants may not be analytically continuable; even

 if they were building invariants through analytic continuation would probably lead to
 invariants that are multi-valued, hence nearly useless (Study 1908, p. 140). The paper

 ends on even harsher notes. Not only is Lie's theory valuable in its limited scope only,

 but, as a mathematician, Lie probably was not aware of these limitations:

 As a foreign necessity imposed from the outside, the indubitable theoretical

 insight he had that his concepts and theorems were valid only in limited domains

 never rooted itself properly in Lie's creative and intuitive mind. It was merely felt

 to be like tiresome fetters, to be dropped at the first occasion. As we mentioned,

 in the theory of invariants of the whole space, Lie never spoke of multi- valued

 invariants any differently than if they had been single- valued; and every drop-

 ping of redundant equations - an operation which, with due caution, is possible
 im kleinen - led, in completely different circumstances, to illicit applications.
 (Study 1908, p. 141)50

 The (excessive) drive for generality is not all there is to it. Study implied that Lie
 did not think correctly; if he did, still he wrote in the loose and unrigorous style of

 old times. Therefore, his writings cannot be trusted, and the whole theory is built on

 sand (Study 1908, p. 132). A crafty and experienced polemicist, Study played with

 quotation marks: the first time '7m kleinen" and '7m grossen" appear, they appear in

 quotation marks; these disappear afterwards. On the contrary, terms that are central to
 Lie's reasoning, such as "independent" (unabhängig; Study 1908, p. 131), "essential"
 (wesentlich; Study 1908, p. 134), or "invariants" (Study 1908, p. 134) are used with

 no quotation marks in the beginning of the text, then get some as Study explains why
 they should be viewed with suspicion.

 The meaning of '7m kleinen" and "im grossen" in this text is not new to us, even

 if Study's take on '7m grossen" is probably less specific than Osgood's syntactic

 49 „(. . .) wo immer eine vollständige Invariantentheorie einer speziellen Gruppe entwickelt werden wird,
 Lies Invarianten einen wesentlichen Bestandteil von ihr ausmachen werden.

 Eine ganz andere Frage aber ist es nun, ob der Weg gangbar ist, auf den Lies allgemeine Theorie notwendig
 verweist, ob es im konkreten Falle durchführbar sein wird, mit einer Invariantentheorie „im kleinen" zu

 beginnen, und diese dann zu einer Invariantentheorie „im großen" zu erweitern."

 50 „Die unzweifelhaft bei ihm vorhandene theoretische Einsicht, daß seine Begriffe und Theoreme nur in
 beschränkten Bereichen Geltung haben, hat als eine fremdartige von außen her aufgedrängte Forderung in
 Lies schaffensfrohem intuitivem Geiste wohl nie recht Wurzel gefaßt. Sie wurde wohl kaum anders denn
 als eine lästige Fessel empfunden, die bei erster Gelegenheit abgeschüttelt werden durfte. So hat, wie wir
 gesehen haben, Lie auch in der Theorie des Gesamtraumes von mehrwertigen Invarianten nicht anders
 geredet, als ob sie einwertig wären; und jenes Weglassen überzähliger Gleichungen besteht ebenfalls darin,
 daß eine im kleinen bei gehöriger Vorsicht mögliche Operation unter ganz anders gearteteten Verhältnissen
 eine nunmehr unerlaubte Anwendung findet."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 34 R. Chorlay

 characterisation and is more closely associated to the process of analytic continua-

 tion. Also, Osgood had already warned his readers against faulty reasoning where one

 seeks to establish global facts by using local theorems only. However, what we have
 here is a general analysis of traditional modes of reasoning (and writing) in which

 systematic mistakes are made, either in the name of generality (generic reasoning) or

 by appealing to a form of reasoning that would be specifically geometric (as opposed
 to rigorous analysis (Study 1908, pp. 131-132) and painstaking writing51).

 This particular text can be - and has been - studied in several contexts, be it the life-

 long difficult relationship between Study and his Master Klein (Hartwich 2005) or the

 long-term history of Lie groups theory (Hawkins 2000, Chorlay forthcoming, Chap.

 6). But Study chose to criticise Lie's theory of invariants not only because of his gen-

 eral dissatisfaction with a style of thinking and writing that was by no means specific
 to Klein and Lie, but because Lie and himself ploughed similar fields (classification

 of geometric objects) with similar tools (groups and invariants). The matters of rigour

 are only one side of the coin, the other being a question of disciplinary pre-eminence:

 Lie's attempts at developing a theory of invariants for algebraic curves and surfaces is

 doomed, Study argued; the right tools come from the algebraic theory of invariants, of

 which Study was a Master and which he would defend until his death (Hartwich 2005,

 Chap. 7). Now, is Study (1908) paper a turning-point in this history of two disciplines

 fighting for the same patch of mathematical territory? Did this emphasis on the purely
 "im kleinen" nature of Lie's theory lead its proponents to take up the challenge and

 articulate a new and "im grossen" research agenda?

 On the whole, we believe the answer to both questions is no. The fact that, due to

 the very tools on which it rests, Lie's theory is of local scope had been pointed out
 by Klein himself for quite some time; for instance, in he Evanston Colloquium talk
 (1893), Klein's second talk on Lie's theory started with:

 The distinction between analytic and algebraic functions, so important in pure

 analysis, also enters into the treatment of geometry.

 Analytic functions are those that can be represented by a power series, conver-

 gent within a certain region bounded by the so-called circle of convergence.
 Outside of this region the analytic function is not regarded as given a priori;
 its continuation into wider regions remains a matter of special investigation and

 may give very different results, according to the particular case considered. On
 the other hand, an algebraic function, w = Alg. (z), is supposed to be known for

 the whole complex plane, having a finite number of values for every value of z.

 Similarly, in geometry, we may confine our attention to a limited portion of an

 analytic curve or surface, as, for instance, in constructing the tangent, inves-
 tigating the curvature, etc.; or we may have to consider the whole extent of
 algebraic curves and surfaces in space. Almost the whole of the applications of
 the differential and integral calculus to geometry belongs to the former branch

 of geometry. (Klein 1894, p. 18)

 51 See Study's the letter to Engel quoted in (Hartwich 2005, p. 123).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 35

 A similar statement can be found in Fano's Encyclopädie chapter on Kontinuirliche

 geometrische Gruppen. Die Gruppentheorie als geometrisches Einteilungsprinzip'.

 The group-theoretic view of geometry also shed light on the true nature of "dif-

 ferential geometry," and showed that the latter is not the opposite of "protective

 geometry" or "algebraic geometry," but only that of the "geometry of the whole
 space" (IIIA B 4a, Fano No. 35); and that within both, one can identify an ele-
 mentary (or metric) viewpoint, a projective viewpoint, a birational viewpoint,
 etc. (Fano 1907, p. 297)52

 Likewise, Study's criticism was explicitly mentioned a few years later, in Cartan's
 version of Fano's article (for the French edition of the Encyclopädie):

 Lie's theory has the advantage of great generality; but, in addition to the drawback

 of requiring integrations, it has an even more serious one, of solving invariant

 problems solely from the viewpoint of analytic functions. Its results generally

 pertain to some domain about a point, and cannot, due to the very generality

 of the theory, be extended to the whole space. In particular, Lie's theory cannot

 replace the algebraic theory of invariants. (Cartan 1915, p. 1845)53

 It seems that between 1893 and 1915, the frontline did not move by an inch. Study's
 criticism did not lead the proponents of Lie's theory to engage in a new and global
 theory of Lie groups; that would happen in the 1920s, in a quite different context
 (Hawkins 2000; Chorlay 2009). For now, Klein and his allies opted for a truce, at least

 for the public eye: Lie's theory and the theory of algebraic invariants both have their

 merits; Lie's theory is local all right, let everyone do their thing; as to the charge about

 rigour, Engel acknowledged that, indeed, they should be more careful (Engel 1908).
 It should be noted, however, that neither Klein, Engel, Fano nor Cartan used "im

 kleinen"-"im grossen" or any similar expressions. Their description was in terms of
 "analytic" versus "algebraic," which was echoed in a distinction in terms of "part"
 versus "whole" (e.g. Gesamtraum), the "part" being the convergence disc of an ana-

 lytic function. The fact that "im kleinen" -Hm grossen" became part of Study's writing

 tools may not have had a direct impact on the history of Lie groups or on the frontline

 between the competing theories of differential and algebraic invariants; however, a

 quick look at another discipline - differential geometry - gives a different picture.
 Apart from the 1908 paper on Lie's invariants theory, Study occasionally used

 "im kleinen" and "im grossen" the meta way. For instance, in his 1905 paper enti-
 tled Kürzeste Wege im komplexen Gebiet, he endeavoured to lay the foundation of the

 52 "Die gruppentheoretische Auffassung der Geometrie hat auch das eigentliche Wesen der "Differential-
 geometrie" ans Licht gestellt und gezeigt, daß letztere kein Gegensatz zur "projektiven Geometrie" oder
 zur "algebraische Geometrie" ist, sondern nur zur "Geometrie des Gesamtraumes" (III A B 4a, Fano No.
 35), und daß man innerhalb beider eine elemenrare (oder metrische), eine projektive, eine birationale usw.
 Auffassung unterscheiden kann."

 53 «La théorie de S. Lie a l'avantage d'une très grande généralité; mais, outre l'inconvénient d'exiger des
 intégrations, elle en a un autre plus grave, c'est de ne résoudre les problèmes relatifs aux invariants que du
 point de vue des fonctions analytiques. Ses résultats ne se rapportent en général qu'à un certain domaine

 autour d'un point et ne peuvent pas, à cause de la généralité même de la théorie, être étendus à tout l'espace.
 En particulier, la théorie de S. Lie ne peut remplacer la théorie algébrique des invariants.»

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 36 R. Chorlay

 geometric theory of Hermitian forms (thanks to which a notion of distance between to

 points can be defined even in the complex context, hence the title). Among the many

 topics dealt with in the 60 page paper, he studied the groups of the properly discon-

 tinuous subgroups of the group of those linear transformations which preserve the

 Hermitian form. After describing the fundamental domain for a class of such groups,

 he pointed that it could be seen from two viewpoints: either as a bounded domain in
 «-dimensional complex projective space or when border points which are equivalent

 under the action of the group are identified, as an ideally closed figure: "It yields a new

 type of - as we might call it - quasi-Hermitian space, which "im kleinen" has the same

 properties as that of the space we considered, but shows very different connectivity

 properties (. . .)" (Study 1905, p. 367).54 Studying the applicability of those Hermitian

 spaces which generalise the ordinary non-Euclidean elliptic and hyperbolic spaces, he

 proved that: "As from n > 2, the elliptic and the hyperbolic (2n - 2)-dimensional her-

 mitian spaces cannot be, even im kleinen, either geodesically or conformally mapped
 one onto the other, or onto a manifold of constant curvature" (Study 1905, p. 371).55

 This occasional meta use would become a systematic use for one of Study's students,

 Wilhelm Blaschke. After a dissertation in Vienna, under the supervision of Wirtinger

 (1908), Blaschke went on a tour of his own, through Bonn (to work with Study), Pisa
 (for Bianchi) and Göttingen56; he became a Privatdozent at Study's side in Bonn, in

 1910, but quickly left for Greifswald (where he could work with Engel; see Reichardt

 1967). In the period from 1910 to 1916, Study and Blaschke often cited one another's

 work57 ; the second volume of Study's Vorlesungen über ausgewählte Gegenstände der

 Geometrie (part II: Konforme Abbildungen und einfach zusammenhängenden Berei-

 che', Study 1913) was written with Blaschke, who wrote the part on Koebe's proof.

 To say that "im kleinen'9- Hm grossen" had not been used very often differential

 geometry before 1913 is an understatement. That seems to be all the more surpris-

 ing since (as far as our core corpus shows) the first use of these expressions in that
 field - namely Kasner's - was very public. The only hits for these expressions in our

 core corpus, after Kasner and before Blaschke, are in Schlesinger's paper on the appli-
 cability of surfaces (quoted above) and in Mangoldt's Encyclopädie chapter entitled
 Die Begriffe "Linie" und Fläche" (Mangoldt 1907).58 In this 1906 text, Mangoldt
 mentioned in passing that the representation of a space curve by a pair of implicit
 equations quite often holds globally: "A similar representation as that im kleinen
 is often possible im grossen" (Mangoldt 1907, p. 138)59; Mangoldt also used "im

 54 „Es liefert dann eine weitere Art von - wie wir etwa sagen mögen, Quasi-Hermitschem - Räume, der

 "im kleinen" dieselben Eigenschaften hat, wie der von uns betrachtete, aber eine andere Art des Zusam-
 menhangs aufweist (...)"

 55 , ,Der elliptische und der hyperbolische (2n -2)-dimensionale Hermitsche Raum können, auch im kleinen,

 weder geodätisch noch konform aufeinander oder auf eine Mannigfaltigkeit konstanten Krümmungsmaßes
 abgebildet werden, sobald n > 2 ist"

 56 (Blaschke 1961, p. 148). In Göttingen, he worked with Koebe.

 57 For instance, in Study's Vorlesungen über ausgewählte Gegenstände der Geometrie (Study 1913,

 pp. 1 2 1-1 22). In the preface, Study also thanked Blaschke for his critical reading and for doing the drawings.

 58 It could be argued, of course, that Study's use of "im Kleinen" to study the local applicability of his
 hermitian hyperbolic and elliptic spaces should be counted as a hit in the field of differential geometry.

 59 "Eine ähnliche Darstellung wie im kleinen ist häufig auch im grossen zulässig"

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 37

 ganzen" to denote this "im grossen" analytic representation.60 On the whole, it seems

 that Kasner's use of "im grossen" to gather under one heading problems of seem-

 ingly unrelated natures did not have a direct impact on the way differential geometers

 viewed and described their field,61 nor did it serve as a research agenda. In contrast,
 Blaschke made a systematic use of "im kleinen" -"im grossen" turning Kasner's list
 of problems into a new-subfield of differential geometry. The first line of his 1913
 paper in the JDM-V Über isometrische Flächenpaare reads: "The following research

 is meant as preliminary work on the treatment of questions pertaining to the deforma-

 tion of surfaces im Großen" (Blaschke 1913, p. 155).62 Many such examples could
 be taken from Blaschke's work in this period.63 There is a swift shift from "Fragen

 im Grossen" (type of question) to "Differentialgeometrie im Grossen" (subdiscipline),

 for instance, in his 1916 book Kreis und Kugel (Blaschke 1916, p. vi)64, in which both

 applicability and isoperimetric problems are tackled. The general description of these
 problems which constitute that research field comes as no surprise: "While most of

 the theorems of differential geometry bear on a sufficiently restricted neighbourhood

 of an element of the geometric figure under study [footnote: in the following, we will

 assume knowledge of the basic notions of this differential geometry "im kleinen"], the

 propositions we will establish deal with the boundary curves and surfaces of convex
 domains and bodies in their whole extent." (Blaschke 1916, p. 113).65 Blaschke also
 stressed the novelty of this subfield, by remarking that Bianchi's textbook on differ-
 ential geometry (which he prized) was almost entirely devoted to local differential
 geometry (Blaschke 1916, p. 114). These views will be echoed in the 1920s in his
 textbooks on differential geometry, in the prestigious Grundleheren der mathematis-

 chen Wissenschaften series. For instance, the first two chapters of the second volume

 are entitled Ebene Kurven im Kleinen (Chap. I), and Ebene Kurven im Großen (Chap.
 II) (Blaschke 1923).

 60 It should be noted that, in this chapter, Mangoldt refers his reader Osgood's work quite often; usually
 for Osgood's papers in point-set topology (space-filling curves, proofs of the Jordan curve theorem, etc.),

 but also for his presentation of Weierstrass' analytisches Gebilde in his EncyclopMie chapter (Mangoldt
 1907, p. 132).

 61 This statement has but a heuristic value, since it is grounded on our word-search in the core corpus,

 and not in a study of differential geometry as a discipline in the 1900s, in terms of body of knowledge and
 image of knowledge (to use Leo Cony's terms), or in terms of network of practitioners, etc (Corry 1996).

 62 „Die vorliegende Untersuchung ist als eine Vorarbeit gedacht zur Behandlung von Fragen nach der
 Verbiegbarkeit der Flächen im Großen"

 63 For instance, in his 1915 JDM-V paper on Kreis und Kugel (Blaschke 1915, p. 203). Fragen der Differ-
 entialgeometrie im Grossen is the title of a talk he gave in December 1915 at the Berliner Mathematische
 Gesellschaß.

 64 In his review of this book for the JDM-V, Heinrich Liebmann wrote „(. . .) das reiche Schatzkästlein

 der in schüchternen und glänzenden Anfangen schon längst vorhandenen, aber abseits stehenden und wohl
 erst im Jahre 1905 von Kasner unter dem Namen "Geometrie im Großen" in das mathematische Stand-

 esamtsregister eingetragenen Sparte dem freudig überraschten Leser aufzuschließen." (Liebmann 1917,
 p. 123)

 „Whärend nämlich die meiste Lehrsatz der Differentialgeometrie sich auf eine genügend enge Nach-

 barschaft eines Elements des betrachteten geometrischen Gebildes beziehen [footnote: Wir werden im
 folgenden die Anfangsgründe dieser Differentialgeometrie "im kleinen" als bekannt voraussetzen], han-

 deln die Sätze, die hier aufgestellt werden sollen, von den Begrenzungskurven und Begrenzungsflächen
 konvexer Bereiche und konvexer Körper in ihrer ganzen Ausdehnung"

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 38 R. Chorlay

 4.3 "im Kleinen" -Hm Grossen" in the design of an axiomatic theory

 In 1912, H. Weyl wrote a critical review of N. Nielsen's Elemente der Funktionentheo-

 rie for the JDM-V. This author, Weyl wrote, derived everything from power series:

 This is naturally and innerly consistent, if one leaves out of the presentation Rie-

 mann's ideas, and even Weierstrass' principle of analytic continuation (which is

 objectively so closely connected to these ideas), and limits oneself to the behav-

 iour of functions "im kleinen" (that is, in the domain of validity of the underlying

 series, or the like.) (Weyl 1912, p. 97)66

 Unfortunately, Weyl deplored, Nielsen did not safely remain within the limits of the

 "im kleinen" part of the theory and touched on topics such as Cauchy's integral theo-

 rem,67 and the theory of algebraic functions:

 But unfortunately, the parts of the book where the two-dimensional domain as a
 whole come into play can hardly be called a success; the vagueness of its con-

 cept-formation [Begriffsbildung] and proof-devising [Beweisführung] (...) is in

 sharp contrast with the painstaking accuracy which prevails in nearly all the rest.

 (Weyl 1912, p. 97)68

 When he wrote this review, Weyl himself was busy lecturing on Die Idee der Rie-
 mannschen Fläche.

 Weyl's 1913 book is a landmark of mathematics and has been studied in several
 historical contexts: the history of complex function theory, the history of topology

 (general and algebraic), the history of the manifold concept,69 etc. Its striking fea-
 tures are well known: the choice of an axiomatic definition of the two structures

 involved (two-dimensional topological surface, complex-analytic structure on the lat-

 ter), instead of a standardised construction procedure; its endorsement of the Kleinian

 1882 Copernican revolution, according to which surfaces per se come first, and func-
 tions on these come second70; its vocal claim that the geometric-topological setting

 which Riemann had chosen for the theory of algebraic functions (and their integrals)

 66 „Es ist natürlich und innerlich konsequent, wenn dabei die Riemannschen Ideenbildungen, ja selbst das

 mit ihnen in engem sachlichen Zusammenhang stehende Weierstraßsche Princip der analytischen Forts-
 etzung von der Darstellung ausgeschlossen bleiben und die Betrachtungen sich auf das Verhalten der Funk-
 tionen "im Kleinen" (d.h. im jeweiligen Gültigkeitsbereich der zugrunde gelegten Reihenentwicklungen

 oder dgl.) beschränken."

 67 Which states that, in a simply connected domain of the complex plane, a meromorphic differential with
 no residues is the differential of a meromorphic function. (Weyl 1919, p. 56)

 68 „Leider aber sind gerade diese Abschnitte des Buches, wo das zweidimensionale Gebiet als Ganzes in
 Frage kommt, kaum als gelungen zu bezeichnen, und stechen in der Verschwommenheit ihrer Begriffsbil-
 dung und Beweisführung (...) merkwürdig ab gegen die im übrigen fast ausnahmslos herrschende peinliche
 Genauigkeit."

 69 See Scholz (1980, 1999).

 70 In the Neumann presentation of Riemann's theory, first came (multi-valued) functions on the complex
 plane, then came surfaces over the plane associated to functions, eventually functions (and integrals) on
 these surfaces.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 39

 is not doomed to a intuitive-but-hopelessly unrigorous hell, but can be made just as

 rigorous as its numerous competitors.71

 Weyl certainly did all these things - define, endorse, claim, etc. - but the questions

 of how he reached the goals he so vocally set for himself in the famous preface has to

 be accounted for. We feel it is necessary but not sufficient to say that he relied on recent

 works which showed how key parts of theory could be develop in a thoroughly rigor-

 ous manner: Brouwer's work on topology, Hubert's work on the Dirichlet principle,
 Koebe's work on uniformisation. These served as prime material indeed, but, again,

 knowing what Weyl selected as the right building blocks leaves the how question,
 to a large extent, unanswered. On the contrary, its makes it all the more challenging

 to describe what Weyl did that was new, since the novelty lies more in the general

 design of the book rather than in some new theorem, or in a new proof for a formerly

 loosely founded proposition. The architectural metaphor sounds right, for once: the
 building-blocks may have been borrowed from the Masters, still, the new layout or

 design has to be accounted for.

 What we called "design," Weyl more specifically described as Begriffsbildung and

 Beweisführung in his critical review of Nielsen. Weyl certainly aimed for rigour, but,

 as that review shows, his specific goal was to find the proper fundamental concepts
 {Begriffe) and proof schemes for the "im grossen" part of the theory; for the "im
 kleinen" part, power series are perfectly adequate. As we shall see, the "im kleinen"-

 "im grossen" articulation is not only useful to make specific sense of the too general

 epistemic value of rigour; it also sheds light on how the new layout was designed.

 Begriffsbildung and Beweisführung are indeed what sets Weyl's exposition of the

 geometric theory of algebraic functions apart from the standard cut-and-paste expo-
 sition. But quoting Weyl's axiomatic definitions of topological surfaces, complex
 analytic curves and covering spaces fails to show why these definitions were crafted,

 what made them right for a rigorous treatment of the global part of the theory. Actually,

 Weyl is perfectly explicit on this issue. After spelling out the axioms for a topological

 surface, he endeavoured to show that they meet the requirements he considered rele-

 vant: "Let us now briefly explain how, on the basis of the concept of neighbourhood,

 all notions pertaining to continuity can be transferred [übertragen] from the ordinary
 plane to any two-dimensional manifold" (Weyl 1919, p. 18).72 The notion that is

 implicitly defined by the axiom is that of Umgebung, and this local basis is enough for

 the standard notions of point set topology to be defined (condensation point, interior
 point, continuous curve, continuous map, etc.).73 Similar reasons are laid out in the

 paragraph that comes before the definition of the analytic structure:

 To claim that z and u are analytic functions on surface 0, it is essential that 0

 be given not only as a surface in the sense of Analysis situs. For, on a surface of

 71 Among which: the funktiontheoretisch theory of analytic configurations (Weierstrass style); the alge-
 braic-geometry-with-invariants theory of Gordan, Clebsch and Noether; the theory of function fields of

 transcendence degree one over some primary field (Dedekind- Weber, with no theory of Abelian integrals
 in that context, of course), etc. (Brill and Noether 1894).

 72 „Wir legen jetzt kurz dar, wie auf Grund des Begriffes der Umgebung alle Kontinuitätsbegriffe von der
 gewöhnliche Ebene auf beliebige zweidimensionale Mannigfaltigkeiten übertragen werden können."

 It is well known that this emphasis on local axioms only led Weyl to fail to include a separation axiom.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 40 R. Chorlay

 which only Analysis-situs properties are taken into account, one can indeed talk

 about continuous functions, but not about "continuously differentiate," "ana-

 lytic" (or even "entire rational") functions, or the like. In order to deal with
 analytic functions on a surface # just as in the plane, we must moreover (in
 addition to the definition of the surface) provide a stipulation [Erklärung] which

 will set the meaning of the expression "analytic function on the surface," in such

 as way that all propositions about analytic functions in the plane which are valid

 "im Kleinen" transfer to this more general concept. Here, propositions valid "im

 Kleinen" are those whose validity is claimed only for some neighbourhood of a

 point; some neighbourhood about the size of which no information is given by

 the proposition. With such a stipulation for the expression "analytic function on
 # ," the surface # becomes a Riemann surface. (Weyl 1919, p. 35, emphasis in

 original)74.

 In both the topological and analytic cases, the notion of Übertragung (transfer)
 is fundamental. The distinction between "im kleinen" and "im grossen" statements

 (definitions, properties, theorems) in the ordinary theory of complex functions is the

 basis on which the requirements that the general definition of Riemann surfaces has

 to meet can be spelled out: the axiomatic definition has to be such that (1) some state-

 ment concerning the newly defined objects can be said to be "im kleinen" (here, the

 topological structure is adequate), thus forming a core sub-class of all the syntactically
 correct statements within this axiomatic context, (2) the class of "im kleinen" valid

 statements75 has to be the same for all Riemann surfaces, i.e. it has to be the same76 as

 the well-known class of "im kleinen" statements for functions defined in the complex

 plane. Weyl put it again in the clearest of ways after the spelling out of the axioms77:

 74 „Für die Behauptung, daß z und u analytischen Funktionen auf der Fläche 0 sind, ist es wesentlich, das
 0 nicht bloß als eine Fläche im Sinne der Analysis situs gegeben ist. Denn auf einer Flächen, von der allein

 Analysis-situs Eigenschaften in Betracht gezogen werden, kann man wohl von stetigen Funktionen spre-
 chen, nicht aber von „stetige differentiierbaren", „analytischen" (oder gar „ganz rationalen") Funktionen

 oder dergl. Um auf einer Fläche # analytische Funktionentheorie in analoger Weise wie in der komplexen

 Ebene treiben zu können, muß vielmehr (außer der Definition der Fläche) eine Erklärung abgegeben sein,
 durch welche der Sinn des Ausdrucks „analytische Funktion auf der Fläche" so festgelegt wird, daß alle

 Sätze über analytischen Funktionen in der Ebene, die„im Kleinen" gültig sind, auf diesen allgemeineren

 Begriff übertragen. „Im Kleinen" gültige Sätze sind dabei solche, deren Richtigkeit immer nur für eine gew-
 isse Umgebung eines Punktes, über deren Größe der Satz selbst keine Auskunft gibt, behauptet wird. Durch
 eine solche Erklärung des Ausdrucks „analytische Funktion auf £* ' wird die Fläche # zur Riemannschen
 Fläche."

 75 "Valid" meaning "well defined" for definitions, and "true" for theorems.

 local maps.

 77 "Allgemeine Definition des Begriffs der Riemannschen Fläche. Liegt eine Fläche $ vor und ist außer-
 dem für jeden Punkt povon # und jede in irgend einer Umgebung von pQ vorhandene Funktion f(p) auf #
 Footnote 77 continued

 erklärt, wann f(p) um Punkte pQ regülar-analy tische heißen soll, so ist damit eine Riemannsche Fläche

 **# gegeben, als deren Punkte die Punkte von # betrachtet werden. Jene Erklärung aber muß den foldenden
 Bedingungen genügen: 1. Ist pQ irgend ein Punkt von #, so gibt es eine Funktion t(p), die nicht nur im

 Pq (woselbst sie den Wert 0 besitzt) sondern auch in allen Punkten p einer gewissen Umgebung von J>o
 auf $ regulär-analytisch und von dieser Umgebung ein umkehrbar-eindeutiges,-gebietsstetiges Bild in der

 komplexen ř -Ebene entwirft; eine solche Funktion heißt eine Ortsuniformisierende zu pQ. 2. Ist f(p) irgend

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 76 Of course, "sameness" here is not defined only syntactically, but in terms of set theoretic admissible

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 41

 Let us close this paragraph with a few general remarks on the idea of the Riemann

 surface. The fundamental idea which grounds its introduction is by no means

 restricted to complex function theory. A function of two real variables x, y is a

 function on the plane; but it is indeed just as legitimate to study functions on the

 sphere, on the torus or on a surface, as to study them on the plane. So long as one

 only cares about the behaviour of functions "im Kleinen" - and most of the prop-

 ositions of analysis bear on this - the notion of function of two real variables is

 generally adequate, since the neighbourhood of any point on a two-dimensional
 manifold can be represented by x, y (or x + iy). But as soon as one proceeds
 further and studies the behaviour of functions "im Grossen," the functions on

 the plane become an important but special case among many equally legitimate
 cases; Riemann and Klein have taught us not to limit ourselves to this special
 case. (Weyl 1910, p. 42)78

 Following these guiding principles or Grundgedanke, it is clear that the axioms

 should not impose any global constraints. Hence all the objects that are to be defined
 on the basis of these axioms should be defined by a syntactically local definition,
 even though they are defined on the whole surface: harmonic functions (Weyl 1919,

 p. 38), differentials (Weyl 1919, p. 55), covering space of a given surface (Weyl 1919,
 p.47).79

 The definitions of "integral functions" (Integralfunktionen) show an interesting

 variant. Weyl started from the notion of a "linear curve function" (lineare Kurven-
 funktion) which, to each smooth curve Y on the surface, associate a number F(Y) so
 that if the end point of Y is the starting point of Y', F(Y + Y') = F(Y) + F(Y). A
 such function is said to be homologous to 0 (denoted F ~ 0) if it vanishes on closed

 curves. But the important notion is defined through localisation: "We shall consider

 only these linear line functions which are everywhere "im Kleinen" ~ 0; these shall be

 Footnote 77 continued

 eine im Punkte pQ regulär-analytische Funktion und t (p) eine zu pQ gehörige Ortsuniformisierende, so gibt
 es stets eine Umgebung Uq von p0 in welcher /(p) sich als eine reguläre Potenzreihe in t(p)

 f(p) = ao +a't(p) + a2(t(p))2 + . . .

 darstellen läßt." (Weyl 1919, p. 36).

 78 „Wir schließen diesen Paragraphen mit einige allgemeinen Bemerkungen über die Idee der Riemanns-
 chen Fläche. Der Grundgedanke, der ihrer Einführung zugrunde liegt, ist keineswegs auf die komplexe
 Funktionentheorie beschränkt. Eine Funktion von zwei reellen Veränderlichen x , y ist eine Funktion in der
 Ebene; aber es ist gewiß ebenso berechtigt, Funktionen auf der Kugel, auf dem Torus oder überhaupt auf
 einer Fläche zu untersuchen als gerade in der Ebene. Solange man sich freilich nur um das Verhalten der

 Funktionen « im Kleinen » kümmert - und darauf beziehen sich die meisten Betrachtungen der Analysis
 -, ist der Begriff der Funktion von zwei reellen Veränderlichen allgemein genug, da sich die Umgebung
 eines jeden Punktes einer zweidimensionalen Mannigfaltigkeit durch x,y (oder x + iy) zur Darstellung
 bringen läßt. Sobald man aber zur Untersuchung des Verhaltens von Funktionen « im Großen » forts-
 chreitet, bilden die Funktionen in der Ebene einen wichtigen, aber speziellen Fall unter unendlichvielen
 andern gleichberechtigten; Riemann und Klein haben uns gelehrt, bei diesem speziellen Fall nicht stehen
 zu bleiben."

 79 We will use "covering space" for what Weyl called unlimited (unbegrenzt), and unramified (unver-
 zweigt) covering space (Überlagerungsfläche). Of course there is one non-local element in the definition,
 the unbegrenztheit (i.e. paths-lifting property), but it is definable in that context.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42 R. Chorlay

 called "integral functions"" (Weyl 1919, p. 68).80 One of the goals of the theory is to

 study the representation of these abstract "integral functions" by actual line integrals
 of harmonic differentials.

 One of the advantages of these axiomatic definitions is that only local properties

 are to be checked in order to prove that a newly defined object is a Riemann surface.

 This is how, nearly by virtue of their definitions alone, the universal covering (Weyl

 1919, p. 51) and the Überlagerung der lntegralfunktionenu (Weyl 1918, p. 74) are

 proved to exist. The Begriffsbildung leads to a smooth and elegant Beweisführung.

 5 Jacques Hadamard's "passage du local au général"

 The number of relevant hits for "im kleinen" and "im grosseri" in the period from 1890

 to 1918 was both small enough to allow for qualitative treatment (in terms of meaning

 and use), and large enough to ground the hypothesis that something specific happened

 there and then; something that was neither mere background noise, nor a misleading

 artefact emerging from clumsy sampling; something that could be studied historically.

 This is not so with "local" or "lokal." With less than 10 relevant hits for these in our

 zero corpus, we cannot claim to be clearly above noise level, and we cannot claim that

 any collective dynamics can be mapped out with any degree of confidence. This is why
 we will opt only for qualitative analysis, centring on the case of Jacques Hadamard:

 he is the only mathematician whom we could identify (using automatic and non-auto-
 matic means of inquiry) who began to use "local" in a coherent and systematic way
 that matured from 1898 to 1918. In this context, the hull of hits for "local" and "lokať

 can be used heuristically to suggest possible dynamics.

 Studying Hadamard's take on "local" will also help show the extent to which what

 we described in the previous paragraphs is specific: "im kleinen" and "im grossen"

 may have been used in several disciplinary contexts right from the start, and with a

 pretty stable meaning82; however, it was used by very few authors, and even fewer
 used these expressions more than once or twice, or in passing. Hadamard's case will
 show that, at the same period of time and within the same mathematical context, other

 mathematicians could come up with something quite different. As we will endeavour
 to show, Hadamard's notion of "passage du local au général" differs significantly

 from Osgood's "im kleinen"-"im grossen," even at the semantic level.

 In 1906, Hadamard used "local" in a context that is already familiar to us, namely

 that of inversion theorems (Hadamard 1906). Before the proof of the main theorem,

 this research paper contains a long introduction in which the very nature of the problem

 80 t*^ir betrachten nur solche lineare Kurvenfiinktionen, welche "im Kleinen" überall ~ 0 sind; diese

 mögen "Integralfunktionen" heißen".

 theory more visible.

 81 In the third edition (1955), Weyl chose to call it the class covering, to make the analogy with class field

 82 Save for a residual but persistent use of "im Kleinen" with an infinitesimal meaning (in mathematics,
 and without "im Grossen" as its counterpart). If we had included research papers in physics, we might have

 found this use to be prevailing.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 43

 is discussed in some detail. The questions seem pretty straightforward: given a system

 of equations (in the real domain)

 X' = fi(xi,X2,...,xn)
 X2 = f2(xi,x2,...,xn)

 Xn = fn(x',X2, . . . , Xn)

 can it be solved for any values (Xi, . . ., Xn) (question 1)? And, if so, does it have
 more than one solution (question 2)1 Hadamard first reminded his reader of the well-

 known necessary condition: if the functions involved are continuously differentiable,
 the Jacobian determinant must not vanish.

 Taken in the strict sense, this condition happens to be locally sufficient, which

 means that, a (a' , ai, . . ., an) being a point of en where determinant (2) is non-
 null, and A (Ai, A2, . . ., An) its image, a small enough sphere can be drawn

 around the latter point, so that any point inside it is the image of one and only
 one point neighbouring a.
 This condition has sometimes been assumed to be generally sufficient (...).
 (Hadamard 1906, p. 72)83

 After showing that this is downright false (for n > 1), Hadamard proved that the
 answer to both questions is yes, provided an extra condition is added to the effect that

 no infinite line drawn in the first Euclidean space en has a bounded image in En (i.e.

 the map is proper). No notion of covering is introduced; Hadamard just remarked at

 the end of the paper that the theorem does not hold as such for multiply connected
 surfaces such as a torus or an infinite cylinder (Hadamard 1906, p. 83). He also men-

 tioned the fact that calculus was not of the essence here, the key notion being that of

 local invertibility, which is perfectly adequate to state the problem (Hadamard 1906,
 p. 84).

 However familiar to us this context might be, it was not standard to use "localement"

 in this context and with this meaning in 1906. The word-search showed many hits that
 we counted as not relevant, but which must be mentioned here. As stressed earlier in

 the essay, "locar was of common use in scientific texts, for instance, in mathematical

 physics (refroidissement local, ébranlement local) or in geodesy. Of course, physical

 problems may be studied from a purely mathematical viewpoint or suggest classes of
 problems for the mathematician to tackle. This builds up a trading zone where words
 or expressions associated with the physical problem can pass on to purely mathe-
 matical contexts. An example is given by Burkhardťs chapter of the Encyclopädie,
 which deals with trigonometric series and integrals. When studying the asymptotic
 integral representation of the waves caused by an initial localised perturbation, he used

 «Cette condition prise au sens étroit est d'ailleurs suffisante localement, c'est-à-dire que, a
 (a',ci2,.. ., an) étant un point de en où le déterminant (2) n'est pas nul et A(Ai , A2. . ., An) son image,
 on peut, autour de ce dernier point, décrire une sphère assez petite pour qu'un point quelconque pris à son
 intérieur soit l'image d'un point et d'un seul voisin de a.

 On a quelquefois admis que la condition était suffisante d'une manière générale (. . .)»

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44 R. Chorlay

 the expression "lokalisierte Anfangstörung in einem elastischen Medium" (Burkhardt
 1914, p. 1286).

 As we saw earlier, the issue of local versus global invertibility was also one of

 the key examples for Osgood. The relationship between Hadamard's "locaF and the
 American "im Kleinen" is not easy to ascertain, however. Hadamard's work on the

 geodesies on a surface of negative curvature was one of the main instances oï" Geome-

 try im Grossen" according to Kasner.84 His results on the asymptotic behaviour of the

 function of a complex variable defined by a power series were dealt with by Osgood
 in his 1898 AMS Colloquium talks, and included in the 1901 Encyclopädie chapter.
 In the calculus of variations, his numerous contributions were widely known (and
 sometimes reviewed in terms of "im kleinen" and "im grossen" (Hahn 1913)). When

 lecturing on the calculus of variations, he referred his reader to what he considered to
 be the two standard textbooks in that field, namely Kneser's and Bolza's (Hadamard

 1910, p. viii); these lectures, as well as his research papers show that he was well
 aware of Osgood's theorems in that field. It seems unlikely that Hadamard was not
 aware of "im kleinen" "im grossen" being used by some (few but visible) mathema-

 ticians active in the many research fields to which he contributed prominently. He

 probably could have imported these expressions into the French mathematical com-
 munity (probably in a translated form) ... but he did not. A detailed analysis of his

 1910-1912 writings should show that he had a pretty different view of local and global.

 This view matured over time. In the 1 898 paper on the geodesies of surfaces of neg-

 ative curvature, the reflexive categories as well as the technical notions and research

 agenda are those that can be found in Poincaré's qualitative study of differential equa-

 tions (either in the early 1880s papers on curves defined by a differential equation or
 in the Méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste). In the final paragraph, Hadamard

 passed a short comment on the importance of Analysis situs:

 (. . .) once more, our conclusions highlight the fundamental role which Analy-

 sis situs plays in these questions. That it is absurd to study the integral curves
 drawn in a given domain without taking into account the very shape of this
 domain, that is a truth on which it seems unnecessary to dwell at length. How-

 ever, this truth remained unsuspected before Mr. Poincaré's works. (Hadamard

 1898, p. 77585)86

 Much more was said in 1909, in his inaugural lecture for the chair of analytical and
 celestial mechanics at the Collège de France. This lecture is entitled La géométrie
 de situation et son rôle en mathématiques, which testifies to the impact of Poincaré's

 84 We can also mention the fact that the Lectures on the Calculus of Variations he gave at Columbia

 University in the fall of 191 1 were proof-read by Kasner (Hadamard 1915).

 85 The page number refers to the Complete Works (Hadamard 1968).

 86 «(...) nos conclusions mettent en évidence, une fois de plus, le rôle fondamental que joue dans ces

 questions V Analysis situs. Qu'il soit absurde d'étudier des courbes intégrales tracées dans un domaine
 déterminé sans faire entrer en ligne de compte la forme même de ce domaine, c'est une vérité sur laquelle

 il peut sembler inutile d'insister longuement. Cette vérité est cependant restée insoupçonnée jusqu'aux
 travaux de M. Poincaré.»

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 45

 work on what constituted, at least for Hadamard, the contemporary agenda in celestial

 mechanics. In this inaugural lecture, Hadamard stressed the fact that, until recently,

 most mathematicians had been unaware of the fundamental role of Analysis situs (or

 "géométrie de situation"), whether in the theory of polyhedra, in inversion problems

 or in the theory of algebraic functions of one complex variable. Hadamard described
 this as a form of blindness,87 which either hindered the advancement of mathematics

 or led to false results. So far, this is basically what could be read in the 1898 paper on

 surfaces of negative curvature or in the 1906 inversion paper, and the emphasis on the

 eye-opening role of the works of Riemann and Poincaré comes as no surprise. To these
 classical elements, Hadamard added an analysis of the causes of this specific form

 of blindness. Hadamard argued that, in the history of mathematics, after the advent

 of Algebra in the sixteenth century, two new sciences prompted major development:
 analytic geometry and calculus ("le calcul intinitésimaV'' Hadamard 1909, p. 830).

 The wealth of result was so impressive that too little attention was paid to the fact that

 these tools, by their very nature, have powers of limited scope. In analytic geometry,

 coordinates usually cannot represent the whole space that is being investigated, as the

 cape of the sphere shows (Hadamard 1909, p. 821). As to calculus, its power lies in the

 fact that, in spite of the variety of objects (curves, for instance), their properties in
 the infinitely small are both simple and common to all of them (Hadamard 1909,
 p. 820). What is more: "(• • •) in many cases, one can derive from these infinitesi-

 mal properties those that the functions or curves at stake show in the finite domain"

 (Hadamard 1909, p. 820).88 However, "(• • •) the powerful tools which had prompted
 the great development of Analysis and Geometry since Descartes, Newton and Leibniz

 had, however, wonderful they may have been, a common weakness. The representa-
 tion of figures by numbers and their decomposition into infinitely small elements
 indeed shed a bright light on the problems which we may ask ourselves about these

 figures; they nevertheless hide an essential property" (Hadamard 1909, p. 822).89 In

 most cases, the conclusion at the finite level which calculus endeavours to reach only
 bear on small regions; not infinitely small, but small enough. To express this, Had-
 amard repeatedly used the metaphor of the geographical atlas, seen as a collection of
 maps/sheets:

 Now, we saw it a moment ago, problems which behave similarly when taken
 in a sufficiently small region of a domain may differ totally on the whole. That

 is to say, it does no suffice to study the different sheets of the map, it has to
 be complemented by that of the combination scheme, and there are several

 87 In a much later text (and in the different context), Hadamard would use the Greek word ablepsia to
 describe such a failure or inability to see (Hadamard 1954).

 «(...) on peut, dans beaucoup de cas, remonter de ces propriétés infinitésimales à celles que présentent

 les fonctions ou les courbes en question dans le domaine fini. »

 « Ainsi les puissants outils qui avaient donné à l'Analyse et à la Géométrie le grand développement

 qu'elles ont pris depuis Descartes, Newton et Leibnitz présentaient, si merveilleux qu'ils fussent, une même

 faiblesse. La représentation des figures par les nombres, leur décomposition en éléments infiniment petits
 éclairent assurément d'une vive lumière les problèmes que nous pouvons nous poser sur ces figures; elles
 en masquent néanmoins une propriété essentielle.»

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 such combinations which differ essentially one from the other. (Hadamard 1909,
 p. 820)90

 46 R. Chorlay

 The uniform treatment of all spaces at the infinitesimal level, or at the level of suf-
 ficiently small domains (for smooth manifold), blinds us to the fact that domains

 taken as a whole differ significantly. Partial domains - whether coordinated domains
 or domains over which calculus theorems prove some conclusion holds - have to be

 fitted together; functions have to be extended. The seeming uniformity vanishes, as in

 the case of the theory of curves defined by differential equation; as Poincaré's work
 showed us, there exists

 (...) a theory of curves defined by a differential equations on a surface of zero

 genus; another one - of which it is only a slight exaggeration to say it bears no
 relation to the first - on a surface of genus one; and so on. (Hadamard 1909,
 p. 826)91

 This 1909 overview of the role of analysis situs in contemporary mathematics would

 be the basis for a much more detailed work, namely the analysis of Poincaré's mathe-
 matical work, which Hadamard wrote as a tribute on the occasion of Poincaré's death,

 in 1912. The tribute issue of Acta Mathematica was ready for publication in 1915, but

 was actually published after the war (in 1921).

 The main theme or leitmotiv is introduced right from the start. Hadamard quoted

 Poincaré's comment to the effect that "There are no longer problems which have been

 solved and others which haven't, there are only problems which have been more or
 less solved" (Hadamard 1921, p. 204)92:

 In this regard, one may say that a first solution is reached in most cases - and
 this achievement, sketched out by Newton, is mainly ascribable to Cauchy and

 Weierstrass: from the relationship between infinitely neighbouring states we can

 infer something significantly different, namely, knowledge of all the states which

 are sufficiently neighbouring to a given state. (...) At any rate, these first results,
 even if we do not have to content ourselves with them, serve as compulsory

 intermediate steps on the way to better ones, so that, almost everywhere, the
 walk of contemporary mathematical sciences consists of two steps:

 90 «Or, nous l'avons vu tout à l'heure, des problèmes qui se comportent de la même façon si on les prend

 dans une région suffisamment petite d'un domaine, peuvent différer totalement dans l'ensemble. Autrement

 dit, il ne suffit pas d'avoir fait l'étude des différentes feuilles de la carte, mais il faut la compléter par celle
 du tableau d'assemblage, et il y a plusieurs sortes de tableaux d'assemblages, essentiellement différents
 entre eux. »

 91 «(...) une théorie des courbes définies par une équation différentielle sur une surface de genre zéro;
 une autre - dont il est à peine exagéré de dire qu'elle est sans rapport avec la première - sur une surface de

 genre un; et ainsi de suite. »

 92 «II n'y a plus des problèmes résolus et d'autres qui ne le sont pas, il y a seulement des problèmes plus
 ou moins résolus. »

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 47

 The local solution of problems;

 kind of synthesis is possible.
 (Hadamardl921,p.2O5)93

 The passage from this solution to a whole solution [solution d'ensemble], if this

 The central element is spelled out slightly more clearly than in 1909 and consists

 in what we will call a two-stage scheme: to pass from the infinitesimal to the local (the

 right tool being calculus), then, to fit together local solutions to reach a conclusion
 about the whole space (this is where analysis situs enters the stage); this two-stage
 dynamic scheme relies on the identification of three levels at which mathematical

 objects can be studied: infinitesimal, local (partial but finite) and whole (for lack of a
 better word in Hadamard).

 A quick comparison with "im kleinen"-"im grossen" already points to do differ-
 ences. First, there is no stable word to say what "im grossen9' says in German (and in
 English!). In sharp contrast to "local," which is perfectly stable in Hadamard's text,
 various counterparts are used: we saw "solution d'ensemble" and "synthèse" (the clas-

 sical counterpart of analysis) ; "propriété [des fonctions] dans tout leur domaine d 'exis-
 tence" (Hadamard 1921, p. 230), and "passage du local au generar (Hadamard 1921,

 p. 247) can also be found. Further, "général' was the standard counterpart of "locaF in

 the medical sciences, as a quick search in the Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sci-
 ences de Paris suggests: "accident local ou generar (in 1847), "moyen anesthésique,
 soit générale, soit locale" (in 1868), "traitement général (. . .) traitement local (1876),

 "développement général ou local des muscles" ( 1 909), etc. As mentioned earlier, there
 was still no standard and stable counterpart for "local" in the French mathematical
 vocabulary in the 1930s.

 A second element of comparison is even more striking. For Osgood, the property of

 being "im kleinen" or "im grossen" was a definable, syntactic property of mathemati-

 cal statements (definitions or propositions). In 1912, Hadamard did not come up with

 syntactic criteria to classify statements; rather, he discussed the nature of problems

 and tactics for solving them. These may not be amenable to syntactic study; writing
 down exactly what the problem or the strategy is constitutes, more often than not,

 a problem of its own! Moreover, the true nature of a problem or the real scope of a

 technique is not something can be read off a statement of that problem or tactic: it has

 to be discovered through painstaking work; hints as to this true nature are gathered in

 time; new insights may lead to a complete change of view. For instance, commenting
 on Poincaré's study on the divergent developments of irregular solutions of linear
 differential equations, Hadamard wrote:

 In one respect, - the investigation of the limit of the logarithmic derivative of the

 solution - the method used is closely related to those which we will meet again

 93 «On peut dire à ce point de vue qu'une première solution est acquise dans la plupart des cas, - et cette
 conquête, ébauchée dès Newton, est surtout l'œuvre de Cauchy et de Weierstrass: - des relations entre

 états infiniment voisins, on sait déduire, ce qui est fort différent, la connaissance de tous les états suffisam-
 ment voisins d'un état donné. (...) Quoi qu'il en soit, ces premiers résultats, même si l'on est pas réduit à
 s'en contenter servent tout au moins d'intermédiaires obligés pour en obtenir de meilleurs, de sorte que,
 presque partout, la marche de la science mathématique actuelle comporte deux étapes: La solution locale
 des problèmes; Le passage de celle-ci à une solution d'ensemble, si cette sorte de synthèse est possible. »

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 48 R. Chorlay

 later, not in the local but in the general study of the problem of differential equa-

 tions; and the true reason for the great difficulty of this question - which would

 deserve so much more research work - lies in the fact that it is only seemingly
 "local." (Hadamard 1921, p. 237)94

 Another striking example can be taken from Hadamard's comments on Poincaré's

 qualitative study of curves defined by differential equations, more precisely on the

 study of curves in the neighbourhood of a closed (periodic) solution:

 One can immediately see that such a question straddles the two viewpoints

 around which the whole theory of differential equations revolves; and combines

 the advantages of both. Well within the scope of the same procedures which apply

 in the local domain, it however lies from the outset beyond this domain, since

 the new trajectories run by no means in the neighbourhood of a unique point,
 and are studied on courses just as extended as the primitive periodic solution
 itself. (Hadamard 1921, p. 249)95

 Neither strategies that straddle two viewpoints nor problems that are only seemingly

 of a local nature fit in Osgood's "im kleinen"-"im grossen" syntactic framework.

 Even though the two-stage scheme applies to nearly all mathematics, Hadamard

 argued many other types of problems and many other tactics also play a significant

 part. For instance, as far as ordinary differential equations are concerned, Hadamard
 listed five classical (i.e. non-qualitative) contemporary research lines (Hadamard 1 92 1 ,

 p. 236). What is more surprising is that many problems or results that we, and Osgood,

 would call "im grossen" are not described by Hadamard in terms of "generar or "de

 synthèse." We need to quote in full the introductory passage to the third and last part
 of Hadamard's text, devoted to Poincaré's work and problems of partial differential

 equations:

 natures.

 The difficulties which they display can, depending on cases, be of very different

 It can be that they resemble, with a difference of degree, the difficulties displayed

 by differential equations, so that, from a theoretical viewpoint, the solution can
 be seen as locally given by Cauchy's method, even if, in a second stage of the
 work, the various elements of solution thus obtained have to be synthesized.

 This is what happens - assuming the equation has been introduced for the study

 of some physical phenomenon - when the latter freely evolves in unlimited space

 94 « Sur un point, - la recherche de la limite vers laquelle tend la dérivée logarithmique de la solution - la
 méthode employée se rapproche beaucoup de celles que nous retrouverons plus loin à propos de l'étude,
 non plus locale, mais générale du problème des équations différentielles; et dans le fait que la question
 dont nous parlons en ce moment n'est «locale » qu'en apparence réside sans doute la véritable raison des
 grandes difficultés de cette question qui mériterait encore tant de nouvelles recherches. »

 95 « On voit immédiatement qu'une telle question est à cheval sur les deux points de vue entre lesquels

 pivote toute la théorie des équations différentielles; et cela en combinant les avantages de toutes deux.
 Accessible aux mêmes procédés qui s'appliquent au domaine local, elle est d'emblée cependant en dehors
 de ce domaine, puisque les nouvelles trajectoires obtenues n'évoluent nullement au voisinage d'un point
 unique et sont étudiées sur des parcours aussi étendus que la solution périodique primitive elle-même. »

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 49

 and where, consequently, to define its evolution, it is sufficient to give initial con-

 ditions, that is, its state at a given moment in time.

 But if the phenomenon is set in some enclosed area - so that, to finish defining
 it, one has to write down a system of boundary conditions expressing the part

 played by the wall - an altogether new kind of difficulty occurs.

 It remains true that, in the neighbourhood of any point, the solution can most of

 the time be represented by series development of the same type as in the pre-

 vious problems. But in this case, none of these elements of solution - not even

 the first one, as happens for ordinary differential equations - can be determined
 in isolation: knowledge of any one of them is inseparable from that of all of

 them. This is a reversal of the principle which, in all other circumstances, guides

 the walk of integral calculus: split the problem into a local problem and a syn-
 thesis problem. Here, such a division is radically impossible. (Hadamard 1921,
 pp. 278-279)96

 In his endeavour to shed light on this motley of problems and partial solutions that
 mathematics is, Hadamard chose to draw a clear-cut line; not one between ODEs and

 PDEs, but one with ODEs and non-elliptic PDEs on the one side, and elliptic PDEs
 on the other side. Both ODEs and non-elliptic PDEs fit the two-stage scheme, since
 global solutions can be reached by patching together local solutions (hopefully); on
 the other hand, elliptic problems - such as the Dirichlet problem - are of a completely

 different nature, and call for a completely different proof strategy. As far as these are
 concerned, Hadamard was not only commenting on Poincaré's work. Of course, he
 presented Poincaré's "méthode de balayage? but added:

 But, whereas the sweeping-out method itself relates to former works devoted

 to the Dirichlet problem, this theory was soon afterwards to enter a completely

 new phase, and undergo a deep revolution whose usefulness is also highlighted

 by the preceding remarks.
 Its principle consists in replacing the partial differential equation, as well as
 the other conditions which the unknown function should meet, by an integral

 96 « Les difficultés que ceux-ci présentent peuvent être, suivant les cas, de nature très différente.
 Il peut arriver qu'elles ressemblent, avec des différences de degré, à ce qu'elles sont pour les équations
 différentielles, de sorte que la solution puisse être considérée, au point de vue théorique, comme fournie
 localement par les méthodes de Cauchy, quitte, dans une seconde partie du travail, à faire la synthèse des

 différents éléments de solution ainsi obtenus. C'est ce qui se passe - l'équation étant supposée introduite
 par l'étude d'un phénomène physique - lorsque celui-ci se déroule librement dans l'espace illimité et où,
 par conséquent, et pour définir son évolution, il suffit de se donner les conditions initiales, c'est-à-dire son
 état à un instant déterminé.

 Mais si le phénomène a pour théâtre une enceinte limitée par des parois - de sorte que pour achever de
 le définir, il faut écrire un système de conditions aux limites, exprimant le rôle joué par les parois en
 question, - une difficulté d'un tout autre ordre apparaît. Il est encore vrai que, au voisinage d'un point
 quelconque, la solution est le plus souvent représentable par des développements en série du même type
 que dans les problèmes précédents. Mais cette fois, aucun de ces éléments de solution, - non pas même le
 premier, comme il arrivait pour les équations différentielles ordinaires - ne peut être déterminé isolément:
 la connaissance de chacun d'eux est inséparable de celle de tous les autres.
 C'est ce renversement du principe même qui, en toutes les autres circonstances, guide la marche du calcul
 intégral: la division de la difficulté en une difficulté locale et une difficulté de synthèse. Une telle division
 est ici radicalement impossible."

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 50 R. Chorlay

 equation. Instead of writing the unknown under the derivative sign, it is made to

 appear under the integral sign. (Hadamard 1921, p. 279)97

 This new phase in the development of the theory of elliptic PDEs is closer to Hadam-

 ard's own research agenda (on integral equations and the emerging functional analysis)
 than to Poincaré's work.98

 Hence, mathematical problems that would lead to typical "im grossen" statements -

 where Osgood's syntactic criterion to be used - fall into two distinct categories accord-

 ing to Hadamard: problems for which "passage du local au generar is the right method

 and problems for which it is altogether irrelevant. Hadamard coined no specific words

 or expressions for the latter; he occasionally referred to them as synthesis problems
 as well (Hadamard 1921, p. 279).

 This may account for the fact that many of Poincaré's results that were already

 considered as standard "im grossen" results are not described by Hadamard in terms

 of "passage du local au général" For instance, the issue of uniformisation of analytic
 functions was described in terms of "im grossen" and "im kleinen" by Osgood as

 from 1898; the description was the same, nearly word for word, in Weyl's Idee der
 Riemannschen Fläche, and his notion of universal covering owed much to Poincaré's

 work. When Hadamard presented this part of Poincaré's work, neither the two stage-

 scheme nor analysis situs were even mentioned; he simply emphasised the connection

 with potential theory.

 The idea that, in 1912, the passage from local solutions to "solutions ď ensembles"

 has become a pressing task in almost all branches of mathematics (Hadamard 1921,
 p. 205) was not widely expressed; that is an understatement. Nor was the idea that
 Poincaré was the Master of this type of synthesis, and that the two-stage scheme is

 the key (or one of the two keys) to a deep and unified understanding of his many
 mathematical achievements. Actually, this had not struck Poincaré himself! In his

 own analysis of his mathematical work - written in 1901 but published in the tribute
 issue of Acta Mathematica - no such idea is expressed (Poincaré 1921). This theme

 of the passage from the local to the global (or the general, or regarding space as a
 whole, etc.) is not mentioned either in Poincaré's 1908 survey talk at the International

 Congress of Mathematicians, bearing on the future of mathematics (Poincaré 1909).
 To the best of our knowledge, Poincaré used "local" once in a technical context, that
 of the classification of the conformai classes of bounded domains in C2; he split the

 problem into three subproblems: a "problème locar (local conformai mapping of a

 97 « Mais alors que la méthode du balayage elle-même se rattache aux autres travaux antérieurs consacrés
 à la théorie du problème de Dirichlet, cette théorie devait peu après entrer dans une phase toute nouvelle et
 subir une révolution profonde dont l'utilité ressort, elle aussi, des remarques précédentes.
 Son principe consiste à remplacer l'équation aux dérivées partielles, ainsi que les autres conditions aux-
 quelles doit satisfaire la fonction inconnue, par une équation intégrale. Au lieu de faire figurer l'inconnue
 sous des signes de dérivation, on la fait apparaître sous un signe d'intégration. »

 98 Consequently, Hadamard had to justify his excursus on the blooming theory of integral equations by

 arguing that (1) "les manifestations les plus importantes, les plus inattendues de l'esprit humain, sont le
 produit non seulement du cerveau de leur auteur, mais de toute l'époque qui les a vu naître," (2) "notre épo-
 que, au point de vue mathématique, c'est avant tout Poincaré," therefore (3) "son œuvre a été une condition
 indispensable à la naissance de la nouvelle méthode"(Hadamard 1921, p. 280).

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 51

 piece of the boundary), a "problème étendu" (Poincaré 1907, p. 244) and a "mixed

 problem [problème mixte], because it stands halfway, so to speak, between the local

 problem and the extended problem"99 (conformai mapping in a neighbourhood of the
 whole boundary; Poincaré 1907, p. 264).100

 Among the very, very few relevant hits for "local" in our zero corpus, two fall within

 the milieu of young French analysts who published in the Borei series. In the introduc-

 tion to his Leçons sur les fonctions définies par les équations différentielles du premier

 ordre, professées au Collège de France (Boutroux 1908), Pierre Boutroux drew a par-

 allel between the historical development of the general theory of (analytic) functions

 and that of the theory of ordinary differential equations of the first degree. According

 to him, until recently, both theories only dealt with "études locales" (Boutroux 1908,
 p. 2) and dared not go beyond the "point de vue locaF (Boutroux 1908, p. 4). Fortu-
 nately, Boutroux argued, recent developments have shown us how to go beyond; in
 particular: "M. Painlevé has abandoned Cauchy's local viewpoint" (Boutroux 1908,
 p. 5).101 Similar views are expressed in Ludovic Zoretti's Leçons sur le prolongement
 analytique professées au Collège de France, taught in 1908-1909, and published in

 191 1 in the Borei series (Zoretti 1911). Zoretti distinguished between "le point de vue
 de Cauchy, ou locar and "le point de vue de Weierstrass ou generar (Zoretti 1911,

 p. 96), and took up Weierstrass' notion of analytic configuration. There was no hit for
 "local" in Borel's texts included in our zero corpus (five monographs and numerous

 research papers) nor in Painlevé's texts (two monographs and several research papers).

 The use of "generaras the counterpart of "local? and the fact that both lectures were

 given at the Collège de France (where Hadamard taught) suggest possible connections
 with Hadamard.

 Hadamard actively promoted the "passage du local au generar as a research pro-
 gram, as is exemplified by the question for the 1916 Grand Prix de Mathématiques of
 the French Academy of Sciences:

 The iteration of a substitution in one or several variables, that is, the construc-

 tion of a system of successive points Pi , P2, . . ., Pn , . . ., every one of which is

 deduced from the previous one by a same given operation:

 P,, = <p(P„-i) (h = 1,2,...,oo)

 (cp depending rationally, for instance, of point Pn-i), and whose first term Po
 is also given, plays a part in several classical theories, and in some of the most
 celebrated memoirs of Poincaré.

 Until now, the well-known works dedicated to this study deal with the "local"
 viewpoint.

 99 «problème mixte, parce qu'il tient pour ainsi dire le milieu entre le problème local et le problème
 étendu.»

 100 As mentioned earlier, a similar splitting of the problem could be found, in the much more elementary
 context of functions of one complex variable, in Osgood's Lehrbuch (Osgood 1912, p. 669). The first part
 of the problem would be taken up by Kasner, for instance, in his paper Conformai Classification of Analytic
 Arcs or Elements: Poincaré's Local Problem of Conformai Geometry (Kasner 1915).

 101 «M. Painlevé abandonne le point de vue local de Cauchy.»

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 52 R. Chorlay

 The Academy believes it would be valuable to move on from this to the exami-

 nation of the whole domain of values which the variables may take on. (CRAS
 vol. 163, 1916, pp. 91 1-912)102

 The prize went to Gaston Julia (with a second prize for Samuel Lattes). There is no
 definite proof that the question was suggested by Hadamard, who had been elected
 to the Academy after Poincaré's demise. However, the direct connections between
 this question and both his and Poincaré's works on dynamical systems (Poincaré's

 section), and the fact that he was a member of the commission for that prize103 back

 up this hypothesis.104

 In spite of the patchy data, it seems that, in the 1900s, some degree of dissatisfaction

 with more traditional works in analysis (that were viewed as merely local) was voiced

 by several - but very few - French mathematicians using the word "local." In this
 context, Jacques Hadamard clearly stands out, both for his personal research which

 features several global results in several branches of mathematics, and for his highly

 articulate analysis of the state of contemporary mathematics, written on the occasion

 of Poincaré's death. As a leading member of the Société Mathématique de France, then

 as a member of the Academy of Sciences, he seems to have promoted the "passage du

 local au generar as a research agenda, though in very specific theoretical contexts.

 In spite of Hadamard's involvement within the international mathematical commu-

 nity - in the general theory of analytic functions, in functional analysis, in the theory of

 integral equations - this development seems to have been quite autonomous from what
 we studied earlier with "im kleinen"- Hm grossed From a semantic viewpoint, we saw

 that the conceptual framework expounded by Hadamard in 1912 differs significantly

 from Osgood's. Another indication is given by the translation into French of Osgood's

 Encyclopädie article.105 In the French version of Osgood's definitional footnote,106

 102 « L'itération d'une substitution à une ou plusieurs variables, c'est-à-dire la construction d'un système de

 points successifs Pi , P2 , . . . , Pn , . . . , dont chacun se déduit du précédent par une même opération donnée:

 Pn = (p(Pn_i) (n = 1, 2, . . . , 00) (cp dépendant rationnellement, par exemple, du point Pn_i), et dont le
 premier terme Po est également donné, intervient dans plusieurs théories classiques et dans quelques uns des
 plus célèbres mémoires de Poincaré. Jusqu'ici les travaux bien connus consacrés à cette étude concernent
 le point de vue "local."
 L'Académie estime qu'il y aurait intérêt à passer de là à l'examen du domaine entier des valeurs que peuvent

 prendre les variables. »

 103 Along with Jordan, Appell, Painlevé, Boussinesq, Lecornu, Picard and Humbert.

 104 Michèle Audin reached similar conclusions, in her recent book on this prize question and subsequent

 developments (Audin 2009). The very wording is the same as Hadamard's: « L'Académie avait mis au con-
 cours l'étude de l'itération d'une substitution, en rappelant que le point de vue local avait seul été considéré

 jusqu'alors et invitant les concurrents à se placer au point de vue général» (CRAS vol. 176, 1918, p. 81 1).

 105 See Gispert (2001).

 106 « [note 22] Les notions d'allure locale d'une fonction et d'allure d'une fonction dans tout un domaine,

 qui s'opposent, jouent en analyse un rôle important, et s'étendent à tous les domaines des mathématiques
 dans lesquels les éléments considérés appartiennent à un ensemble parfait, notamment en géométrie et
 en mécanique. Dans la théorie des fonctions, on entend par allure locale d'une fonction l'allure de cette
 fonction au voisinage d'un point fixe a de coordonnées (a', a2»---»an) ou d'un ensemble de points P [no.

 40] , et pour abréger, on dit simplement l' allure de la fonction au point a ou au point (a ' , 02 , . . . ,an ) , ou l' allure

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 53

 as expected, "im kleinen" was translated by "locali" and no specific terms were used

 to translate "im grossen" But something more surprising comes next. The translators

 (or adapters), Boutroux and Chazy, actually skipped the passage in Osgood's footnote
 which we saw as definitional: "(• . •) in a domain 7' T' %, T', etc., the extent of which

 is set from the start [von vornherein feststeht] and not determined afterwards to meet

 the requirements of the given problem." (Osgood 1901a, p. 12). In 1911, for Bou-
 troux and Chazy, "locar made perfect sense; but, apparently, the syntactic distinction
 between statements that bear on a domain that was set from the start, and statements

 which bear on some new ad hoc domain, just did not ring a bell. So much so that it
 could be skipped altogether.

 6 Conclusion

 oured to capture.

 Let us summarise some of the main facts gathered from the empirical study, then con-

 clude with more general comments on the type of historical phenomenon we endeav-

 From a pragmatic viewpoint, the introduction pairs of terms such as "im Kleinen
 -im Grossen'9 first served expository purposes: expressing the scope of a theorem,
 warning against common mistakes, stressing the conceptual connection in a series of

 theorems or among the sections of a treatise. By providing new classificatory concepts
 to describe mathematical knowledge, it soon began to be used in the assessments of

 current research mathematics and in the formulation of new research agendas. In par-

 ticular, Hubert's work in the calculus of variations (including his existence proof for

 the Dirichlet problem) led to a distinction between ODEs and non-elliptic PDEs, on the

 one hand (for which patching up local solutions is relevant) and elliptic PDEs, on the
 other hand, for which integral equations are seen as a new and fundamental tool;

 the cases of Wallie Hurwitz and Jacques Hadamard document this shift of agenda
 in pure analysis. Another quite distinct research program, that of Differentialgeomet-

 rie im Grossen, would be launched at the end of our period of study by Whilhelm
 Blaschke, only to bloom in the 1920s (Chorlay 2009).107

 The "im kleinen-im grossen" distinction also led to direct conceptual innovation.
 In point-set topology, a series of terms for local-connectedness, local-compactness,
 etc. began to appear in the 1910s, following a similar definitional template which we

 called localisation. More importantly, we claim that the "im kleinen-im grossen" pair
 played a key role in Weyl's axiomatic rewriting of the theory of Riemann surfaces.

 Footnote 106 continued

 de la fonction sur l'ensemble P. Dans beaucoup de cas, un domaine T étant donné, l'allure locale d'une
 fonction en tout point d'un domaine T' est uniforme [no. 6] et l'allure de cette fonction dans tout le domaine

 T en résulte immédiatement. » (Chazy and Boutroux 1912, p. 105)

 107 A list of negative results should be mentioned: (1) The introduction of "im kleinen-im grossen" in
 polemics about the theory of Lie groups did not prompt its proponents to engage in an "im grossen" theory
 of Lie groups. (2) It seems that "local-global" was not used in the theory of numbers before Hasse, even
 though his "local-global principle" has its roots in Hensel's turn of the century work (Schweriner 2007).
 (3) The founders of Analysis situs as an autonomous research field (Dehn and Heegaard, or Brouwer) did
 not use the "im kleinen-im grossen" to define its scope and word their agenda.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 54 R. Chorlay

 These meta-level descriptive concepts provided him with the tools to express what the

 axioms should do, Riemann surfaces being the objects of a theory in which a sub-class

 of statements could be identified as "im kleinen" (hence the key role of the notion of

 neighbourhood) which were to be valid if and only if they were for a standard model

 (the z-plane). Needless to say the investigation of similar guiding principles for the

 design of axiomatic theories should be a fruitful research topic for those historians

 who work on the contemporary period.

 From a syntactic viewpoint, samplings from the 1 920s and 1 930s showed that, at that

 time, to some extent, "local-global," "im kleinen-im grossen" and "in the small-in the

 large" could be used one for the other. Going as far back in time as our means allowed,

 we showed that this intertranslatibility between several pairs of terms belonged to a

 second phase of development, after a first phase, in the period from 1898 to 1918,
 where "im kleinen-im grossen" prevailed, both the English- and German-speaking
 worlds. This pair seems to have first been used in a very consistent and systematic

 way by Göttingen-trained American mathematician William Fogg Osgood, in numer-
 ous high-level didactic publications, both in the English and German languages. It
 was quickly adopted within the still small American mathematical community, in
 such diverse fields as function theory (Osgood), the calculus of variations (Bolza) and

 differential geometry (Kasner).

 Finally, from a semantic viewpoint, it turns out that the meaning of "im kleinen-im

 grossen" was not transmitted through use only, since Osgood once endeavoured to
 define these terms in his Encylclopädie chapter on the general theory of functions of
 one or several variables. We called his take on "im kleinen-im grossen" the syntac-

 tic view, since it refers to a syntactic property of mathematical statements and can

 be rephrased in terms of the order of quantifiers. The fact that, on one occasion, a

 definition was put forward does not imply that every one used this pair with the very

 same meaning, or even that those who did were aware of the definition (Bolza, Schle-

 singer). In some cases, it can be argued that "im kleinen-im grossen" was only added
 to an already well-identified series of pairs such as "im begrenzten Raumstück-im
 Gesamtraum" and "analytic-algebraic"; these pairs, however, were used in a more

 specific disciplinary context - that of Klein's conception of geometry as a theory of
 invariants - and with a much more restricted meaning - the Raumstück referring to the

 disc of convergence of some power series, in a context where only analytic functions
 were considered. Another use of "im kleinen" clearly stands apart from the semantic

 viewpoint, since it clearly refers to the infinitesimal (im unendlich kleinen) and not to
 the local. It appears marginally within our corpus and is never used in pair with "im

 grossen" Moreover, close reading of the texts shows that both Osgood and Hadamard

 clearly meant to delineate to realm of "im kleinen" or "local" statements and properties
 from that of infinitesimal statements and properties. The coining of these terms served

 a purpose of conceptual differentiation.

 From a more general perspective, the "local-global" pair presents itself as a chal-

 lenging object for the historian to study, since it stands in between better identified

 categories. It is more than a mere metaphor (although with metaphorical undertones),
 but needs not be explicitly defined (although definitions can be given, in specific con-

 texts). It is used to help the readers find their way about mathematics and make sense

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 55

 of the motley of notions, theorems and techniques. Performing this meta function, it

 stands in between the body of knowledge and the image of knowledge and actively
 links both. In some cases, it can be internalised within the body of knowledge, for

 instance, when a new pattern of concept definition is introduced (e.g. definition by
 localisation) or when it provides the guidelines to select the right axioms for the
 revamping of a theory. In other cases, it can be used at higher levels of discourse
 which are more typically analysed in terms of image of knowledge: discussing the

 scope and strength of a theory (as in Study's criticism of Lie's theory), articulating
 research agendas (as for Blaschke's Differentialgeometrie im Grossen or Hadamarďs

 theory of integral equations). It helps connect notions, theorems or theories that belong

 to different disciplines; these are weak links, if strength is to be assessed in terms of

 logical dependence, but they are long-distance and cross-disciplinary links which help

 present mathematics as an organised whole at times of speedy growth.

 For these reasons, it comes as no surprise that, as Morse did, mathematicians see

 this articulation as something that has been used "for some time with varying mean-

 ings" and concerns "more or less" all mathematics; something that is part of the

 mathematical landscape; part and parcel of the toolkit that mathematicians think and

 write with. What may come as a surprise is that the emergence of such a conceptual

 tool can be studied historically, and that this study gives quite definite results. These
 results depend heavily on methodological choices that we endeavoured to spell out

 and ground.

 We chose to focus on the explicit use of a series of terms, but we did not tell a story

 of the passage from the implicit to the explicit. This is not a tale of growing aware-
 ness, but one of collective making.10* We feel this is the background against which

 two other historical issues can be tackled. First, that of the historical development of
 theories and disciplines such as, for instance, global differential geometry or local

 algebra. Second, that of the history of other (possibly competing) reflexive categories

 or articulations, such as "qualitative-quantitative."

 This principled focus on the explicit led us to resort to use a combination of not-read-

 ing (here: computer-aided word-search) and close-reading.109 As far as the emergence

 of "im kleinen-im grossen" is concerned, this approach showed that in spite of their
 apparent elusiveness, both meaning and social context could be delineated with some

 confidence. Empirical data show that "im kleinen-im grossen" was not used just any-
 where and with no discernible core-meaning. Quite the contrary: the fact that other
 meanings (for instance, an infinitesimal meaning for "im kleinen") and other social

 contexts (for instance, that of young French analysts working along Borei and Hadam-

 ard) can be distinguished from that of the AMS-Göttingen "im kleinen-im grossen"
 testifies to the specificity of the latter. One of the advantages of this combination of
 not- and close-reading is that it captures the conceptual and the social at the same

 108 For a very different but not unrelated work on the historical emergence of a semantic category that
 we cannot even imagine was not "always there," see Michel Pastoureau's fascinating work on the history
 of the colour "blue" (Pastoureau 2006). For a more philosophical background, see (Goodman 1992) and
 (Hacking 1999).

 109 These awkward terms have somehow become standard in the field of "digital humanities." See Crane
 (2006) and Kirschenbaum (2007). For an overview of the French scene and several stimulating examples
 (very few dealing with mathematics and the sciences, however), see http://www.revue-texto.net/.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 56 R. Chorlay

 time, thus shedding light on the dual dynamics of conceptual innovation. Another
 great advantage, though double-edged, is that it makes our conclusions falsifiable.

 Appendix: Corpus building

 In Sect. 1 , we strove to identify the specific of question that we set out to tackle, the kind

 of tools which we want to use in this first phase of the work and some potential biases

 to beware of; so it seems we are ready to let the computer "not read" for us. For now,

 the period of emergence is still undetermined; so is the "site," be it a research domain

 or a linguistic area. Hence, the building of the core corpus has to proceed through full-

 text search for the words or expressions: "im kleinen," "im grossen," "local," "lokal,"

 "global," "in the small" and "in the large"; starting from a corpus which is as large
 as possible in terms of topics and languages. However, only printed and published
 mathematical texts will be selected for this zero corpus. This restriction is not only

 an obvious consequence of the choice of tools; it also reflects the fact that we want to

 study the public and collective use of these reflexive terms.

 This led us to include in the zero corpus the Jahrbuch, of course, as well as the

 Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians. Other highly visible

 publications were included, be they periodical such as the Jahresbericht der Deutschen
 Mathematiker-Vereinigung and the Comptes Rendus de V Académie des Sciences de

 Paris', or non-periodical, such as the Encylopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften
 (the 13 volumes from Band I to Band III). Several journals were included, such as
 the Mathematische Annalen, the Bulletin de la société mathématique de France and

 the AMS Journals.110 We also included something over which we have less control,

 namely the corpus of retrodigitised mathematical texts available in the Cornell Library

 of Historical Monographs and the Michigan Historical Maths Collection. We feel this
 loss of control is well worth it, especially when the diversity of genres and textual
 forms is taken into account: these online libraries bring monographs and textbooks to

 a corpus which otherwise consists primarily of proceedings and research papers. We
 also included the collected works of Klein and Hubert.

 Zero corpus:

 AMS Colloquium publications (1903, 1906, 1909, 1913, 1916).
 Annales Scientifiques de TENS (1864-)
 Bulletin de la Société Mathématique de France (1872-)

 Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences de Paris (vol. 130, 134, 139, 140,
 141, 144, 149, 153, 154, 155, 159111)

 110 The Journal fir die reine und angewandte Mathematik (JRAM) was not part of the zero corpus.
 However, we OCRed it and ran the word-search after completion of this essay, from volume 106 (1890)

 to volume 148 (1918). The results are thoroughly in keeping with the conclusions drawn from the study

 of the core corpus: one hit for "lokal" in vol. 131. The first hits for "im Kleinen" or "im Grossen" appear
 after 1914, in volumes 145 (in the calculus of variations) and 146; the first systematic use is to be found in

 Robert König's paper in volume 148 (1918) (König 1918).

 111 We only used those for which full-text search was available.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 57

 Encyclopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften I.I, 1.2, IL 1.1, II. 1.2, II.2,
 II.3.1, II.3.2, ULLI, III.1.2, III.2.1, III.2.2A, III.2.2B, III.3
 Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik (1868-1942)

 Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker- Vereinigung [from vol. 1 (1890/1891)
 to vol. 27 (1918)]

 Journal, Bulletin, Proceedings, and Transactions of the American Mathematical
 Society
 Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique (1881 (cahier 49), 1882 (51, 52), 1884 (54),
 1886 (56), 1890 (60), 1891 (61), 1894 (64), 1895 (1), 1897 (2), 1902 (7), 1903
 (8), 1904 (9), 1906 (11), 1907 (12), 1910 (14), 1912 (16), 1921 (21), 1923 (23),
 1924 (24), 1927 (26), 1929 (27), 1931 (29), 1932 (30), 1933 (31), 1935 (34)112).
 L'enseignement mathématique (1899-)
 Mathematische Annalen [from vol. 35 (1890) to vol. 79 (1919)]

 Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians (1897, 1904, 1908,
 1912, 1920)

 The University of Michigan Digital Maths Collection, http://quod.lib.umich.edu/
 u/umhistmath/ (accessed 7 Nov. 2009) which includes Klein's collected papers.

 Cornell University Library. Historical Maths Monographs, http://digital.library.
 cornell.edu/rn/math/ (accessed 7 Nov. 2009)

 Hubert's collected papers (Hilbert 1932), retrieved from GDZ and OCRed.

 Now, the core corpus is given by the list of relevant hits for "im kleinen" or "im

 grossen" is the following, ordered by year of publication,113 until 1918:

 (1) (Osgood 1898)
 (2) (Osgood 1899)
 (3) (Osgood 1901a)
 (4) (Bolza 1904)
 (5) (Kasner 1905), (6) (Schlesinger 1905), (7) (Study 1905), (8) (Young 1905)
 (9) (Osgood 1906)

 (10) (Haussner 1907), (11) (Mangoldt 1907), (12) (Hartogs 1907), (13) (Bernstein

 1907), (14) (Fano 1907)
 (15) (Study 1908), (16) (Riesz 1908)
 (17) (Jung 1909), (18) (Bliss 1913 [1909]), (19) (Bolza 1909), (20) (Cole 1909),
 (21) (Carathéodory 1909)
 (22) (Hurwitz 1910), (23) (Stäckel 1910)
 (24) (Study 1911), (25) (Young 1911)
 (26) (Weyl 1912), (27) (Hahn 1912), (28) (Bill 1912)
 (29) (Osgood 1914 [1913]), (30) (Rosenblatt 1913), (31) (Hahn 1913), (32) (Voss

 1913), (33) (Blaschke 1913),

 (34) (Hahn 1914), (35) (Van Vleck 1915 [1914]), (36) (Jacobstahl 1914), (37) (Koebe

 1914)

 (38) (Blaschke 1915)

 1 12 Depending on availability of full-text search.

 For the Jahrbuch, we used the year of publication of the reviewed paper or book. For talks, we gave

 the date of publication first, and mentioned the date of delivery between square brackets.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 58 R. Chorlay

 (39) (Osgood 1916)
 (40) (Osgood 1917), (41) (Moore 1917), (42) (König 1917), (43) (Liebmann 1917),

 (44) (Carathéodory and Rademacher 1917)
 (45) (Blaschke 1918), (46) (Williams 1918)

 It should be emphasised that this collection should not be seen as raw material. Indeed,

 it is the result of a processing that involves more than selecting the documents and,

 more often than not, running an OCR software.114 For reasons which pertain to the

 kind of words or expressions for which we searched, we actually had to check every

 hit to decide if it would appear in our collection. Hence, we will work on a collection

 of relevant hits ... so much for not reading.

 Actually we were faced with two rather different problems.

 Since the words and expressions which we targeted are not strictly technical, we got

 much more "noise" than if we had searched for occurrences of, say, "non-Euclidean" or

 "Fuchsian function." Many hits are not remotely mathematical: "im kleinen + [noun]"
 or "in the small + [noun]" (such as "im kleinen Dorf? "in the small village") account

 for a large proportion of the hits, "im grossen" appears in the German phrase "im gros-

 sen und ganzen'9 which means "on the whole," "by and large." Further, "local" can be

 used to thank the "local organising committee" for the great job they did. The German
 "lokal" and the French "local" can be used to refer to the room where some meeting

 was held; needless to say you get quite a few of these in conference proceedings. This

 large proportion of non-mathematical hits makes the purely automatic not-reading of

 the corpus highly inadequate for further study, even if one were to engage in a purely

 quantitative study in terms of date and place of publication, nationality of the author(s),

 research field (identified by key-words or classification in the Jahrbuch), references

 to published papers (for quotation networks), etc. Of course, more sophisticated not-

 reading techniques could be devised to partially solve this problem, although probably
 at the cost of new biases. In the case at hand, it turned out that the parting of clearly

 non-mathematical hits from mathematical hits was tractable by old fashioned reading.

 A completely different problem arises when one wants to select relevant hits among

 hits that have a somewhat technical meaning in a scientific text. For instance, in Eng-

 lish, "local" can be used to describe problems or theorems bearing on loci, as in Sam-

 uel Roberts' 1880 paper On an Immediate Generalization of Local Theorems in which
 the Generating Point Divides a Variable Linear Segment in a Constant Ratio (Roberts
 1880). It is occasionally used with the same meaning in French (e.g. "théorème locar ;

 Breton 1853, p. 101 1). A related meaning can be found in the theory of "local proba-

 bility" or "geometric probability," as in Morgan Crofton (1868) paper On the Theory
 of Local Probability, applied to Straight Lines drawn at random in a plane (Crofton
 1868). We did not include these in our list of relevant hits. The word "local" was

 (and is) also quite common in physics and some fields of applied mathematics, with a

 meaning that is clear in the context. Since our zero corpus in French features scientific

 1 14 And hoping that it will work well enough, not reading "im kleinen" as "im dleinen ," for instance.
 In fact, many hits for "local" are mistakes, the actual text reading "focal".... The quality of the scanning

 process, and the rate of failure of the OCR software are things over which we have no control. The fact that
 this rate is non-null implies that specific statements such as " "im kleinen" are never used by X in book B"
 should be taken cum grano salis.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 59

 papers beyond mathematics (in the Comptes Rendus or in the Annales scientifiques de

 V Ecole Normal Supérieure, for instance), this is where we get the largest variety of

 hits. For instance, we come across "déformation locale" (in a paper on the deformation

 of copper wires), "cause locale" (in a paper on meteorology, dealing with the causes
 of winds), "traitement local du cancer" (one of many, many hits in the medical field),
 "abaissement local de température" (in a paper on sun spots), "courant local" (in
 electrodynamics), "attractions locales" (in geodesy), etc. In all cases, "local" draws
 the attention to the fact that something happens at a specific place, as opposed to

 everywhere in the medium (be it the earth, a metal layer or the human body). We did

 not include these in the list of relevant hits, even though they may help understand

 how, at some point in time, some mathematicians chose to import terms which were
 quite commonly used in the sciences into mathematics. The case of "temps local" is
 borderline, since it started its career both in the outer world (for travellers, merchants

 and soldiers) and in the sciences (in geodesy, meteorology and astronomical obser-
 vation), then, after 1905, became a central notion in a highly mathematical theory,

 namely relativity theory (special, then general). However, interesting this case may

 be, we didn't include the technical use of "local" or "lokaF in relativity theory in our
 list of relevant hits.

 Some final remarks have to be made regarding these empirical data. Although these

 remarks are part of methodological nature, this is not methodological discussion for
 the sake of methodological discussion. The choice of methods of analysis depends

 on the type of empirical data available to us, and the type of historical object that we
 endeavour to capture.

 It should first be noted that our list of occurrences is heterogeneous in several dif-

 ferent senses. It is heterogeneous in terms of genres, including textbooks (e.g. (4),
 (9)), research papers (e.g. (33)), texts of talks given at mathematical meetings (e.g.
 (2), (5)), short reviews (e.g. (10), (23)), etc. In terms of size, these texts range from a

 10 line review to a thick textbook (e.g. 766 pages in the second edition of (9), in 1912).

 The number of occurrences of "im kleinen" or "im grossen" also varies greatly, even

 in texts of similar natures and sizes. For instance, there is one sentence in Mangoldt's
 Encyclopädie article on the concepts of curve and surface in which "im kleinen" and

 "im grossen" are used (11); in contrast, both terms are used a significant number of
 times in Osgood's Encyclopädie article on the general theory of functions of one or
 several complex variables (3); what's more, Osgood used these terms in the titles of

 paragraphs, which probably means that it should be considered more significant -
 in some way - than use in a mere sentence. One could think of automatic means to

 account for this textual importance; for instance, a weight could be assigned to the
 various hits, a footnote being of less weight than a sentence in the core of the text, a

 paragraph title being of less weight than a chapter title, etc. However, as we shall see in

 the next section, a footnote can be of fundamental significance. Finally, this list of texts
 shows mirror effects. For instance, (19) is the German edition of American textbook
 (4); (13) is a review of (9). We could have removed (13) from our list, but we think

 we would have lost significant information: whether "im kleinen" and "im grossen"
 plays a lesser or a greater role in a new and improved edition of a textbook seems to us

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 to be significant; as does whether or not a reviewer chooses to explain to the German

 audience the meaning of an expression used by an American mathematician.115

 Of course, it should also be noted that this list is extremely short, given the quite

 extended time period and zero corpus. For instance, there are no relevant hits in the

 Proceedings of the ICM (from 1897 to 1920); nor any in the collected works of either
 Klein or Hubert.

 60 R. Chorlay

 For reasons of both heterogeneity and scarcity, we opted for a qualitative analysis

 rather than a quantitative one (or a combination of qualitative and quantitative meth-

 ods). A third type of reasons drove us away from further quantitative treatment, either

 of the core corpus itself or starting from the core corpus. Let us take a slightly closer

 look at some of the first texts in the "im kleinen" -"im grossen" list, from 1898 to 1906.

 There are several texts by William Fogg Osgood, including three of great national (US)
 and international visibility: a series of six lectures delivered at the Cambridge Col-
 loquium of the AMS in 1898, on general function theory (2); the first article of the
 Encyclopädie volume on complex function theory (3); and a high-level textbook on
 complex analysis, based on state of the art point set topology and real analysis, and

 published in German (9). Number (5) is a lecture delivered by Edward Kasner on The
 Present Problems of Geometry at the International Congress of Arts and Sciences in

 Saint Louis in 1904, the seventh part of which is entitled "Geometry im Grossen"116
 Number (4) is Oskar Bolza's textbook on the calculus of variations, which was sub-

 sequently be translated into German by its German born author (19). Surprisingly

 enough, these first occurrences already cover very different research fields; maybe not

 yet "more or less all mathematics" - for instance, no number theory appears in our

 core corpus - but a significant share indeed. Since these texts survey a vast literature,

 listing who they quote might not bring very interesting information and probably not

 much more information that can be got by actually reading the texts. Because of their

 nature and high visibility, listing who quote them might prove incredibly tedious; in

 addition to looking rather intractable, the prospect of getting significant information
 from such a citation network is not great: textbooks and encyclopaedia chapters are

 not quoted the way research papers are; the former convey an image of a discipline,

 gather tools into tool-boxes, tell more or less mythical histories, articulate research

 agendas, etc. All of this may leave a deep imprint on their (very numerous) readers,

 yet referring to them is not compulsory the way referring to a research paper in which
 some new technical definition or theorem appears is. Because of the fact that several

 large mathematical domains are covered, and very few texts involved, we doubt that

 115 We didn't include in our list of relevant hits those cases in which the expressions appear in a review as

 a mere quotation of the original text, or the cases in which the review is written by the author of the original

 paper/book.

 1 16 In the biographical Memoir written by Jesse Douglas, one reads: "The speech, published in the Bul-
 letin of the American Mathematical Society, also aroused wide interest abroad; an indication of this was

 the publication of a translation in a Polish mathematical journal. Incidentally, one of Kasner's auditors at
 the St. Louis Congress was the great French mathematician Henri Poincaré, himself one of the principal
 invited speakers" (Douglas 1958, p. 13). To name a few of the participants in that Congress: H.S. White,
 G.A. Bliss, H. Maschke, M. Bôcher, J. Pierpont, E. Moore; among the non-American participants: E. Picard,
 G. Darboux and Poincaré. (White 1905).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 61

 we could get much more information using other quantitative methods1 17 such as, for

 instance, co-word graphs used to map "dynamics of problematisation" (Callón et al.
 1986).

 To sum up, for reasons of scarcity, heterogeneity, visibility and interdisciplinarity

 which are all specific to our empirical data, we have engaged in qualitative analysis
 only. The fact that many of the methodological questions which we were faced with

 are usually associated with quantitative approaches results from the fact we built our
 core corpus by using automatic (i.e. blind) methods to survey a quantitatively large

 zero corpus.

 References

 Alexandroff, Pavel. 1924. Über die Metrisation der im Kleinen kompakten topologischen Räume. Mathe-

 Archibald, Raymond. 1938. A semicentenial history of the American Mathematical Society, vol. I.

 Audin, Michèle. 2009. Fatou, Julia, Montel, le grand prix des sciences mathématiques de 1918, et après. . .

 matische Annalen 92: 294-301.

 New York: AMS.

 Berlin and New York: Springer.

 Behnke, Heinrich, and Ernst Peschi. 1935. Zur Theorie der Funktionen mehrerer komplexer Veränderli-

 chen. Konvexität in bezug auf analytische Ebenen im kleinen und grossen. Mathematische Annalen 1 1 1 :
 158-177.

 Bernstein, Felix. 1907. Review of W. Osgood, Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie. Jahresbericht der Deuts-

 chen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 16: 463-467.

 Bill, Earl. 1912. An existence theorem for a problem of the calculus of variations in space. Transactions of

 Birkhoff, Garett. 1936. Lie Groups Isomorphic in the Large with no Linear Groups. Bulletin of AMS 42:344.
 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1913. Uber isoperimetrische Flächenpaare. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathemati-

 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1915. Kreis und Kugel. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 24:

 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1916. Kreis und Kugel. Leipzig: Veit & Comp.
 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1918. Mittelwertsätze der Potentialtheorie. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathemati-

 AMS 13(1): 50-58.

 ker-Vereinigung 22: 154-183.

 195-209.

 ker-Vereinigung 27: 157-160.

 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1923. Vorlesungen über Differentialgeometrie und geometrische Grundlagen von
 Einsteins Relativitätstheorie. II Affine Differentialgeometrie (Iste und 2te Auflage). Berlin: Springer.

 Blaschke, Wilhelm. 1961. Reden und Reisen eines Geometers (2te Auflage). Berlin: VEB.
 Bliss, Gilbert. 1913. Fundamental existence theorems. In The Princeton Colloquium, 1-107. New York:

 AMS.

 Bolza, Oskar. 1904. Lectures on the calculus of variations. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

 Bolza, Oskar. 1909. Vorlesungen über Variationsrechnung. Leipzig: Teubner.
 Boutroux, Pierre. 1908. Leçons sur les fonctions définies par les équations différentielles du premier ordre
 (professées au Collège de France). Collection de monographies sur la théorie des fonctions publiée sous
 la direction de M. Emile Borei. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Breton, Paul. 1 853. Note sur un point important de la question des porismes. Comptes Rendus de l 'Académie

 des Sciences de Paris 36: 1008-1012.

 Brill, Alexander, and Max Noether. 1894. Die Entwickelung der algebraischen Funktionen in älterer und

 neuerer Zeit, Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 3: 107-566.

 Burkhardt, Heinrich. 1914. Trigonometrische Reihen und Integrale. Encyclopädie der mathematischen

 Wissenschaften mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen II (1.2): 819-1354.

 117 On quantitative methods as heuristic tools for the history of mathematics, see, for instance, Goldstein
 (1999b).

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Callón, Michel, John Law, and Arie Rip. 1986. Mapping the dynamics of science and technology. London:

 62 R. Chorlay

 The MacMillan Press.

 sche Annalen 67: 355-386.

 Carathéodory, Constantin. 1909. Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Thermodynamik. Mathemati-

 Carathéodory, Constantin, and Hans Rademacher. 1917. Über die Eindeutigkeit im Kleinen und im Grossen

 stetiger Abbildungen von Gebieten. Archiv der Mathematik und Physik 26(3): 1-19.

 Cartan, Elie. 1915. La théorie des groupes continus et la géométrie (exposé d'après l' article allemand de
 G. Fano). In Encyclopédie des Sciences Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées, éd. Jules Molk (tome III,
 vol. 1), 1-135. Paris: Jacques Gabay (Reprint 1991).

 Chazy, Jean, and Pierre Boutroux. 1912. Fonctions analytiques (exposé, d'après l'article allemand de W.F.
 Osgood). In Encyclopédie des Sciences Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées, éd. Jules Molk (tome II,
 vol. 2), 94-128. Paris: Jacques Gabay (Reprint 1992).

 Chorlay, Renaud. 2009. Passer au global: le cas d'Elie Cartan, 1922-1930. Revue d'Histoire des Mathéma-

 tiques 15(2): 231-316.

 Chorlay, Renaud. 2010. From problems to structures: the cousin problems and the emergence of the sheaf

 concept. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 64(1): 1-73.

 Chorlay, Renaud. Forthcoming. Mathématiques globales. U émergence du couple local- global dans les

 théories géométriques (1851-1953). Paris: Librairie Albert Blanchard.

 Cole, Frank. 1909. The fifteenth annual meeting of the AMS. Bulletin oJAMS 15: 275-292.

 Corry, Leo. 1996. Modern algebra and the rise of mathematical structure. Basel and Boston: Birkhäuser.
 Courtes, Joseph, lyy 1. Analyse semiotique du discours, rans: Hachette.
 Crane, Gregory. 2U06. What do you do with a million books/ UrLib Magazine iz '5). üoi:iu.iU4D/

 march2006-crane

 Crofton, Morgan. 1868. On the theory of local probability, applied to straight lines drawn at random in a

 plane. Transactions of London CLVIII: 181-199.

 Dehn, Max, and Poul Heegaard. 1907. Analysis situs. Encyclopädie der mathematischenWissenschafien

 mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen 111(1.1): 54-222.

 Douglas, Jesse. 1958. Edward Kasner 1878-1955, A biographical memoir. Washington, DC: National

 Academv of Sciences.

 Dunmore, Caroline. 1992. Meta-level revolutions in mathematics. In Revolutions in mathematics, ed. Don-

 ald Gillies, 209-225. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Engel, Friedrich. 1908. Zu der Study sehen Abhandlungen. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-

 Vereinigung 17: 143-144.

 Fano, Gino. 1907. Kontinuirliche geometrische Gruppen. Die Gruppentheorie als geometrisches Einteilung-

 sprinzip. Encyclopädie der mathematischenWissenschafien mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen 111(1.1):
 289-388.

 Fenster, Della, and Karen Parshall. 1994. A profile of the American mathematical research community:
 1891-1906. In The history of modern mathematics, eds. Eberhard Knobloch, and David Rowe, vol. 3,
 179-227. Boston: Academic Press.

 Gispert, Hélène. 2001 . The German and French editions ot the Klein-Molk bncyclopedia: contrastea images.
 In Changing images in mathematics: from the French revolution to the new millenium, eds. Umberto
 Bottazzini and Amy Dahan-Dalmedico, 113-135. London: Routledge.

 Goldstein, Catherine. 1999a. Local et global. In Dictionnaire d'histoire et de philosophie des sciences, éd.

 Dominique Lecourt, 571-575. Paris: PUF.

 Goldstein, Catherine. 1999b. Sur la question des méthodes quantitatives en mathématiques: le cas de la
 théorie des nombres en France (1870-1914). Acta historiae rerum naturalium nec non technicarum,
 New Series 3, 28: 187-214.

 Goodman, Nelson. 1992. Ways of worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett.

 Hacking, Ian. 1999. The social construction of what? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 Hadamard, Jacques. 1898. Les surfaces à courbures opposées et leurs lignes geodesiques. Journal de

 Mathsématique 4(5):27-73 = [Hadamard 1968] vol.2: 729-775.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1906. Sur les transformations ponctuelles, Bulletin de la SMF 34:71-84 = [Hadamard

 1968] vol. 1:449-363.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1909. La géométrie de situation et son role en mathématiques (Leçon d ouverture du

 cours de Mécanique Analytique et Mécanique Céleste au Collège de France, 1909) = [Hadamard 1968]
 vol.2: 805-827.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1910. Leçons sur le calcul des variations, tome premier, rans: Hermann.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 63

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1915. Four lectures on mathematics, delivered at Columbia University in 1911.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1921 . L'œuvre mathématique de Poincaré. Acta Mathematica 38:203-287 = (Hadamard

 New York: Columbia University Press.

 1968) vol. 4: 1921-2006.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1954. Sur des questions d'histoire des sciences: la naissance du calcul infinitésimal,

 Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciencias 26:83-89 = [Hadamard 1968] vol.4: 2267-2271.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1968. Œuvres, 4 vols. Paris: C.N.R.S.
 Hahn, Hans. 1912. Review of A. Signorini, "Esistenza di un'estremale ciusa dentro un contorno di

 Whitaker". Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik 43.0461.01.

 Hahn, Hans. 1913. Review of J. Hadamard, "La contruction de Weierstrass et l'existence de l'extremum

 dans le problème isopérimétrique". Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik 44.0444.02.

 Hahn, Hans. 1914. Über die allgemeinste ebene Punktmenge, die stetiges Bild einer Strecke ist. Jahresbe-

 richt der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 23: 318-322.

 Halikoff, H.S. 1938. Sur la stabilité des intégrales des équations différentielles "im Grossen". Bull Soc

 Phys.-Math. Univ. Kazan 9 (3): 31-61.

 Hartogs, Friedrich. 1907. Über neuere Untersuchungen auf dem Gebiete der analytischen Funktionen me-

 hrerer Variablen. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 16: 223-240.

 Hartwich, Yvonne. 2005. Eduard Study (1862-1930) - ein mathematischer Mephistopheles im geometris-

 chen Gärtschen (unpublished dissertation). Mainz: Johannes Gutenberg-Universität.

 Hasse, Helmut. 1930. Die Normenresttheorie relativ- Abelscher Zahlkörper als Klassenkörpertheorie im

 Kleinen. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 162: 145-154.

 Haussner, Robert. 1907. Review of Hadamard, "Sur quelques questions de calcul des variations". Jahrbuch

 über die Fortschritte der Mathematik 38.0404.03

 Hawkins, Thomas. 2000. Emergence of the theory of Lie groups - An essay in the history of mathematics

 Hermann. Weyl, 1955. Die Idee der Riemannschen Fläche (3, Vollständig umgearbeitete Auflage). Stuttgart:

 Hermann Weyl. 1997. Die Idee der Riemannschen Fläche. In Teubner Archiv zur Mathematik, ed. R. Remm-

 Hubert, David. 1900. Über das Dirichletsche Prinzip. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereini-

 Hubert, David. 1901a. Mathematische Probleme. Archiv f. Math. u. Phy. 3 Reihe, Bd.l: 44-63, 213-237 =

 1869-1926. New York: Springer.

 Teubner.

 ert, vol. 5. Leipzig: Teubner

 gung 8:184-188

 (Hubert 1932) vol.3: 290-329.

 99. = (Hubert 1932) vol.2: 437-448.

 Hubert, David. 1901b. Uber Flächen von Constanter Gaussscher Krümmung. Transactions of AM S 2(1): 87-

 Hubert, David. 1932. Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 3 vols. Berlin: Springer.
 Hopf, Heinz. 1931. Géométrie infinitésimale et topologie. L'EnseignementMathématique 30:233-240.
 Hurwitz, Wallie. 1910. Randwertaufgaben bei Systemen von Linearen Partiellen Differentialgleichungen

 erster Ordnung. Göttingen: Druck der Dieterchischen Universitäts-Buchdruckerei.

 Jacobstahl, Ernst. 1914. Review of Hahn, Über die allgemeinste ebene Punktmenge, die stetiges Bild einer

 Strecke ist. Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik 45.0627.01.

 Jung, Heinrich. 1909. Der Riemann-Rochsche Satz für algebraische Funktionen zweier Veränderlichen.

 Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 18:267-339.

 Kasner, Edward. 1905. The present problems of geometry. Bulletin ofAMS 11: 283-314.

 Kasner, Edward. 1915. Conformai classification of analytic arcs or elements: Poincaré's local problem of

 conformai geometry. Transactions ofAMS 16 (3): 333-349.

 Kirschenbaum, Matthew. 2007. The Remaking of Reading: Data Mining and the Digital Humanities.
 Nat. Sci. Found. Symposium on Next Generation of Data Mining and Cyber-Enabled Discovery for
 Innovation. http://www.cs.umbc.edu/~hillol/NGDM07/abstracts/talks/MKirschenbaum.pdf. Accessed
 29 December 2009.

 Kitcher, Philip. 1984. The nature of mathematical knowledge. New York and Oxford: Oxford University

 Klein, Felix. 1 883. Neue Beiträge zur Riemann'schen Functionentheorie. Mathematische Annalen 21:141-

 Press.

 218.

 Klein, Felix. 1893. Einleitung in die Höhere Geometrie, I. (Vorlesungen gehalten im Wintersemester 1892-

 1893, ausgearbeitet von Fr. Schilling). Göttingen.

 Klein, Felix. 1894. The Evanston Colloquium. New York and London: Macmillan.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Koebe, Paul. 1 909. Ueber ein allgemeinen Uniformizierungsprinzip. In Atti del IV Congresso Internazionale

 64 R. Chorlay

 dei Mattematici. ed. Guido Castelnuovo. 25-30. Roma: Lincei.

 Koebe, Paul. 1914. Über die Uniformisierung der algebraischen Kurven IV. Mathematische Annalen 75:

 König, Robert. 1917. Grundzüge einer Theorie der Riemannschen Funktionenpaare. Mathematische Ann-

 42-129.

 alen 78: 63-93.

 König, Robert. 1918. Riemannsche Funktionen- und Differential-Systeme in der Ebene. Arithmetischer

 Teil. Journal fär die reine und angewandte Mathematik 148: 146-182.

 Koopman, Bernard. 1944. William Fogg Osgood- In Memoriam. Bulletin ofAMS 50: 139-142.
 Latour, Bruno. 1999. Pandora's hope. Essays on the reality of sciences studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

 Liebmann, Heinrich. 1917. Review of W. Blaschke, Kreis und Kugel. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathe-

 University Press.

 matiker-Vereinigung 25: 123-126.

 Mangoldt, Hans. 1907. Die Begriffe "Linie" und "Fläche". Encyclopädie der mathematischenWissenschaf-

 ten mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen III( 1.1): 1 30-1 52.

 Moore, Robert. 1917. A theorem concerning continuous curves. Bulletin ofAMS 23(5): 233-236.
 Morse, Marston. 1925. Relations "in the large" between the numbers of extremals of different types Joining

 two fixed points. Bulletin ofAMS 31:216.

 Morse, Marston. 1989. What is analysis in the large. In Global differential geometry, ed. S.-S. Chern,

 259-269. Providence: The Mathematical Association of America.

 Osgood, William. 1898. Example of a single- valued function with a natural boundary, whose inverse is also

 single- valued. Bulletin ofAMS 4: 417-424.

 Osgood, William. 1899. Selected Topics in the general theory of functions (Six Lectures delivered before

 the Cambridge Colloquium, August 22-27, 1898). Bulletin ofAMS 5:59-87.

 Osgood, William. 1901a. Analysis der komplexen Größen. Allgemeine Theorie der analytischen Funktio-
 nen (a) einer und (b) mehrerer komplexen Größen. Encyclopädie der mathematischenWissenschaften
 mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen 11(2): 1-1 14.

 Osgood, William. 1901b. On the existence of a minimum of the integral J^J F(x, y, y')dx when xq and
 x' are conjugate points, and the geodesies on an ellipsoid of revolution. Transactions ofAMS 2(2):
 166-182.

 Osgood, William. 1906. Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie. Leipzig: Teubner.
 Osgood, William. 1912. Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie (2te Auflage). Leipzig: Teubner.

 Osgood, William. 1914. Topics in the theory of functions of several complex variables. The Madison Col-

 loquium 1913-part II. Providence: AMS/New York: Dover (1966 reprint)

 Osgood, William. 1916. On infinite regions. Transactions ofAMS 17(3): 333-344.
 Osgood, William. 1917. Factorization of analytic functions ot several variables. Annals of Mathematics IV

 (2): 77-95.

 Parshall, Karen and David Rowe. 1989. American mathematics comes of age: 1875-1900. In A century of

 mathematics in America, part III, ed. Peter Duren et al., 1-24. Providence: AMS.

 Parshall, Karen and David Rowe. 1994. In The emergence of the American Mathematical Research Com-

 munity 1876-1900, eds. J.J. Sylvester, Felix Klein, and E.H. Moore. Providence: AMS/London: London
 Mathematical Society.

 Pastoureau, Michel. 2006. Bleu. Histoire d'une couleur. Paris: Point Seuil.
 Picard, Emile. 1880. Mémoire sur les fonctions entières. Annales Scientifiques de l'Ecole Normale Supé-

 rieure 9:145-166.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1881. Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle. J. de Math. 7 (3ème

 série): 375^22 and 8 (3ème série): 251-296 = (Poincaré 1951) vol. 1: 3-84.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1883. Sur un théorème général de la théorie des fonctions. Bulletin de la SMF 11:1 12-125

 Poincaré, Henri. 1895. Analysis situs. Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique 1 (2ème séné) = (Poincaré 1951)

 = (Poincaré 1951) vol. 11: 57-69.

 vol. 6: 193-288.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1 905 . Sur les lignes géodésiques des surfaces convexes. Transactions ofAMS 6(3):237-274.
 Poincaré, Henri. 1907. Les fonctions analytiques de deux variables et la représentation conforme. Rendiconti

 del Circolo Matematico di Palermo 23:185-220 = (Poincaré 1951) voi. 4: 244-289.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1908. Sur l'uniformisation des fonctions analytiques. Acta Mathematics 3: 1-63 = (Poincaré

 1951) vol. 4: 70-143.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 "Local-Global": the first twenty years 65

 Poincaré, Henri. 1909. L'avenir des mathématiques. In Atti del IV congresso internazionale dei matematici,

 ed. Guido Castelnuovo, (voi. 1), 167-182. Roma: Lincei.

 Poincaré, Henri. 1921. Analyse des travaux scientifiques de Henri Poincaré faite par lui-même. Acta Math-

 Poincaré, Henri. 1951-1956. Œuvres de Henri Poincaré, 11 vols. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Reichardt, Hans. 1967. Willhelm Blaschke. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 66:

 ematica 38:3-131.

 1-8.

 Riesz, Friedrich. 1908. Über die Approximation einer Funktion durch Polynome. Jahresbericht der Deuts-

 chen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 17: 196-211.

 Rinow, Willi. 1932. Über Zusammenhänge zwischen der Differentialgeometrie im Grossen und im Kleinen.

 Mathematische Zeitschrift 35: 512-528.

 Roberts, Samuel. 1880. On an immediate generalization of local theorems in which the generating point
 divides a variable linear segment in a constant ratio. American Journal of Mathematics 3(4): 336-343.
 Rosenblatt, Alfred. 1913. Review of St. Mazurkiewicz, "O arytmetyzacyi continuow". Jahrbuch über die

 Rowe, David. 2004. Making mathematics in an oral culture: Göttingen in the Era of Klein and Hubert.

 Fortschritte der Mathematik 44.0557.01 .

 Science in Context 17(2):85-129.

 Schauder, Juliusz. 1933. Über das Dirichletsche Problem im Grossen für nichtlineare elliptische Differen-

 tialgleichungen. Mathematische Zeitschrift 37: 623-634.

 Schlesinger, Ludwig. 1095. Über eine Darstellung des Systems der absoluten Geometrie. Jahresbericht der

 Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 14: 559-568.

 Schmidt, Erhard. 1942. Über eine neue Methode zur Behandlung einer Klasse isoperimetrischer Aufgaben

 im Grossen. Mathematische Zeitschrift 47: 489-642.

 Schmidt, Friedrich. 1930. Zur Klassenkörpertheorie im Kleinen. Journal für die reine und angewandte

 Scholz, Erhard. 1980. Geschichte des Mannigfaltigkeitsbegriffs von Riemann bis Poincaré. Basel and Bos-

 Scholz, Erhard. 1999. The concept of manifold. In History of topology, ed. loan James, 25-64. Amsterdam

 Mathematik 162: 155-168.

 ton: Birkhäuser.

 and New York: Elsevier Science.

 Schreier, Otto. 1927. Die Verwandtschaft stetiger Gruppen im Großen. In Abhandlungen aus dem mathe-

 matischen Seminar der Hamburgische Universität, vol. 5, 233-244. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Schweriner, Joachim. 2007. Minkowski, Hensel, and Hasse: On the beginnings of the local-global prin-
 ciple. In Episodes in the history of modern algebra, eds. Jeremy Gray, and Karen Parshall, 153-177.
 Providence: AMS/London: London Mathematical Society.

 Seifert, Herbert, and William Threlfall. 1938. Variationsrechnung im Grossen {Morsesche Theorie). Leip-

 zig: Teubner.

 Stäckel, Paul. 1910. Review of Levi, Studii sui punti singolari essenziali delle funzioni analitiche di due o

 più variabili complesse. Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik 41.0487.01.

 Stolz, Otto. 1893. Grundzüge der Differential- und Integralrechnung (Zweiter Theil). Leipzig: Teubner.
 Struik, Dirk. 1933. Outline of a History of Differential Geometry (II). ISIS 20: 161-191.
 Study, Eduard. 1905. Kürzeste Wege im komplexen Gebiet. Mathematische Annalen 60: 321-378.
 Study, Eduard. 1908. Kritische Betrachtungen über Lies Invariantentheorie der endlichen kontinuirlichen

 Gruppen. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 17: 125-142.

 Study, Eduard. 191 1. Vorlesungen überausgewählte Gegenstände der Geometrie, vol. 1. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Study, Eduard. 1913. Vorlesungen überausgewählte Gegenstände der Geometrie. Zweites Heft. Herausge-

 geben unter Mitwirkung von W. Blaschke: Konforme Abbildung und einfach zusammenhängende Berei-
 che. Leipzig and Berlin: Teubner.

 Threlfall, William. 1939. Le calcul des variations global. L'Enseignement Mathématique 38: 189-208.
 Tietze, Heinrich. 1928. Uber Konvewheit im kleinen und im grossen und über gewisse den Punkten einer

 Menge zugeordnete Dimensionszahlen. Mathematische Zeitschrift 28: 697-707.

 Van Vleck, Edward. 1915. The Rôle of Point-set Theory in Geometry and Dynamics. Bulletin ofAMS

 21(7):321-341.

 Voss, Aurei. 1913. Wilhelm Fiedler. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 22: 97-1 13.
 Walsh, Joseph. 2002. William Fogg Osgood 1864-1943. A biographical memoir. Washington, DC: The

 National Academy Press.

 Wernick, Max. 1934. Uber Minimalflächen im Grossen. Schriften Berlin 2: 35-64.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Weyl, Hermann. 1912. Review of Nielsen, Elemente der Funktionentheorie. Jahresbericht der Deutschen

 Mathematiker-Vereinigung 21: 96-97.

 Weyl, Hermann. 1919. Die Idee der Riemannschen Fläche (2ter Auflage). Leipzig: Teubner.
 White, Henry. 1905. Mathematics at the St. Louis Congress. Bulletin ofAMS 1 1(7): 358-363.
 Williams, Kenneth. 1918. Note on continuous functions. The American Mathematical Monthly 25(6):

 66 R. Chorlay

 246-249.

 alen 61: 281-286.

 33:240-286.

 Young, William. 1905. Zur Theorie der nirgends dichten Punktmengen in der Ebene. Mathematische Ann-

 Young, William. 1 9 1 1 . On the analytical basis of non-euclidean geometry. American Journal of Mathematics

 Young, Grace. 1926. Review of Dingler, Der Zusammenhang der Wissenschaft und des Primat der Philos-

 ophie. L'enseignement mathématique 25: 325-326.

 Zoretti, Ludovic. 1911. Leçons sur le prolongement des fonctions analytiques {professées au Collège de
 France). Collection de monographies sur la théorie des fonctions publiée sous la direction de M. Emile
 Borei. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:28:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

