 

 

 

 

Mathematics, technics, and courtly life in Late Renaissance Urbino
Author(s): Martin Frank
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 67, No. 3 (May 2013), pp. 305-330
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23479275
Accessed: 19-05-2020 11:59 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2013) 67:305-330
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0113-5

 Mathematics, technics, and courtly life in Late
 Renaissance Urbino

 Martin Frank

 Received: 22 December 2012 / Published online: 10 February 2013
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract The present article seeks to provide an overview of the general characteris

 tics of the cultural and scientific climate in the Duchy of Urbino. Three of the Duchy's

 milieus seem to have been particularly important for scholars who were engaged in
 the study of mathematics: the so-called "School of Urbino", the environment of the
 court, and the world of the technicians and engineers. While the Urbino School has

 already been the object of previous studies, the other two milieus and their effect on
 the mathematicians' work have been rather neglected and are, consequently, addressed

 here. The paper's final section presents some documents that attest the importance of
 Renaissance scholars' interaction with these environments to their actual scientific

 activity, taking the case of Guidobaldo dal Monte as an example.

 1 The mathematicians of Urbino and the context of their scientific work

 Urbino was an important centre of Renaissance culture and, in particular, it was
 home to two influential sixteenth-century mathematicians, Federico Commandino and
 Guidobaldo dal Monte, as well as other similarly interesting figures like Bernardino
 Baldi, Muzio Oddi or Giulio da Thiene. A better knowledge of their cultural milieu and
 the technical and scientific ideas that circulated in their environment is essential for a

 fair interpretation of their own scientific activity. Admittedly, we already know who

 The studies for the present paper have been enabled by a research Grant offered by the Foundation Filippo

 Burzio (Turin), and generalise some results I reached in the course of my Ph.D. thesis.

 Communicated by: M. Folkerts.

 M. Frank (IS)
 Pisa,Italy
 e-mail: martin.frank82@gmx.de

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 306 M. Frank

 the "great" scholars with whom they maintained scientific relations were: practition
 ers of mathematics like Benedetti, Clavius, Galileo, Maurolico etc. It is comparatively

 difficult, however, to gain even a rough idea about their everyday scientific environ

 ment: the present article seeks to address this problem. Its point of departure lies in
 the overview provided by the important investigations of P.L. Rose and E. Gamba,
 V. Montebelli into the scientific dimension of the Duchy of Urbino's academic world
 (Rose 1975; Gamba and Montebelli 1988).

 As far as the cultural and scientific background of Duchy's mathematicians is con

 cerned, existing literature tends to place an exclusive emphasis on the importance of
 the lectures held by Commandino and the subsequent establishment of the "Urbino
 School".1 These lessons were indeed so influential for Commandino's later work and

 his disciples' education that important aspects of the technical and scientific environ

 ment that similarly conditioned their work have been sidelined. This is clear from
 recent research into Guidobaldo dal Monte's life (Frank 2011/2012); numerous doc

 uments have been uncovered which testify to his close relationship with two other
 milieus: he assumed a remarkably high position at the court of the Duke of Urbino

 and was continually in touch with the world of architect-engineers and technicians. A

 similar situation also holds true for Commandino and Baldi. Moreover, the argument

 about the importance of the courtly milieu and the technicians' environment could be

 extended to include the works of other Renaissance mathematicians outside the Duchy
 of Urbino, like Giovanni Battista Benedetti in Turin.2

 Commandino's late scientific work was notably influenced by Francesco Maria II

 della Rovere—his teaching activity in Urbino and publication of Euclid's Elements
 (1572) both occurred at the behest of the Duke (Frank 2013c). A similar, perhaps
 even more evident example of patronage can be seen in Guidobaldo's case—who
 will generally serve as a point of reference in the present article on account of the

 fact that the aforementioned studies have given us a relatively detailed knowledge of
 his scientific activity. Francesco Maria II repeatedly exerted direct influence on his
 work:3 he instructed him to write a treatise on the calendar reform (De ecclesiastici

 calendarii restitutione, Pesaro, 1580), to revise Commandino's translation of Pappus's
 Collection.es Mathematicae (Pesaro, 1588) and to compose a treatise on the workings
 of a sundial.4

 1 For further information on the "School of Urbino" see Rose ( 1975) and Gamba and Montebelli ( 1988).

 A proposal for a new way of dating of Commandino's lectures is contained in Frank (2013c). Research into

 the organisation and contents of Commandino's lectures by the present author is similarly underway.

 2 A study of Giovanni Battista Benedetti's work in the light of his connection with the court of Savoy is
 forthcoming. The general problem of the interaction between the courtly milieus and Renaissance mathe

 maticians, work was recently discussed at fifth congress of European Society of History of Science (Athens,

 1 -3 november 2012), symposium "Humanities, mathematics and technics at Renaissance courts", organised
 by Gavagna (Salerno) and the present author.

 3 As the aforementioned studies into his life attest, Guidobaldo was essentially the Duke of Urbino's "court
 mathematician". In this context, it is important to note that the dal Monte family was one of the most
 influential in the duchy at this time. In keeping with his family's stature Guidobaldo was one of the most

 renowned members of the Urbino court, as is evidenced by the "payrolls" of the court—for further reading
 see Frank (2011/2012, Part A, 1.2 and Appendix I, 1.4.4).

 4 As far as De ecclesiastici calendarii restitutione is concerned, the Duke wrote to his agent in Rome
 [Biblioteca Oliveriana Pesaro (referred to henceforward as BOP), ms 458, fol. 17r]: "dipoiché per Vostre

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 307

 Further, Guidobaldo was entrusted by his lord with the supervision of a whole
 series of construction projects: he was consulted for a hydraulic problem connected
 with work on the fountain in front of the ducal palace in Pesaro, and for a simi
 lar issue connected with renovation work on the ducal Villa Mirafiore (Menchetti

 2013; Frank 2011/2012, see particularly Appendix 1,1.3.2). He also appears to have
 supervised works at the port of Pesaro; and is known to have worked as an archi
 tect in the construction of the Santa Maria degli Angeli church in Pesaro (Frank
 2011/2012; see particularly Appendix 1,1.4.1 and 1.4.3), and as a military engineer
 for the Grand Duke of Tuscany and the Dukes of Mantua and Urbino (Menchetti
 2013; Frank 2011/2012, see particularly 1.4.1 e 1.4.3). Finally, he was commis
 sioned by the Duke to ensure the precision of mechanical clocks that were fabri
 cated by craftsmen in the latter's service and that were valuable instruments used in
 diplomacy.5.

 Such duties, exemplified here by the case of Guidobaldo, but testified also
 for other mathematicians such as Muzio Oddi6 (one of the Duke's architects
 from around 1597) and Giulio da Thiene7, led to the exchange of ideas with
 collaborators at various construction sites: architects and engineers like Giro
 lamo Arduini, Carlo Macigni or Francesco Paciotti, and craftsmen, members of
 the so-called "intermediate cultural layer",8 like Simone Barocci (the head of
 a famous workshop producing scientific instruments),9 "mastro Lazzaro" (the

 Footnote 4 continued

 lettere s'intese che al Papa saria piacciuto in ogni modo che si fosse fatta di qua ancora qualche fatica
 sopra la riforma del Calendario, ci risolvemmo di dar questo assunto al Sig.r Guid'Ubaldo de' Marchesi
 del Monte, il quale avea fatto in ciô quel tanto che gl'è stato concesso dalla poca salute che ha (...)·"
 Whilst referring to his involvement in the revision of the Collectiones Mathematicae, Baldi wrote in his
 Life of Commandino: "<l'incarico di curare I'edizione delle Collectiones Mathematicae> fu dato (...) a
 Guidobaldo (...) che lo fece stampare nella città di Pesaro." As for Guidobaldo's composition of a treatise
 on sundials at the behest of the Duke, see the following letter of the Duke's adviser Giulio Cesare Mamiani
 to Guidobaldo on 1 July 1587 (BOP, ms 211, f. 102r/v): "ho fatto vedere a S.A. la scrittura che V.S. Ill.ma
 ha fatto sopra l'orologio che va nel calamaro a fiume, et l'Ait. Sua è restata molto sodisfatta. Ma desidera
 che vi si aggiungi l'informatione (...). Sia dunque contenta V.S. di far tutto questo conforme alla mente di
 S.A. et il tutto più chiaro che si puô, et mandarla quando avrà commodità." A more detailed description of
 these cases is contained in Frank (2011/2012, Appendix 1,1.3.1 and 1.4.1).

 5 For further information on the construction of mechanical clocks in the Duchy of Urbino in the Renais
 sance, their use in diplomacy and the mathematicians' involvement in the fabrication process, see Frank
 (2011/2012, 2013a,b).

 6 For further information on Muzio Oddi see Gamba and Montebelli (1988) and Marr (2011).

 7 Count Giulio da Thiene (died in 1588) was active as a diplomat, military captain and architect in the
 service of the Dukes of Urbino. The Venetian mathematician Francesco Barozzi referred to Thiene as

 "Illustrissimo Comiti Iulio Thiene, viro praestantissimo, omnibus scientiis, arteque militari egregie versato"

 in his description of an instrument for drawing the hyperbola invented by Thiene, in his De admirandum
 illud geometricum Problema (Venice, 1586, pp. 29-31). As far as his role in the scientific environment of

 the Duchy of Urbino goes, we know that Baldi had originally had the intention of dedicating his translation
 of Heron's Autowaia (Venice, 1589) to Thiene, if the latter had not died 1 year before the book's publication.

 8 The notion of "strato culturale intermedio" was introduced by Carlo Maccagni. For further reading see
 Maccagni (1993, 1996).

 9 For further information on the Barocci family, in particular Simone, and their artistic and technical work,

 see the proceedings of the international congress "I Barocci a Urbino tra arte e scienza", 5-6 October 2012

 (http://urbinoelaprospettiva.uniurb.it/barocci.asp), forthcoming.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 construction manager of Villa Mirafiore) or the clockmaker, Pietro Griffi (see
 Sect. 3).

 308 M. Frank

 The interaction with the representatives of this milieu offered fruitful stimuli for

 the mathematicians' scientific work: testimonies of this fact are constituted by Muzio
 Oddi's Fabrica et uso del compasso polimetro (Milano, 1633) and De gli Horologi
 Solari (Venezia, 1638). Another example, Guidobaldo's manuscript Meditatiunculae,
 will be examined in Sect. 3.

 But another category of interlocutors also appears to have left signs on the scholars'

 work: as the following section documents, the cultural milieu at court was characterised

 by a profound interest in philosophical questions, with particular attention paid to the
 philosophy of Aristotle. Thus, in keeping with Guidobaldo, Baldi and Oddi's close

 ties to the court, some of their most important interlocutors were philosophers: Jacopo

 Mazzoni, Federico Bonaventura and Cesare Benedetti. And in fact, certain arguments

 addressed in their writings seem to reflect discussions on natural philosophy they had

 had with them or appear to be developments of such exchanges of ideas (see Sect. 4).
 Thus, indirect impact on their works can also be made out—aside from the Duke's
 direct influence on the mathematicians' work—in particular in the interaction they

 had with their technical collaborators and their philosophical interlocutors.

 These few examples may suffice to illustrate the need to consider the Urbino schol

 ars' scientific work against the background of their cultural, scientific and technical

 environment. Correspondingly, the present article seeks to augment our knowledge of

 these background conditions to their scientific activity: Sect. 2 provides a description

 of the courtly environment, while Sect. 3 outlines important traits of the engineers and

 technicians' milieu. The final part Sect. 4 seeks to illustrate, as a way of example, the

 impact that Guidobaldo's interaction with his environment had on several aspects of
 his scientific work.

 2 The courtly environment

 There are essentially two aspects of the sixteenth-century della Rovere court that are

 relevant for our purposes: the great deal of attention given to philosophy, in particular
 to Aristotle's work; and secondly a profound interest in mathematics in its broader

 sense, including mechanics and fortifications.

 2.1 The interest in mathematics, mechanics and fortifications

 The study of mathematics was not unusual at Renaissance courts. A particular impor
 tance was attributed to it at the Urbino court, already from the time of Federico da

 Montefeltro onwards. Aside from this general cultural trend, there were also concrete

 reasons that urged the Dukes of Urbino to encourage the study of mathematics. The
 dukes were traditionally military captains variously in the service of the Venetian
 Republic, the Pontifical State and the Spanish King.10 The activities that this role
 entailed were often fraught with mechanical challenges, such as the movement of

 10 The most authoritative tome on the history of the Duchy of Urbino remains Dennistoun (1851).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 309

 heavy loads (e.g. cannons), the construction of stable walls or the calculation of the

 trajectory of projectiles.11

 These historical preoccupations remained prominent in the courtly milieu of the

 little duchy, even though the political situation in Italy had increasingly calmed down
 over the course of the sixteenth century. Indeed, the Venetian ambassador, Federico
 Badoer, remarked in 1547 of the counts and associates of Duke Guidobaldo II that "all
 of them live off warfare".12

 This is the context in which Prince Francesco Maria and Guidobaldo dal Monte grew

 up together. Correspondingly, both of them were prepared for a life in the military.
 Guidobaldo was the Prince's page from the age of seven, and had the privilege of
 enjoying the same education as Francesco Maria II della Rovere, which included, inter
 alia, the study of mechanics (and, more generally, of mathematics). Several Venetian
 ambassadors describe the form that the Prince's education took. Lazaro Mocenigo
 wrote in 1571:

 [Il Principe Francesco Maria II] si dà molto alii essercizi del corpo, come al giocar
 délia palla, all'andar a caccia, a piedi ed altri simili essercizi, per abituarsi alli
 incommodi délia guerra, disegnando SuaEccellenza di seguir anch'egli il mestier
 deU'armi (...)· Studia, è intelligente delle matematiche e delle fortificazioni, e
 insomma si diletta di tutte quelle cose che veramente sono appartenenti ad un

 principe.13

 Mocenigo's report:

 Some years later (in 1575), another ambassador, Matteo Zane, was to confirm

 [Duca Francesco Maria II] è studioso e litterato assai, e fa profession soprattutto
 d'arme e d'esser soldato.14

 So, this "intelligent" young Prince took pleasure in "mathematics and fortifica

 tions" even to the extent that he made Commandino teach him it. Baldi writes in

 Commandino 's Life:

 Attendeva [Commandino] egli adunque a condurre a fine moite opere già da
 lui cominciate, quando Francesco Maria, figliuolo di Guidubaldo nostro Duca,
 giovane d'animo eroico, sapendo quanto quelle scienze stiano bene a chi è per

 11 In this context it is interesting to recall that Niccolô Tartaglia's Nova Scientia (Venice, 1537) is dedicated
 to the Duke of Urbino Francesco Maria della Rovere: revealingly, the work is devoted to the very problem

 of identifying the trajectory of projectiles; further, his successor Guidobaldo II della Rovere figures as one

 of Tartaglia's interlocutors in the Quesiti et Inventioni diverse (Venice, 1546).

 12 All passages of the Venetian ambassadors' reports to the senate cited in the present section are published
 in Segarizzi (1913); see p. 171; "Vi è poi de' conti ed altri signori temporali, in numéro 18, parte de' quali
 pagano feudo al Duca (...) e tutti vivono alia guerra."

 13 See Mocenigo's report (1571) in Segarizzi (1913), p. 189: "[Prince Francesco Maria] devotes himself a
 great deal to physical exercise, such as playing with a ball, hunting, walking and other similar exercises, in
 order to accustom himself to the inconveniences of war, as His Excellency plans to undertake the profession

 of arms himself (...). He studies, is proficient in mathematics and fortifications and in any case, he takes

 pleasure in all those things that are becoming of a prince."

 14 See Zane's report (1575) in Segarizzi (1913), p. 212: "[Duke Francesco Maria II] is studious and really
 well-read, and devotes himself particularly to matters of war and to be a soldier."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 310 M.Frank

 sostenere il carico del governo ed è per dar opera all'arti militari, non comportô
 che Federico se ne stesso rinchiuso fra le mura délia casa paterna, ma propostogli

 onoratissimi partiti, voile, corne aveva già fatto il Padre, chiamarlo ai suoi servizi.
 Nello quale entrato leggendo a quel Principe gli Elementi d'Euclide apportava
 lui molta sodisfazione nell'interpretarli.15

 This account is confirmed by Francesco Maria II's autobiography.16 Along with

 the Prince, other members of his court like Guidobaldo, in all probability his brother

 Francesco Maria dal Monte, Alderano Cybo, Giulio Giordani and other passing guests,
 like Torquato Tasso, frequented these lessons as well.

 The enthusiasm with which the young Prince attended these lessons is impressively

 borne out by another document from a few months after Duke Francesco Maria II's

 ascension to the throne in 1574. A member of the court, Almerigo Almerici, wrote to
 his son, Virginio:

 II S.r Duca sta bene ma occupatissimo sempre ne' negotii et nelle audienze
 publiche che sonno ogni giorno indeffessamente. Et sin qui fa reuscita di gran
 prencipe et dice che il maggior scontento che abbia il non poter continuare li
 suoi studii.17

 2.2 The interest in philosophy at court

 Preoccupation with war and an interest in certain mathematical disciplines were not
 the only traits that characterised the courtly environment: above all, throughout the

 fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the Duchy of Urbino was an important cultural centre.
 Indeed, famous artists, architects and men of letters like Raffaelo Sanzi, Piero della

 Francesca, Leon Battista Alberti, Luca Pacioli, Francesco di Giorgio Martini, Pietro
 Aretino or Torquato Tasso were connected with its court. The ambassador Badoer
 stressed this point:

 La corte del Duca e di tutta quella casa, come per una consuetudine, è stata
 sempre onorevole, percioché in ogni tempo, e nell'armi e nelle lettere, ella ha
 avuto de' più segnalati uomini d'ltalia.18

 15 Nenci (1998): "Thus, [Commandino] expected to complete many works that he had already started when
 Francesco Maria, son of our Duke Guidobaldo [II], a young man of heroic mind, refused to allow Federico
 to remain closed between the walls of his paternal house, knowing how much the sciences are of use to
 any who must bear the responsibility of power and attend to matters of war. So, with an offer of lucrative

 remuneration, the Prince wanted to call him into his service as his father had done before. Having entered

 this service, Commandino lectured the Prince on the Elements of Euclid whose interpretation brought him
 much satisfaction."

 See footnote 21.

 17 BOP, ms 1577, letter number 35 (10 January 1575): "The Duke is well but always very busy with affairs

 and public audiences that go on unremittingly every day. And hitherto he succeeds in his role as a great
 prince and says that his only sorrow is that of not being able to persevere with his studies."

 18 See Badoer's report (1547) in Segarizzi (1913), p. 165: "The court of the Duke and of this entire house,
 as if by custom, has always been honourable: in fact, at all times it hosted the most notable men in both
 warfare and letters from the whole of Italy."

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 311

 This interest in letters and humanities extended also to philosophy. An extant descrip
 tion of Carnival 1574 is particularly interesting in this regard, as it allows us to get
 an idea of the general intellectual climate at the court, and especially of its members'

 interest in philosophy (the reader should note, for instance, the presence of the Prince
 (and of the Duke) at the time of the following discussions):

 Abbiamo goduto ancora molti ragionamenti (...) passati fra molti begli intelletti
 come dire il Mazzone da Cesena, (...), il Tasso, il Pino da Cagli e ms. Cesare
 Benedetti (...). Intesi primieramente che presô ragionamento innanzi il Principe
 alia venuta del Mazzone (...) e fu fra il Mazzone e ms. Cesare sopra la differenza
 ch'è fra Platone et Aristotile intorno alia Reminicenza, dove il Mazzone cerco di

 diffendere l'opinione di Platone e de' seguaci e ms. Cesare vi sosteneva quella
 d'Aristotile.

 (...) Un'altra volta s'attaccarono in festa mentre si ballava il Tasso et il Mazzone,

 et io mi trovai présente. Fra gli altri a una parte délia contesa ch'era allora cioè
 che il Tasso teneva ch'Epicuro ponesse tutto il sommo bene ne' piaceri del corpo
 e che fosse cattivo, et il Mazzone pareva che tenesse ch'egli avesse avuto sempre
 buona opinione nelle cose morali e che perô egli non fosse tale quale si trova
 descritto da Cicerone e da Plutarco (...), sopracché contesero un pezzo dov'io
 conobbi veramente che quel Mazzone era d'una gran lettione e di grandissima
 memoria e dottrina più che mediocre, et il Tasso avvertito molto et accorto
 ragionatore.19

 If confirmation were needed of the Duke's interest in philosophy, Torquato Tasso
 (who had lived for a certain period at the Urbino court), called Francesco Maria II
 della Rovere a "Prince educated as a philosopher".20 This statement is confirmed by

 the latter's autobiography (written in the third person):

 19 BOP, ms 390, fols. 92r-97v: "We have had the pleasure of many other discussions involving remarkable
 intellects like that of [Jacopo] Mazzoni of Cesena, [Torquato] Tasso, Pino of Cagli and squire Cesare
 Benedetti. (...) I first heard that a discussion had begun in front of the Prince upon the arrival of Mazzoni. It
 was between Mazzoni and the squire Cesare and about the difference that exists between Plato and Aristotle
 with regard to Reminiscence; Mazzoni tried to defend the opinion of Plato and his followers, and master
 Cesare took up Aristotle's. Another time, during the festivities and the dances, Tasso and Mazzone had a

 dispute and I was present. One part of the contention was that Tasso held that Epicure considered the carnal
 pleasures as the greatest good and that he was evil; Mazzoni appeared to argue that he had always had a

 high opinion of moral matters and that, therefore, he was not as described by Cicero and Plutarch (...); they

 argued about this a while, and I truly recognised that this Mazzoni was very well-read, had a most tenacious
 memory and was of a more than average refinement, and that Tasso is a very sagacious and perspicacious
 thinker." A part of this passage is presented in Gamba and Montebelli (1988, p. 31).

 20 See the letter written by Tasso to Francesco Maria II in 1578 (Guasti 1852, vol. I, pp. 279-280): "E
 s'avessi cosî a parlar con Vostra Altezza come ho a scrivere, non senza molto rossore potrei ragionare:
 ma la scrittura non arrossa; e con Vostra Altezza posso laudar me stesso, senza noiar Lei in alcuna parte:
 percioché Ella è cosî ricca de l'eccellenze e de le laudi convenevoli a principe, ed a principe formato di
 filosofo, che udendo le laudi de' privati, non ha che invidiare ο di che rammaricarsi."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 312 M. Frank

 [Il Principe] ritornô alii suoi studii tralasciati mentre era stato fuori d'Italia, li

 quali furono prima di matematica lettagli da Federico Comandino, poi di filosofia
 da Cesare Benedetti, Giacomo Mazzone e Cristofero Guarimone.21

 The importance attributed to (Aristotelian) philosophy by Francesco Maria II must

 have been considerable, as we can deduce from his diary:

 A' 25 <gennaio 1585>: detti fine di vedere tutte l'opere d'Aristotele, nelle quali
 mi ci sono affaticato non meno di 15 anni, essendomi state lette da messer Cesare

 Benedetti da Pesaro per la maggior parte.22

 By contrast, his studies of the Bible lasted <4 years.23 This is even more revealing

 when one considers that Francesco Maria II was deeply religious.

 In short, the Duke's profound interest in Aristotle's philosophy must have had

 tangible consequences for other members of the courtly milieu as well: in fact, the
 leading philosophers of the Duchy, Federico Bonaventura and Cesare Benedetti, were

 proponents of Aristotelian thought.24

 2.3 The interests of the mathematicians and their interlocutors: common ground

 with the cultural milieu of the court

 Information about Prince/Duke25 Francesco Maria II's interests in mathemat

 ics/mechanics and philosophy might seem, at first sight, hardly relevant to a better

 understanding of the Urbino mathematicians' scientific environment. In reality, how

 ever, the combination of interests in philosophy and mathematics seems to have rubbed

 off on Guidobaldo, Baldi and Oddi's contacts as well, such as the Count of Carpegna,
 Curzio Ardizi, Jacopo Mazzoni, Omero Tortora and Pier Matteo Giordani (all of whom
 were members of the court at the same time).

 Tommaso, Count of Carpegna, a regular participant in diplomatic missions on behalf

 of the Duke, was interested in philosophy and got encouraged to study Aristotle's philo

 sophical writings by his brother-in-law, the aforementioned Federico Bonaventura. At

 the same time, he was equally interested in mechanics: even though the provenance
 of Baldi's Exercitationes remains obscure, (Baldi 2010; see particularly its introduc
 tion). the funeral oration in his honour attests that it was the Count of Carpegna who

 21 BOP, ms 386, fol. 223r/v (written in the third person): "he returned to his studies that were interrupted

 during his absence from Italy; firstly in the field of mathematics, taught to him by Federigo Commandino,
 and afterwards in philosophy with Cesare Benedetti, Giacomo Mazzoni and Cristofero Guarimone." Inter

 estingly, the Duke deleted the name "Felice Paciotto" before "Cesare Benedetti". The reason for this deletion
 remains unclear.

 22 Sangiorgi (1989): "25 [January 1585]: I finished looking over all the works of Aristotle. I have struggled
 with them for no <15 years, having had them read to me mainly by Cesare Benedetti."

 23 Sangiorgi (1989): "18 [agosto 1587]: Finii di vedere tutta la Bibbia con diversi argomenti, nel quale
 studio vi posi il tempo di tre anni e dieci mesi."

 24 Furthermore, the Duke's library also reflects the Duke's pronounced interest in philosophy; see Mei,
 Paoli (2008).

 25 Francesco Maria II became Duke of Urbino in September 1574, succeeding his father Guidobaldo II
 della Rovere.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 313

 asked Baldi to write (what was potentially the first draft of) the commentary on the
 Quaestiones Mechanicae.

 Curzio Ardizi, a man of letters and close friend of Baldi and Torquato Tasso's, must

 have also enjoyed an education in mechanics and/or fortification: a recently discovered
 document reveals that he was commissioned by Duke Guidobaldo II della Rovere to go

 to Tunis in order to draw up maps of several fortifications and send back information

 about their surroundings.26

 Jacopo Mazzoni, an important interlocutor of Galileo's and famous philosopher of

 his time who had spent much of 1574/5 at the Urbino court, must have been notably
 influenced by the climate and interests of the court, as his work De triplici hominum

 vita (finished and printed in 1576, Cesena) reveals: in the preface he thanks Francesco

 Maria II della Rovere and the dal Monte family for their support. The existence of a
 40-pages treatise devoted to fortifications and warfare, in spite of the philosophical

 character of the work, can be interpreted as a reflection of the influence exerted on

 him during his period at the della Rovere court.27

 Omero Tortora, a historian and the author of the Historia di Francia (Venezia,

 1619) appears to have been similarly influenced by this courtly environment with
 its orientation towards warfare and mechanics: in his work about French history, he

 discussed amongst other things the link between cannonball's potential for destruction

 and on the materials of which they are made. Interestingly, Tortora's reasoning was to

 become one of the topics of the controversy involving Grassi/Sarsi and Galileo.28

 26 Archivio di Stato Firenze (referred to henceforward as ASF), Ducato di Urbino, I, 127, fol. 1047r: "ho

 preso ardire di darne anco segno all'Ecc.za V.ra et mandarLe, come fo, il dissegno di Tunesi, della Goletta,
 del Forte nuovo, et di tutta quella riviera di Barbaria, che désignai da quei luoghi più eminenti del Porto
 Farina, in quel miglior modo che ho saputo The entire letter is published in Frank (2011/2012, p. 667).

 27 Parts of this treatise are transcribed in Frank (2011/2012, pp. 687-690).

 28 One should not exclude the possibility that Galileo became aware of this text through Guidobaldo himself,
 who might have spoken to him about the work of Tortora, his disciple. For further information about the
 controversy, see Galileo (1977, pp. 213-216). Sarsi had written: "Anzi io so che talvolta le palle di piomo
 lanciate da grandi bombarde si liquefanno nell'aria. Omero Tortora, come modernissimo cost diligentissimo
 scrittore delle cose galliche, dice che talvolta fu inutile la gran forza delle palle lanciate dalle macchine
 belliche a distruggere le mura perché, essendo prima piccole e di ferro, erano state poi ingrandite con
 piombo fatto cadere sopra loro: <<Cesplodendo infatti, dice, contro le mura, poiché il piombo si liquefaceva
 nell'aria, solo il piccolo globo interno di ferro, grande quanto un nocciolo, perso l'involucro, arrivava a!
 muro.S> " Galileo replied in II Saggiatore: "Ma perché non punto deroga di fede né di dignità all'istorico
 l'arrecare d'un effetto naturale vero una ragione non vera, essendo che all'istorico appartiene il solo effetto,
 ma la ragione è officio del filosofo; perô credendo io al Signor Omero Tortora che le palle d'artiglieria,
 per essere state incamiciate di piombo, facesser poco effetto nel batter la muraglia nemica, piglierô ardire
 di negargli la ragione ch'egli, ricevendola dalla commune filosofia, n'adduce; (...) Credo dunque al Signor

 Tortora, che le palle di ferro covertate di piombo nella batteria di Corbel facesser poco effetto, e che di loro

 si ritrovasser l'anime di ferro spogliate di piombo; e questo è tutto quello ch'appartiene aU'istorico: ma non

 credo già l'altra parte filosofica, cioè che il piombo si liquefacesse, e che perciô si trovasser nude le palle di
 ferro; ma credo che giungendo con quello estremo impeto che dal cannone veniva cacciata la palla sopra la

 muraglia, la coverta di piombo in quella parte che rimaneva compressa tra'l muro esterno e l'interior palla di
 ferro si ammaccasse e sbranasse, e che l'istesso ο poco meno facesse anco l'altra parte del piombo opposta,

 schiacciandosi sopra il ferro, e che tutto il piombo, dilaniato e trasfigurato, saltasse in diverse bande, il quale

 poi, imbrattato da calcinacci e perciô simile ad altri fragmenti della ruina, malagevolmente si ritrovasse,
 e forse anco per avventura non fusse con quella diligenza ricercato, ce richiederebbe la curiosità di chi
 volesse venire in cognizione s'ei si fusse strutto ο pur dilacerato" (Italian translation by F. Flora). I would

 like to thank Prof. P. D. Napolitani for this suggestion.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 And finally, Pier Matteo Giordani, a close friend and interlocutor of Guidobaldo,

 314 M.Frank

 Baldi and Oddi's, was also interested in both mathematics—it is he who was

 approached by Baldi for the revision of the In mechanica Aristotelis problemata
 Exercitationes—29 and philosophy.30

 So, despite the diversity of professions pursued by the aforementioned mathemati
 cians' friends and correspondents, they have one point in common: their interest in

 mechanics/fortifications and often, an accompanying interest in philosophy or the
 humanities. The poet Ardizi who designed maps of fortifications in Tunisia; the his
 torian Tortora who pondered the material properties of cannonballs; the philosopher

 Mazzoni who included questions related to fortifications in his philosophical writing;
 the diplomat and enthusiast of philosophy, the Count of Carpegna, who simultane
 ously entertained an interest in mechanics: all of these sundry individuals and their

 recurring interest in the same subjects offer a valuable insight into the cultural spirit
 of the Urbino court.

 3 The world of the technicians in the Duchy of Urbino

 Several documents testify that the Urbino mathematicians, along with their close ties

 to the court, were also strongly connected with the engineers and technicians of the

 duchy.

 It is known that the Duchy of Urbino was an important centre of military archi
 tecture. In the course of few decades it had generated and hosted several eminent
 representatives of this field, such as Francesco Maria della Rovere, Francesco di Gior
 gio Martini, Gerolamo Genga, Giovanni Battista Belluzzi, Francesco Paciotti etc. Like
 other contemporary architects, the mathematicians Giulio da Thiene, Muzio Oddi and

 Guidobaldo were also repeatedly employed in their capacity as military engineers.

 This aside, various (large-scale) construction projects relating to civil architecture
 were undertaken in the duchy at the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the
 seventeenth century: the construction of the S. Maria degli Angeli church, the Vecchio

 Teatro di Corte (the theatre inside the ducal palace), renovation work at the port of
 Pesaro, the construction of the ducal Villa Vedetta and modifications at the Imperiale
 and Mirafiore villas of Duke Francesco Maria II.

 A particularly important technical branch in the Duchy was the fabrication of instru

 ments of precision—the workshops in which these were produced were nationally, if

 not even internationally renowned.31 In particular, the devices they produced com

 29 BOP, ms 430, fol. 59r/v, published in Frank (2011/2012). For further evidence of his interest in math
 ematics, see his correspondences with Guidobaldo, Baldi and Oddi which are conserved in BOP, ms 413,
 426 and 430.

 30 An important testament to Giordani's interest in philosophy is provided by the letters he exchanged with

 Guidobaldo about Aristotle's Politics, and the problem of the incorruptibility of the heavens on the occasion
 of the 1604 nova, published in G. Arrighi, Un grande scienziato italiano: Guidobaldo dal Monte in alcune
 carte inedite della Biblioteca Oliveriana di Pesaro, in "Atti dell'Accademia Lucchese di Scienze, Lettere

 ed Arte", XII2 (1965). Further, Giordani was asked by Fabio Albergati to oversee the revision of the latter's
 Dei discorsi politici libri cinque (Roma, 1602), in which Albergati attacked Jean Bodin's Les six livres de
 la République (Paris, 1576) and defended Aristotle; see BOP, ms 402, fols. 30-49.

 31 For more on this, see footnote 5.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 315

 prised mechanical clocks—which were even offered as gifts to Popes, Cardinals,
 Kings and Dukes—but also scientific instruments, like planispheres, high precision
 balances or proportional compasses. It was no coincidence that Galileo had part of his

 military compasses put together in no other place than Urbino.

 In order to give an idea of what the mathematicians' relationship with this envi
 ronment was like, it is worth tracing the correspondences that Guidobaldo kept in

 1583 in which the engineering works that were being conducted to improve the water

 supply of Villa Mirafiore, and oversight of the fabrication of clocks by craftsmen in
 the Duke's service were discussed.

 On 1 September 1583 the ducal architect, Girolamo Arduini, wrote to the Duke's

 adviser, Giovanni de' Tommasi:

 Siamo stati il S.r Guid'Ubaldo et io et mastro Lazzaro al Barchetto. Et infatti

 mastro Lazzaro assicura che l'acqua montarà sicuramente et gettarà la mettà a

 Mirafiore, et l'altra parte sopra il terrapieno per il mezo di quelle chiavi come
 dissi a Sua Alt.z Ser.ma. Et abbiamo anco livellato che dal dado del ponte ove si
 dee pigliar l'acqua sino al piano del terrapieno l'acqua deve ascendere piedi 22
 et averà di caduta da detto piano sino al piano del barchetto nanti la casa piedi
 30.32

 The enlargement of a fish tank in the park of Villa Mirafiore had engendered prob

 lems with the water supply. After months of vain endeavours to resolve the problem,
 Guidobaldo was summoned to offer an expert's inspection. As the preceding letter
 shows, Guidobaldo was accompanied by Arduini and the construction manager of
 Mirafiore, "master Lazaro".

 Guidobaldo must also have been encouraged to report back to Count de' Tommasi,

 as he wrote to him on the very same day:

 Questa mattina siamo stati al Barchetto, il Cavaliere Arduino e Mastro Lazaro et
 io. Et ci siamo risoluti che l'acqua potrà andar sul terraglio vicin'alla Porta del
 Ponte, che se ben il terraglio è più alto che non è la fonte di Mirafiore, nondimeno
 l'acqua ci andarà. (...)
 Siamo poi venuti a ragionamento tutti tre del sito di far una conserva dove l'acqua

 si possa radunare accioché la fonte di Mirafiore possi gettar altratanto più acqua,
 cioè farla gettare in 12 ore quello che la getterebbe in 24. Tutti siamo d'accordo
 che chi la facesse vicino alla fonte che sarebbe meglio, ma perché bisognerebbe
 far <la conserva in alto> com'un campanile e ci vorebbe gran spesa, pero
 questa si lascia da parte. Dicevamo per questo che volevamo far detta conserva
 ο in quella possessione dei Frati (credo che siano di Sant'Agostino) per esser in
 alto il luogo, overo farla più in qua vers'il ponte. Et io gli ho detto che non la

 faria in nessun di questi luoghi, ma che la farei là su dove è la conservetta che è
 il principio dove l'acqua comincia a entrar nelli cannoni; perché quello è il più
 alto luogo che ci sia, e tutti i luoghi sono più bassi di quello. Ε cosi l'acqua di
 li averà la maggior caduta ch'ella possi aver. Et anche credo che la si farà con
 minor spesa poi che ne è fatta una parte, et a Mastro Lazaro è piaciuta questa

 32 BOP, ms 434, fol. 58r/v.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 opinione. Dice poi il Cavalière che mi ha da mostrar non so che altro a Mirafiore
 che, come io l'avrô veduto, ne darô conto a V.S.33

 The letter attests to the discussions Guidobaldo had with his collaborators, in partic

 ular about the construction of the water reservoir and the water conduits ("cannoni").

 One can see that the reduction of financial costs was a clear priority; furthermore, the

 on-site inspection was no isolated incident ("dice poi il Cavalière che mi ha da mostrar
 non so che altro a Mirafiore").

 Count de' Tommasi's accepted the proposals of the joint inspection and instructed

 316 M.Frank

 Arduini on what measures were to be taken:

 Poiché il S.or Guidobaldo, V.S. et mastro Lazzaro dicano che l'acqua montarà,

 bisogna mo' pensare che'l S.or Duca vuoli che si facci il casino del Barchetto (...).
 Ho visto quello che V.S. mi dice in materia delli condotti di legno li quali, se
 fanno danno, è necessario a farli accomodare, né intorno a ciô bisognava aspettar

 altri commandamenti. V.S. lo facci dunque et quanto prima.

 Nelle cose del condotto di piombo che si ha da fare nel ponte, V.S. potrà essere
 col S.r Guidobaldo et con il campanaro per sapere la quantité di piombo che si
 arà da far venire di Venetia (...).34

 The problem of choosing the appropriate material for the water conduits (wood
 or lead) dominated the following series of letters. It emerges that Guidobaldo had to

 accompany Arduini to the manufacturer of the lead conduits ("campanaro", as such
 also the manufacturer of bells), as the following letter of the latter to Tommasi of 5

 September attests:

 Oggi dovevamo essere il S.r Guid'Ubaldo et io con il campanaro et non si è
 potuto per essere ito fuori, domattina non mancaremo et rissolvere il tutto et
 anco che fornisca il cannone di piombo per far l'isperienze delle conserve (...)·35

 It is probable that Guidobaldo was also involved in the experiments to see if the

 leaden conduits transported a sufficient quantity of water ("isperienze delle conserve").

 The extant sources also reveal that, at the time of his various inspections at Villa

 Mirafiore, Guidobaldo also had duties of a different nature to fulfil at the request of the
 Duke, namely the supervision of the clockmakers' labour. Again, besides Guidobaldo,
 Count de' Tommasi was involved as the Duke's intermediary, as well as G. Arduini
 and some clockmakers. In a letter of 30 August, Arduini wrote to de' Tommasi about

 the difficulty involved in obtaining a certain watchcase in the form of a tortoise ("tar
 taruca") from a clockmaker called Tortorino:

 Giunto a Urbino parlai al Tortorino, il quale mi disse che non vorebbe manco

 tempo di un mese a fornire la tartaruca ancorché la vista non gli serviva molto,

 et che non puô per otto dî mettersi a lavorare: perché era li in procinto di mettere

 33 BOP, ms 426, fol. 155r/v. Published by Gamba (1995, pp. 104-105).

 34 BOP, ms 434, fol. 98r/v: the letter is not dated, but it clearly refers to the joint inspection of Guidobaldo,
 Arduini and master Lazzaro.

 35 BOP, ms 434, fol. 65r/v.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 317

 per monaca una sua nepote; et questo è quanto ho potuto cavare, oltre li prieghi
 et commandamenti dettoLi in nome di Sua Alt.a Ser.ma.36

 Faced with this difficulty, Arduini seems to have approached the famous clock
 maker, Pietro Griffi of Pesaro. The following letter corroborates that Guidobaldo had

 the task of controlling the precision of the fabricated clock:

 Ho mandata a dire a mastro Pietro orologiero, che dia l'orologio della tartaruca
 al S.r Guid'Ubaldo, actio veda se è giusto; il mastro me ha detto che subbito lo

 portarebbeno et vi sono poi stato io, et ho ritrovato che mastro Pietro è andato a

 Imola, et non sarà qui prima che domani.37

 Guidobaldo's afore-cited letter of 1 September informs us that the mathematician

 did indeed find something in the clock that had to be mended:

 Ho poi tenuto la toretta da che Vostra Signoria mi scrisse l'altra Sua, ma non

 Glene voglio dir altro per adesso perché come torna mastro Pietro gli faro acco
 modar alcune cosette e poi scriverô in che modo vadano le ore. Ε Gli bascio le
 mani. Di Pesaro al primo di settembre del 1583.

 Work on the clock then suffered a delay, as we learn from the following letter written

 at the end of September, again by Arduini to Count de' Tommasi:

 Ιο ho lassato la cura al S.r Guid'Ubaldo che manda l'orologio, il quale è stato
 fornito questa sera. Infatti l'orefice non puô dare fornito le tazze prima delli

 diece di ottobre, et le sono più che posso al pelo ancorché egli mena le mani et
 lavoraria no di notte ma m.s Franc.co non li vol dare due libre di candele.38

 On a similar occasion the following note was sent to Guidobaldo at the behest of
 the Duke ("Sua Altezza", "S.A.") with a series of instructions on how to construct two

 clocks, one that needed to be wound every 30 h and another which was destined for
 Spain (the royal court?) that operated for 26-28 h. It emerges that Guidobaldo was
 personally instructed by the Duke ("avendo inteso apresso poco l'intentione di S.A.")
 and that he had to engage even with technical details ("l'assicuri che tirano quelle ore
 che si délibéra").

 Che l'orologio senza Γ ore et i quarti, et che sveglia, et che se i quarti sonassero
 con due campane come il tamburo vecchio, gli piacerà assai, che vuol che sia
 con la [spinala] che sia lavorato all'antica, senza inventione, che tin 30 ore.
 Quanto al modello del tamburo, ha da essere come V.S. giudicherà ch'abbi
 gusto. Et inviarlo a Urbino e in man mia, avertendo ch'è pericoloso il giustar il

 svegliatolo come è insieme, dove si mostra l'ore et i quarti; nel mandar inanzi et
 in dietro che non facci sonar l'ore ο i quarti senza preaviso. V.S. dunque potrà
 far una poliza, avendo inteso apresso poco l'intentione di S.A.

 36 BOP, ms 434, fol. 52r.

 37 BOP, ms 434, fol. 57r/v; G. Arduini to Count de' Tommasi, 1 September 1583.

 38 BOP, ms 434, fol. 70r-71r; 27 September 1583.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 318 M.Frank

 L'altro <orologio> di Spagna ha da tirar per il manco le 26 hore, ma se fusse 28
 saria meglio, perché Mastro Pietro non vuole dire il vero, et pero V.S. l'assicuri

 che tirano quelle ore che si délibéra. Quanto alla gente, questo Guem è tanto caro

 che bisognerà che proviamo a chi ci fa meglio partito, ma che mastro Alessandro

 non ci impedischi perché Gline toraeria male.39

 In conclusion, the preceding letters demonstrate that Guidobaldo, in spite of being

 a mathematician by vocation, was entrusted with duties of a technical nature by the
 Duke. The autumn of 1583, with the repeated inspections of the water supply at

 Villa Mirafiore and the regular checks on the precision of clocks that characterised the

 autumn of 1583 do not appear to have been particularly exceptional. Fortune has it that
 the letter book of the aforementioned Duke's close adviser, Giulio Cesare Mamiani,

 has been conserved. It contains his letters of 1587 and permits other interesting insights

 into the tasks Guidobaldo was commissioned with by the Duke: modification of the
 Villa Mirafiore, supervision of the construction at the port of Pesaro, revisions of

 Commandino's translation of the Collectiones Mathematicae and the composition of a

 treatise on a particular sundial ("la scrittura che VS. Ill.ma ha fatto sopra l'orologio"40)

 The resulting engagement with questions of a practical nature and interaction with

 technical collaborators stimulated his scientific work. This is easily evidenced by an

 analysis of his manuscript Meditatiunculae.4] Apart from using the manuscript to fur

 ther his studies of perspective, astronomy and gnomonics, Guidobaldo also addressed

 practical topics: how to target with a cannon, the advantages and disadvantages of cer
 tain kinds of mechanical machines, the maximal and minimal inclination of roofs, and

 the water intake of a mill. In view of what is known about his practical activities, these

 reflections appear aimed at an elaboration of Guidobaldo's everyday observations and
 discoveries as a civil and military engineer and inventor of scientific instruments.

 On pages 39^0, Guidobaldo deals with the question of how to target a specific

 point on a wall with a cannon. Interestingly, he supposes that the cannonball will follow
 a straight line as its trajectory. On this occasion, however, Guidobaldo is not so much
 interested in the actual trajectory as in a practical concern he must have encountered

 himself as a result of his activity as a military engineer: if the cannon is adjusted badly
 and the cannonball therefore ends up at point / instead of e (see Fig. 1), how can this
 problem be corrected?

 Without going into details, Guidobaldo's suggested solution also attests the close

 relationship this question had to a practical dilemma: a straw (!) would have to be

 applied at the aperture of the cannon in order to bring the straw's top g in line with the

 eye point a and the impact point /. By moving the cannon in such a way that g (taken

 as an adjustment point) comes to lie on the line ae, the second shot will hit e (Fig. 1).

 The entry on pp. 135-136 of the Meditatiunculae discusses the advantages and

 disadvantages of wheels that are vertically or horizontally placed. It shows a different

 39 BOP, ms 430, fol. 217r; the folio reports the recipient (Guidobaldo), but unfortunately neither the date
 nor the sender.

 40 BOP, ms 211, fols. 108r, 102 r/v, 131r-132v.

 41 Bibliothèque Nationale de France (Paris), ms. Latin 10246; for a transcription and analysis of the
 Meditatiunculae see Tassora (2001).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life

 319

 Fig. 1 The problem of a badly adjusted cannon: pp. 39-40 of the Meditatiunculae (this and the following
 figure of Meditatiunculae are taken from Tassora 2001)

 Fig. 2 The representation of a
 running wheel with a men
 operating it in C, found on
 p. 135 of the Meditaliunculae

 Guidobaldo compared to the one we know from the Mechanicorum Liber: instead
 of dealing abstract geometrical questions to do with machines, he is interested here
 in the functional and financial aspects of different types of real machines. Thus, he
 discusses the disadvantages of vertical wheels (pointing out the higher cost required
 to ensure their stability, their shorter lever arm, the impossibility of using animals to
 power them, etc.) compared to horizontal ones (Fig. 2).

 Other manuscript entries (pp. 59-61) show Guidobaldo's considerations of how
 to reduce the friction that occurs during the operation of machines like pulleys or
 winches, or pulleys systems (p. 147). This is another question that is not addressed in
 the Mechanicorum Liber, but which is clearly a typical engineering concern.

 4 The impact of Guidobaldo's environment on his scientific work

 How was the scientific work of the Urbino mathematicians influenced by their inter
 action with their surroundings? The present section seeks to shed more light on this

 question, in addition to the information presented in the introductory part of this arti
 cle. In particular, the recent research into the circumstances surrounding Guidobaldo's

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 320 M. Frank

 work provides us with a detailed example of how these contacts with the Urbino milieu

 influenced the scholars' scientific activity. For this reason, I shall focus on Guidobaldo

 in the present section, in particular on three aspects of his work that will help to illu
 minate the question at hand: the integration of problems raised by his interlocutors

 into his writings; his use of precision instruments in both theory and practice; and his

 engagement with questions relating to natural philosophy in his works.

 4.1 Guidobaldo's scientific writings: the consideration of problems discussed

 in his environment

 The present paragraph presents two cases that show how Guidobaldo addressed prob
 lems that were discussed by those around him in his work.

 A particularly interesting entry for our purposes is found on page 6 of the Medi

 tatiunculae: it deals with a geometrical problem which consists in showing that two
 certain lines in a rectangular triangle are equal (see Fig. 3). In the upper left corner
 Guidobaldo wrote: "Problem proposed by Count Giulio da Thiene". There are some
 grounds for supposing that Guidobaldo's solution to this question goes back to the
 early 1570s.42

 Interestingly, at a later time—probably in the first half of the 1590s—he commented

 at the bottom of the page:43 "This problem helps a lot in perspective: if the eye is in a
 and if one sees the line db, one can find the line fg which appears to have the same

 size as db, being the section equidistant to de". This comment is very telling: with all

 probability, Guidobaldo realised the relevance of this problem to perspective when he
 was working on the Perspectivae Libri sex (Pesaro, 1600). Thus, when he addressed

 the question of how to construct his main work on perspective, he recalled the problem

 that had been raised several years before by Count Giulio da Thiene and, so, integrated
 it into his treatise:44 in fact, Proposition 13 of the Perspectivae Libri sex's first book

 repeats the very same problem with slightly different wording (Fig. 4).45

 A second example of Guidobaldo's integration of problems discussed in his social
 environment is found at the end of the first book of the Paraphrasis where he deals

 42 Frank, (2013d) A Proposal for a New Dating of Guidobaldo dal Monte's Meditatiunculae, in Bollettino
 di Storia delle Science mathematiche, forthcoming.

 43 The use of Italian (as opposed to Latin which is used in the main body of the text) and of different ink

 to write these lines indicate that this comment did not form part of the initial entry. Given the comment's

 reference to perspective it seems reasonable to date it to the period when Guidobaldo was studying this
 branch of mathematics. As his correspondences show, this period can be located in the early 1590s.

 44 Note that a consistent part of the Meditatiunculae is devoted to studies of the rules of perspective.
 Guidobaldo simply had to browse through the earlier manuscript pages to find "Count Giulio's problem",
 while he worked on perspective in the second part of the notebook.

 45 The first book of the Perspectivae Libri sex is devoted to the question of when certain lines appear bigger
 than or equal to others in perspective. In the thirteenth proposition Guidobaldo discusses the conditions of

 the lines' equal appearance; "Problema Propositio XIII" (p. 23) states: "Oculo dato, dataque linea terminata
 in subiecto piano existente, planum autem per lineam et oculum transiens sit subiecto piano erectum;
 sectionem subiecto piano erectam invenire, in qua apparens linea datae lineae aequalis appareat et aequalis
 existât." There he proves that "dico sectionem per Ε F ductam subiecto piano erectam esse, lineamque Ε F
 in sectione ipsi BC et aequalem apparere et aequalem esse."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life

 321

 Fig. 3 Guidobaldo shows in the first and third case that gf is equal to bd and in the second that ed is equal

 to bd (Méditâtiunculae, p. 6)

 Fig. 4 The diagram of Prop. 13
 in the first book of the

 Perspectivae Libri sex.
 Guidobaldo shows that Ε F is

 equal to CB, analogously to the

 first case of Fig. 3

 with the following problem: is a plane figure necessarily divided into two parts of

 equal area by a line passing through its barycentre? He proves that generally the parts
 after the intersection do not have the same area. Leaving aside the wording, the same

 proof can also be found on p. 116 of the Mediatiunculae (Figs. 5).

 An idea about the provenance of this problem—one of the rare own theorems
 that Guidobaldo includes in his commentary on the Archimedean propositions of the

 Equilibrium of Planes—is given by the following letter from Francesco Guerrini,
 Guidobaldo's disciple, to Clavius, few months after the death of his teacher:46

 After the death of the most Illustrious Guido dal Monte, may God rest his soul,

 several gentlemen of Pesaro asked me to show them the practice of the Mechan
 icorum Liber of the aforesaid Sir, as I am doing. We already finished the first

 46 Archivio délia Pontificia Université Gregoriana, 529, fols. 112r—113v; published in Chr. Clavius, Cor
 rispondenza, critical edition by U. Baldini and P.D. Napolitani, 7 vols., Pisa, Edizioni del Dipartimento di
 Matematica dell'Università di Pisa, 1992.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 322

 M. Frank

 Fig. 5 Guidobaldo shows in the
 last proposition of the

 Paraphrasis' first book that
 AFG and BCGF do not have

 the same area (D being the
 triangle's bary centre and F G the

 intersecting line)

 chapter Delia Libra and at the beginning there has been a great controversy about
 the definition of the centre of gravity, about these words:

 <$Cln fact, if a plane is drawn through this centre, intersecting the figure in an

 arbitrary way, so it always divides it into equiponderating47 parts.
 And if one wanted to insist on the wording "intersecting in an arbitrary way",

 it would seem that the two parts, after the section, would weigh equally, but in

 reality the contrary can be proven. (...) I beg You to tell me Your opinion which
 would be of great use for me (...)■

 Thus, Guerrini's letter (and the discussions among the "gentlemen of Pesaro")
 concerns exactly the same problem as addressed by Guidobaldo in the last proposition

 of the Paraphrasis' first book. Formulated in terms of modern physics (in the three
 dimensional case), it is equivalent with the question: does the intersection of a body
 by a plane passing through its barycentre create two parts of equal weight, or rather

 of equal moment?

 In the light of the latter's activity as a teacher of future engineers, the double
 occurrence of this problem does not seem coincidental: since the distinction between

 weight and a kind of (proto-)moment ("aequeponderare") is one of the basic problems
 of Archimedes' barycentre theory, it appears probable that Guidobaldo encountered
 this problem at the time of his lessons during which he taught, inter alia, the contents

 of his Mechanicorum Liber (and thus, perforce, the foundations of the Archimedean
 theory as well). In this book, he had cited Pappus' definition of the barycentre, which
 is closely connected with the problem cited by Guerrini. Thus, as a result of the

 Mechanicorum Liber being taught by Guidobaldo, this problem appears to have come
 up repeatedly: both when Guidobaldo was working on the Paraphrasis—with the
 result that it was included in his book—and then years later, when Guidobaldo was

 already dead, during Guerrini's lessons.

 47 This is a neologism to translate the Latin word "aequeponderare", one of the basic notions of the
 Archimedean barycentre theory. Both the translations "equal" and "of equal moment" would distort the

 sense of the sentence. For further information in this regard see Frank (2011/2012, pp. 348-349).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 323

 4.2 Guidobaldo's use of high precision instruments in theory and practice

 We know that Guidobaldo was in close contact with several excellent craftsmen,
 like the aforementioned Pietro Griffi, one of the clockmakers in the Duke's service,
 or Simone Barocci, the reputed constructor of scientific instruments (and head of

 a renowned workshop in Urbino).48 In fact, Muzio Oddi reports in his Fabrica et
 Uso del Compasso polimetrico (Milano, 1633, proem, pp. 3-4) that while attending
 Commandino's lessons, Guidobaldo "was often at the place where [Simone] Baroccio

 worked", and it was there that he developed his new proportional compass, parting
 from Commandino's model.49

 Oddi also recounts—this time in De gli Horologi Solari (Venezia, 1638, pp.
 99-100)—that his teacher had invented a new type of sundial, working with refracted
 rays of light, and again had enlisted the help of Barocci in its construction.50

 Nevertheless, Guidobaldo's close relationships with expert craftsmen impacted on

 more than just his invention of new scientific instruments. Even a crucial element of

 his mechanical theory seems to be strongly connected with the availability of precision
 instruments: that is his description of the "Simple Machines" and, in particular, his
 theory of the indifferent equilibrium.

 In fact, in 1580 Guidobaldo exchanged several letters with Giacomo Contarini

 and Filippo Pigafetta concerning the Mechanicorum Liber: the latter two did not
 succeed in reproducing the ratios between weights and 'forces' that had been pre
 dicted by Guidobaldo's geometrical theory of Simple Machines. Thus, he explained to
 Contarini:

 You should know that, before writing anything about the Mechanicorum Liber,

 I never wanted (so as not to make errors) to consider anything, irrelevant as it

 may have been, if first I had not seen that the experiment (esperienza) agreed

 exactly with the proof; and of very little thing I have made the experiment. (...)
 In any case, it is most sure that practice and theory always agree and do not
 differ from each other. And I tell you even this: the proofs have taught me much

 about how to make the experiments, regarding which many things have to be
 considered: firstly, the instruments should be small rather than big; as for example

 the pulleys with their wheels: if possible they should be made out of brass with
 very thin, iron axes; and the wheels should be well turned so that they do not
 waggle round the axes; but if possible, it would be very good if they turned

 around with just a blow of air.

 In fact, the big pulleys which are able to lift heavy weights, are not that adept at

 telling apart details, as the balances clearly show: in order to distinguish every
 little detail, one has to use those small ones for weighing coins, and not those

 For further information on the Barocci family and its members, see footnote 9.

 49 For further information on the topic of the proportional compass see, inter alia, Gamba (1994).

 50 M. Oddi, : "Ben so de' moderni, che l'anno 1572 l'lllustrissimo Signor Guidobaldo de' Marchesi del
 Monte ne fece fare uno da Simone Baroccio, eccellente artefice, in una mezza sfera d'ottone, e hollo avuto

 nelle mani molto tempo (...)·"

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 324

 M. Frank

 Fig. 6 The abstraction of an
 isostatic balance, presented in

 the fourth proposition of the
 Mechanicorum Liber

 big ones, with which large objects are weighed like meat or similar things, even
 if they are precise.51

 Two aspects of this passage deserve emphasis. The first is the close relation between
 Guidobaldo's theoretical studies on the one hand and the 'experiences' with his devices

 on the other ["the proofs have taught me much about how to make the experiments";

 "before I have written anything (...) I never wanted (so as not to make errors) to deter

 mine anything (...) if first I had not seen that the experiment (esperienza) exactly agreed
 with the proof"]. Secondly, the instruments considered by Guidobaldo were snot the
 everyday devices used at the marketplace (balances) or at building sites (pulleys):

 rather, he referred to special instruments, of small dimensions, made out of brass with

 "very thin" iron axes to reduce friction to a minimum, so that a blow would suffice to
 make them turn around.52

 It is interesting to note that even Contarini who was, inter alia, a collector of
 mechanical machines and surely not inexperienced with their working,53 appears to
 have been unable to recreate Guidobaldo's precision instruments. On the contrary,
 one might plausibly suppose that Guidobaldo's instruments—or at least the know
 how for producing them—came from Barocci's workshop, just as was the case for the

 proportional compass and the sundial of refracted rays.

 A special—and highly relevant—example of a mechanical precision instrument
 considered by Guidobaldo is the isostatic balance (whose rotation point lies exactly
 on its beam, see Fig. 6). In the fourth proposition of the Mechanicorum Liber he had
 (correctly) demonstrated that the equilibrium shown on this balance is indifferent—
 thus contradicting the theories established by authorities of mechanics like Jordanus
 and Tartaglia. Since Guidobaldo had perfectly understood the importance of this

 51 Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana (Venezia), It. IV 63 (=Ven. 259); 9 October 1580; published in A. Favaro,
 Due lettere inedite di Guidobaldo del Monte a Giacomo Contarini, in "Atti del Reale Istituto Veneto di
 scienze, lettere ed arti", LIX 2 (1899-1900), pp. 307-310.

 52 For further information on this topic see Gamba (1995)

 53 For further information on G. Contarini see Rose (1976). On p. 121, Rose writes about a contemporary
 of Contarini's who praised the latter in these terms: "Of all your distinctions your most wonderful is in
 mathematical speculations, whereof the rarest and most estimable instruments, so worthily commissioned
 by you, are to be seen in your house." On the following page, Rose reports an entire list of instruments that
 were in Contarini's possession.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 325

 question—for postulating the impossibility of indifferent equilibrium would imply
 the invalidity of the Archimedean approach to mechanics based on the concept of the
 centre of gravity—he defended his theory tooth and nail against criticisms and made

 it a central element of his mechanical theory.54

 Guidobaldo explained the empirical grounds for his theory in the same letter to

 Contarini, referring to the scepticism of those who had not had any possibility of
 testing it with a real model of the isostatic balance:

 I have constructed a balance which most verily shows me that, if its rotation

 point is to be found in its middlepoint, then it stays still where it was left, in

 any position to which it was moved, as the fourth proposition De Libra in my
 Mechanicorum Liber states. This troubles many scholars who were unable to

 reproduce it physically.55

 These isostatic balances were extremely difficult to fabricate, for a minimal diver

 gence from the original would be sufficient to disturb the indifferent equilibrium;
 Guidobaldo, however, was able to have them fabricated thanks to the specialisation
 of the workshops in Urbino and indeed, he even sent exemplary models to several of

 his correspondents who were apparently unable to construct them, so as to convince

 them of the correctness of his theory.56

 4.3 Mechanics and natural philosophy in Guidobaldo's writings

 Section 2.2 traced an important trait of Guidobaldo's environment: a pronounced inter

 est in philosophy. In keeping with this, some of his closest friends and correspondents
 where also philosophers (C. Benedetti, F. Bonaventura) who were interested in ques
 tions relating to natural philosophy. Not surprisingly, certain passages of Guidobaldo's

 mechanical writings contain arguments that seem to be influenced by the discussions
 he had with them.

 Guidobaldo's conception that mathematics was not sufficient to describe mechanics
 can already be found in the Mechanicorum Liber (1577). He argued that mechanics
 would need to include elements of natural philosophy alongside mathematics, for
 instance in the context of the "true motion" of weights:

 In fact, there are some keen mathematicians of our time who assert that mechanics

 can only be considered either mathematically, or physically; as if mechanics
 could sometimes be considered either without geometrical demonstrations or
 without the true motion.57

 For further information on Guidobaldo's discovery and his strategies for defending it against critics see

 Frank (2011/2012, Part B, chapter I).

 55 "Dove ho anco fatto una libra la quale mi mostra verissimamente che avendo il centro nel mezzo di essa,
 mossa la libra dove si vuole, sta ferma dove si lascia, come dice la quarta proposizione De Libra nel mio
 libro delle Mechaniche, che è cosa che dà fastidio a molti che non l'hanno saputa far materialmente."

 56 Again, see Frank (2011/2012, Part B, chapter I).

 -*7 Mechanicorum Liber, preface, p. 8*: "Reperiuntur enim aliqui nostraque aetate emunctae naris mathe

 matici, qui mechanicam turn mathematice seorsum, turn phisice considerari posse affirmant; ac si aliquando
 vel sine demonstrationibus geometricis, vel sine vero motu res mechanicae considerari possint."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 326 M. Frank

 Another reference to the connections between mathematics/mechanics and natural

 philosophy can be found in the Cochlea (Venice, 1615). In the posthumously pub
 lished work Guidobaldo emphasised that mathematics and mechanics shed light on
 phenomena which at first glance seem to be in contradiction with common sense: like

 the fact that heavy loads can be moved by exiguous forces.58

 As for the cochlea, it seems incredible that water, while descending in the screw, in

 reality moves upwards. Guidobaldo's reference to his philosopher friends is manifest
 here:

 Who has heard a greater contrariety, not to say contradiction? How can it be

 accepted that a heavy body freely moves downwards and for this reason goes
 upwards? Which natural philosopher will ever agree with that? Does not this
 immediately seem opposed to the senses, to reason, and to nature itself?59

 Guidobaldo attacks earlier treatments of this subject on account of their failure to

 explain the cause of the water's ascent.60 The mere (mathematical) description of the
 cochlea's workings did not suffice in his opinion—a point of view that is echoed in
 the Paraphrasis.

 It is mainly in this commentary on Archimedes' Equilibrium of Planes that
 Guidobaldo illustrates his view on the interrelation of aspects relating to mathematics

 and natural philosophy in the discipline of mechanics. In the preface to the Paraphrasis
 the conception of mechanics as composed of two parts is emphasised and consider
 ably developed. The first one is described as a "natural" one, as mechanics refers to
 phenomena set in nature ("naturalia"), whilst the other is a "mathematical" one, as it

 makes recourse to notions like distance or ratio belonging to mathematics. The two

 fields would be represented by their major exponents—Aristotle as the authority on
 natural philosophy and Archimedes as the most excellent mathematician.

 But Guidobaldo's conception of the relation between Archimedes and Aristotle

 goes beyond attributing to them an equal equipollent status: he presents a kind of
 concordism, claiming that in his axioms Archimedes followed what Aristotle had
 shown and that they agree also in their perception of mechanics as subdivided in

 58 Other examples concerning geometry that are cited include: the existence of greater and smaller magni

 tudes than another given magnitude would suggest that it is possible to find a magnitude equal to the latter.

 As geometry shows, however, this does not necessarily hold true, as in the case of an angle formed by a line

 and a circumference: it is either bigger or smaller than a right angle, but never equal to it; or consider two

 entities that steadily get nearer to each other: it would seem intuitive that they would meet after a certain
 time. Yet, as the hyperbole and its asymptotes show, this is not true.

 59 Cochlea, p. 2: "Quis maiorem repugnantiam, ne dicam contradictionem intellixit? Quomodo concedi

 potest grave aliquod sponte deorsum moveri, et ob id sursum tendere? Quis unquam naturalis philosophus
 concedet hoc? Non ne statim hoc sensui, rationique repugnare, atque ipsimet naturae contrarium esse
 videtur?"

 60 Cochlea, p. 4: "Nam fateor quidem omnes de hac cochlea multa dixisse, sed praecipua quaedam, quae
 ad instrument huius cognitionem perfectam pertinere videntur, omnino praetermisisse. Etenum docent

 quidem, sive potius tantum affirmant (hoc enim sensu percipitur) hoc instrumentum aquam sursum attolli:
 qua vera ratione id contingat non docent. (...) nemo unquam hanc cochleam, ut eius cognitio expostulat,
 declaraverit; ac non solum: non declaraverit, sed (quod ipse viderim) nec artificium, quod in ipsa inest,
 cognoverit, nullum enim prospectum habetur, eius ignorata causa."

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 327

 the two fields. Consequently, although Guidobaldo was undoubtedly a follower of
 Archimedes' mechanical theory, he did not consider Aristotle's approach as inferior:

 In fact, at the beginning of the Quaestiones Mechanicae, Aristotle gave many
 extraordinary clues for discerning the causes of mechanical phenomena. In
 his writings, Archimedes followed him and brought to light the principles of
 mechanics more clearly, making them even more intelligible. But Aristotle is

 not diminished in stature for this reason: in fact, he masterfully explained the
 causes behind the problems that he had presented and discussed. (...) for exam

 ple, Aristotle asks why we move heavy weights with a lever. And he replies that

 the cause is the greater length of the law on the side of the force: and he certainly

 is right.61

 This passage might shed some light on Guidobaldo's surprising62 evaluation of
 the respective importance of Archimedes and Aristotle to mechanics: it seems that he

 interpreted Aristotle's approach as an explanation of the causes63 of the mechanical

 phenomena—correspondingly to the "task" of philosophy: the search of the causes.

 Archimedes, in turn, would have dealt with the mathematical description of the phe
 nomena, and reached a more complete formalisation in this regard.

 Another highly interesting argument in the Paraphrasis' preface is the explanation
 of the barycentre's properties. In his reasoning, Guidobaldo makes recourse to the
 Aristotelian conception of the cosmos (see above: the "true motion"), in order to
 justify his integration of the Pappian definition of the center of gravity into his own
 mechanical theory.64

 Thereby, the basic assumption is that a heavy body is at rest in the centre of the
 world. Thus, all the parts must have equal moments with respect to the point that
 coincides with the centre of the world. Otherwise, one part would outbalance the
 other and produce movement, thus contradicting the hypothesis of the body's rest at

 the centre of the world. And this point is, according to Commandino's definition, the
 centre of gravity.65 So, saying that a body moves to the centre of the world naturali

 61 Paraphrasis, p. 4: "Aristoteles enim in principio Quaestionum Mechanicarum multa, eaque praecipua ad
 causas rei mechanicae dignoscendas aperuit. Quem secutus Archimedes in his libris mechanica principia
 explicatius patefecit eaque planiora reddidit. Nec propterea Aristoteles diminutus exstitit: etenim eorum
 quae ab ipso proposita et explicata fuere, problematum causas egregie patefecit. (...) Aristoteles enim (gratia
 exempli) quaerens cur vecte magna movemus pondéra. Causam esse ait longitudinem vectis maiorem ad
 partem potentiae: et recte quidem." The emphases are mine.

 62 Guidobaldo's conception might at first sight seem surprising, if one considers that his mechanical work
 shows a profound engagement with the central Archimedean concepts while his references to Aristotle
 seem to be limited to some scattered citations of the Quaestiones Mechanicae.

 63 Note the triple occurrence of the word "causa" in this short passage.

 64 Pappus' definition, presented at the beginning of the Collectiones Mathematicae's eighth book and
 reported by Guidobaldo both in the Mechanicorum Liber and Paraphrasis, reads: "Centrum gravitatis unius
 cuiusque corporis est punctum quoddam intra positum, a quo, si grave appensum mente concipiatur, dum

 fertur, quiescit; et servat earn, quam in principio havebat positionem, neque in ipsa latione circumvertitur."

 65 Commandino's definition of the centre of gravity, contained in his Liber de centra gravitatis solidorum
 (Bologna, 1565), reads: "Centrum gravitatis uniuscuiusque solidae figurae est punctum illud intra positum,
 circa quod undique partes aequalium momentorum consistant. Si enim per tale centrum ducatur planum
 figuram quomodocunque secans semper in partes aequeponderantes ipsam dividet."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 propensione, this also means that the body wants to make coincide the centre of the

 world and its centre of gravity. Since it is gravity that generates the natural propensity

 and the movement of a heavy body towards the centre of the world, and since, in fact,

 it is the body's centre of gravity that really unifies with the centre of the world, it can

 be said that all bodies possess weight exclusively in their own centres of gravity. Now,

 if then an arbitrary body is held in its centre of gravity, it has to stand still insomuch as

 the reason for its movement, namely gravity, does not act under these circumstances.

 And hence the statement of the Pappian definition of the barycentre, derived as it is

 from central elements of Aristotle's cosmology. Guidobaldo could have been sure that

 this authority gave the necessary credibility to the definition, so crucial in his theory
 of the isostatic balance.

 328 M. Frank

 According to Guidobaldo, Archimedes also agreed with the conception of mechan

 ics as composed of a mathematical part and a natural one, and so the explanation of
 the barycentre's properties in cosmological/philosophical terms was permissible, if
 not necessary:

 In fact, the aspects that have to be considered mathematically have been proved

 by Archimedes by means of geometry: like distances, ratios and so on. In contrast,

 what is related to nature (naturalia), has been treated by him in a way that is
 appropriate to nature (naturaliter): such as the arguments which concern the
 centre of gravity, or the objects that have to move upwards or downwards, and
 so on.66

 The cosmological explanation of the barycentre had implications that were impor
 tant for far more than just its centre of gravity: since this is the basic notion of
 Archimedes's theory, its reliance on the general conception of the cosmos and of natural
 philosophy meant above all: that Archimedes's mechanics as part of the Aristotelian
 cosmos. In this way, Guidobaldo brought into effect his conception of mechanics as a
 composite discipline.67

 Another curious argument in this regard is Guidobaldo's reference to light bodies

 (in the Aristotelian sense) in the preface. Though it obviously lacks any real application

 in mechanics, it is perhaps the best example of how his considerations of philosophical
 concepts are integrated with his study of mechanics.

 The reference is made as part of a discussion of the main subject of Archimedes's

 Equilibrium of Planes, namely plane figures, i.e. objects without gravity, mathematical
 abstractions. As the preceding paragraph has shown, however, Guidobaldo did not
 agree with a conception of mechanics that confined itself to the consideration of

 geometrical problems. So, these objects and their relation to reality constituted a

 66 Paraphrasis, pp. 4-5: "Nam quae mathematice sunt consideranda, geometrice <Archimedes> demon
 stravit, ut sunt distantiae, proportiones et alia huiusmodi. Quae vero sunt naturalia, naturaliter quoque
 consideravit; ut ea, quae ad gravitatis centrum spectant, et quae sursum et quae deorsum moved debent et
 cetera huius modi."

 67 It must be noted that in Archimedes's extant writings there is no trace of such a connection between

 mechanics and natural philosophy. As on other occasions, Guidobaldo interpreted the Archimedean theory
 according to his own preconception and consequently used it, to a certain extent, for his own purposes.
 Thus, as much as Guidobaldo's approach to Archimedean mechanics can be characterised as close to the

 text, it has to be admitted that the interpretation Guidobaldo gave to it changed its meaning.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mathematics, technics and courtly life 329

 serious problem for Guidobaldo, since mechanics had to refer to objects with a precise
 meaning in natural philosophy.

 He found an ingenious solution for this dilemma: in keeping with their lack of
 gravity, plane figures could be treated similarly to light bodies. A centre of light
 ness—analogous to the centre of gravity for heavy bodies—could be assigned to these

 objects: an idea that would have found support in Aristotle and Ptolemy who would
 have attributed moments to heavy and to light bodies alike. In keeping with Pappus'

 definition of the barycentre, light bodies held in their centre of lightness would stand

 still. The geometrical treatment of the centre of lightness would be analogous to that

 of the centres of gravity. By extension, also the treatment of plane figures does not

 differ from that of real bodies with a barycentre.

 In conclusion, as the present section has striven to show, several central aspects

 of Guidobaldo's scientific activity were clearly influenced by his interaction with the

 cultural and scientific environment of the Duchy of Urbino; and research into his social

 surroundings contributes to a better understanding of his mathematical work.

 As the introductory part sought to show, analogous situations hold true for other

 mathematicians who were active in the duchy as well, such as Federico Commandino,
 Bernardino Baldi and Muzio Oddi. Furthermore, studies I am conducting on Giovanni
 Battista Benedetti's scientific work at the court of Turin show a similar framework:

 that of a close relationship between mathematics, technics and courtly life in the late
 Renaissance.

 References

 Baldi, Β. 2010. Mechanica Aristotelis Problemata Exercitationes. Ed. E. Nenci. Milano: Angeli.
 Dennistoun, J. 1851. Memoirs of the Dukes of Urbino, 3 vols London: Longman.
 Frank, M. 2011/2012. Guidobaldo dal Monte's Mechanics in Context. Research on the connections between

 his mechanical work and his life and environment. Supervisors Prof. P.D. Napolitani, Prof. C. Maccagni,
 Prof. J. Renn. Université di Pisa and Max-Planck-Institut filr Wissenschaftsgeschichte.

 Frank, M. 2013a. Clockmaker-mathematicians and politics, in Ricerche sull'ambiente tecnico-scientifico

 de Ducato di Savoia nel tardo Rinascimento. "Studi e Ricerche". Journal of the Foundation Filippo
 Burzio (Turin) (forthcoming).

 Frank, M. 2013b. Cortigiani, scienziati e tecnici a Urbino: il caso dei meccanismi e degli orologi. In

 Proceedings of the international congress "1 Barocci a Urbino tra arte e scienza", 5-6 October 2012
 (forthcoming).

 Frank, M. 2013c. Dating Federico Commandino's teaching activity in Urbino. In Bollettino di Storia delle

 Frank, M. 2013d. Proposal for a New Dating of Guidobaldo dal Monte's Meditatiuncube, In Bolletino di

 Scienze matematiche (forthcoming)

 Storia delle Scienze matematiche (forthcoming)

 Galileo, G. 1977. Il Saggiatore. Ed. F. Flora. Torino: Einaudi.
 Gamba, E., and V. Montebelli. 1988. Le Scienze a Urbino nel tardo Rinascimento. Quattroventi: Urbino.
 Gamba, E. 1994. Documenti di Muzio Oddi per la storia del compasso di riduzione e di proporzione.

 In Physis, vol. XXXI, 799-809.

 Gamba, E. 1995. Guidobaldo dal Monte tecnologo. In Pesaro città e conta, 99-105.
 Guasti, C. 1852. Le Lettere di Torquato Tasso. Firenze: Le Monnier.
 Maccagni, C. 1993. Leggere, scrivere e disegnare la "scienza volgare" nel Rinascimento. In Annali della

 Scuola normale Superiore di Pisa. Classe di Lettere e Filosofia, vol III 23, fasc. 2, 631-675.

 Maccagni, C. 1996. Culture e sapere dei tecnici nel Rinascimento. In Piero del la Francesca: tra arte e

 scienza, ed. M. Dalai Emiliani, V. Curzi, 279-292. Venezia: Marsilio.

 Marr, A. 2011. Between Raphael and Galileo: Mutio Oddi and the Mathematical Culture of Late Renais

 sance Italy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Mei, M., and F. Paoli, eds. 2008. La libraria di Francesco Maria II délia Rovere a CasteIdurante. Quattro

 330 M. Frank

 venti: Urbino.

 Menchetti, F. 2013. Guidobaldo del Monte nel Granducato di Toscana e la scuola roveresca di architettura

 militare. In Guidobaldo del Monte (1545-1607). Theory and Practise of Mathematical Disciplines from
 Urbino to Europe (Proceedings), ed. A. Becchi, D. Bertoloni Meli, E. Gamba. Berlin: Open Access
 Editions.

 Nenci, E., ed. 1998. Bernardino Baldi, Le vite de' matematici. Edizione annotata e commentata dellaparte

 medievale e rinascimentale. Milano: Angelo.

 Rose, P.L. 1975. The Italian Renaissance of Mathematics. Genève: Droz.
 Rose, P.L. 1976. Jacomo Contarini (1536-1595), a Venetian Patron and Collector of Mathematical Instru

 ments and Books. In Physis, vol. XVIII 2, 117-130.

 Sangiorgi, F. 1989. Diario di Francesco Maria II della Rovere. Quattroventi: Urbino.
 Segarizzi, Α., ed. 1913. Relazioni degli Ambasciatori veneti al Senato, 4 vol, vol II. Bari: Laterza.
 Tassora, R. 2001. Le Meditatiunculae de rebus mathematicis di Guidobaldo del Monte, Tesi di Dottorato,

 Supervisor Prof. P.D: Napolitani. Università di Pisa.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 11:59:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

