 

 

 

 

On dating Hero of Alexandria
Author(s): Ramon Masià
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 3 (May 2015), pp. 231-255
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569551
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:19 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569551?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:231-255
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0148-2

 On dating Hero of Alexandria

 Ramon Masià

 Received: 2 June 2014 / Published online: 19 March 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract The dating of Hero of Alexandria has been linked with the lunar eclipse of

 March 13, AD 62, since Otto Neugebauer discovered that this eclipse is the only one

 that can fit the one described in Hero's Dioptra 35. Although only a number of scholars

 claim that Hero himself observed the eclipse, almost all of them take Neugebauer's

 identification for granted. We use statistical and linguistic methods to criticize this

 assumption: all indices we have found point to the fact that the eclipse was merely

 invented as an example and, for that reason, that it cannot be used to determine Hero's

 life span.

 1 Introduction

 The dating of Hero of Alexandria has received the attention of modern scholarship

 since Neugebauer (1938) claimed that, on the one hand, the lunar eclipse (henceforth

 «eclipse») of March 13, AD 62, is that described in Dioptra 35 and, on the other hand,

 that the eclipse could have been observed by the Alexandrian scientist.1 This has
 been generally accepted (Drachman 1950, 1972; Raïos 2000; Keyser 1988). However,
 recent works have cast some doubts on this conclusion: Souffrin (2000) resorted to

 probabilistic arguments, Sidoli (2005) proposed a new interpretation of the text of

 1 The direct observation of the eclipse by Hero has only been asserted explicitly by Drachmann (1972,

 Communicated by: Bernard Vitrac.

 n. 4).

 R. Masià (H)

 R. Masià

 Centre Alexandre Koyré, 27, rue Damesme, 4e étage, 75013 Paris, France
 e-mail: rmasia@gmail.com

 Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Rambla del Poblenou, 156, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 232 R. Masià

 Dioptra 35 (Schône 1903), pointing out that other eclipses fit the data of the eclipse

 there described (for a summary of these positions see Acerbi 2007). Recently, Sidoli

 corrected his last conclusion, recognizing that the only eclipse partially consistent

 with the data of Dioptra 35, in the five centuries between second century BC and third

 century AD, is the one identified by Neugebauer (Sidoli 2011). Contrary to Drachman's

 claim, Sidoli only regards this date as a terminus post quem for the dating of Hero.

 The present discussion on the dating of Hero is based on factual and interpretation

 laden data. To the first category belong the astronomical data concerning ancient

 eclipses, available in tables set out in a variety of forms (such as the NASA website);2

 to the second category belong the text of Dioptra 35 and the probabilistic treatment of

 the eclipses occurring in the period of time in which Hero is supposed to have lived.

 The relationships between these factors have formed the crux of a debate that, in our

 view, has been developed without a clear distinction between facts and assumptions.

 Thus, the hypotheses of the arguments set forth by the scholars involved in the debate

 have sometimes been defined without precision; in some cases, they are even marred

 by circular reasoning.

 With regard to the first two factors, although a number of ambiguities and obscurities

 in the text of Dioptra 35 persist, it seems clear that the only eclipse that actually

 happened and that fits relatively well, both the data for Alexandria provided in the

 text of Dioptra 35 and the presumed life span of Heron, is that of March 13, AD 62.

 That said, no-one has discussed the margin of error implicit in the adverb «relatively».

 This, as we shall see, is crucial to a consistent probabilistic approach to the issue.

 As for the probabilistic approach, Souffrin (2000) presented results based on the

 assumptions that the distribution of eclipses is uniform throughout the year, over long

 periods of time, and that the minimal period of time that certainly includes that of
 Hero's life is 500 years. However, the weakness of the probabilistic framework and
 errors in calculations make Souffrin's conclusion incorrect.3

 2 Neugebauer (1938, p. 23, η. 39) used the Oppolzer and Ginzel Tables, whereas Souffrin (2000, p. 14)
 and Sidoli (2005, p. 251) consulted tables of ancient eclipses and performed additional calculations of their
 own.

 3 In fact, Souffrin does not argue his probabilistic results: «un calcul simple indique alors que la probabilité

 a priori qu'une éclipse «convenable» ait eu lieu au moins une fois précisément un dixième jour avant le

 printemps dans un intervalle de 500 ans est de 0.7S> (Souffrin 2000, p. 15). Souffrin does not show us how

 to do this «calcul simple», but perhaps it is 5^ = 0.73. This result (and the calculation likely producing it)
 is not correct; the probability that at least one eclipse occurs on a particular day, if we consider a uniform

 distribution of eclipses, is 1 - ■ approximately equal to 0.58 (CRa j, means combinations with

 repetition of a elements grouped in sets of b elements, b can be greater than a because the operation allows

 repetition of elements). This calculation is not difficult, but cannot be described as «simple». Souffrin
 also performed a calculation taking into account the hour and not only the day of the eclipse. This too

 appears to be wrong: The correct calculation is 1 - = 0.10248 (where 4,380 = 365 χ 12,

 and 4,379 = 365 χ 12 — 1). We do not know the exact operations that Souffrin used as he only states that

 the result «est un peu supérieur[e] à 0.1»; since his previous result of 0.75 is incorrect, it is reasonable to
 think that this is incorrect too, and that it is close to the result of the exact calculation only by chance. In

 fact, Souffrin's second result could be based on a simple operation, close to his former one: 3^75, that
 is approximately equal to 0.11. The resemblance between this result and the exact result is due to the fact

 that the formulae are asymptotic.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 233

 In this paper, we shall review these factors and propose an analysis based mainly on

 philological arguments but also on statistical ones. The goal is to set up a framework

 for the interpretation of the text and a well-founded estimate of the probability that a

 random date and hour fits a certain eclipse that actually happened in Alexandria on

 that date and at that hour, within a selected period of time.

 In Sect. 2, we discuss the meaning of some terms and phrases related to the expres

 sion of time in the Greek language and, more specifically, in Greek astronomy. In

 Sect. 3, we analyze the passage of the Dioptra in which the eclipse is described. After

 the analysis of the text, we add historiographical data in order to delimit the time

 frame of Hero's life. Once the timeframe and the interpretative framework are fixed,

 in Sect. 4, we turn to probability. First, we define a simple probabilistic model derived

 from our interpretation of the text. Within this model, we calculate the probability that

 an eclipse happened under the conditions given by the text and in a period of time

 coinciding with the timeframe. To this end, we set up the complete table of all eclipses

 between the dates of the timeframe, classifying them according to the hour and the

 day of the month in which they occurred, regardless of the year.4 in Sect. 5, we sum up

 the conclusions derived from this statistical analysis and discuss some methodological

 issues involved in the use of statistical techniques in the treatment of dating problems.

 2 Preliminaries

 In this section, we present some astronomical, mathematical, and linguistic facts

 related to the reckoning of time in Greek civilization that will allow us to back up

 some features of our subsequent argument.

 2.1 The modern expression of ancient dates

 The identification of dates in Greek texts can generate some confusion simply because
 there appears to be no complete agreement on how to express them, not even in

 modern literature.5 Most texts use the dating system called Anno Domini, based on

 the (supposed) birth date of Christ: The number of the year before/after this date,
 always starting with year 1, is accompanied by the abbreviation bc or ad.6 Two
 calendars refer to this dating system, the Gregorian calendar and the Julian calendar,

 though scholars usually do not expressly declare the calendar used. Most often, a date

 is simply, and tacitly, expressed in terms of its corresponding calendar (i.e., Julian,

 before October 4,1542, and Gregorian, onward from the immediately subsequent day,

 which was October 15). Historians normally date events in this way.7

 4 We have used the complete tables of ancient eclipses provided by NASA Eclipse Web Site (2013).

 5 This is not a minor problem, since the error (that Sidoli himself acknowledged: Sidoli 2011, p. 7) in Sidoli

 (2005) is precisely due to a misinterpretation of the dating method used by the table of eclipses he himself
 had used.

 6 See Meeus (1998) and Mosshammer (2008, chapter 2) for part of the information contained in this section.

 7 In recent years, some scholars have advocated the use of the religiously neutral abbreviations BCE (for
 «Before Common Era») to replace bc, and CE (for «Common Era») to replace ad. See Mosshammer (2008,
 p. 34)

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 234 R. Masià

 Year Zero System
 Year Zero System

 JULIAN CALENDAR
 JULIAN CALENDAR

 GREGORIAN CALENDAR
 GREGORIAN CALENDAR

 UNTIL OCTOBER 4
 UNTIL OCTOBER 4

 FROM OCTOBER 15
 FROM OCTOBER 15

 -1
 -1

 0
 0

 1
 1

 2
 2

 1541 1542
 1541 1542

 1543 1544
 1543 1544

 2 BC
 2 BC

 1 BC
 1 BC

 AD 1
 AD 1

 AD 2
 AD 2

 AD 1541 AD 1J
 AD 1541 AD If

 42 AD 1543 AD 1544
 42 AD 1543 AD 1544

 V
 V

 ✓
 ✓

 JULIAN CALENDAR
 JULIAN CALENDAR

 GREGORIAN CALENDAR
 GREGORIAN CALENDAR

 UNTIL OCTOBER 4
 UNTIL OCTOBER 4

 FROM OCTOBER 15
 FROM OCTOBER 15

 Anno Domini System
 Anno Domini System

 Fig. 1 Basic diagram of different dating systems

 The Anno Domini system has one major problem: the absence of a so-called Year

 Zero. As already said, in fact, the year immediately after 1 BC is AD 1. The absence of

 Ό' complicates matters, especially if computational tools are used. Therefore, in an

 astronomical context and sometimes among historians of astronomy, the astronomical

 notation or Year Zero notation is used, which identifies year 1 BC with year 0. As a

 consequence, all years preceding year 0 are decreased by one year with respect to the

 Anno Domini date, a - or + being added to all of them according to their preceding

 or following year 0, respectively (i.e., using the notation of integer numbers). In this

 way, year 2 BC becomes -1, 3 BC becomes -2, and so on (see Fig. I).8 We shall use

 both conventions, still giving prominence to the Year Zero notation. When using the
 Anno Domini convention, the Latin AD precedes the numeral while the English BC
 follows the numeral.9

 2.2 Some aspects of the expression of time in the Greek world

 The measurement of time and its linguistic expression appear to be self-evident data,

 but they are highly developed and codified conventions of the International System of

 Units subsumed in common speech. Of course, in ancient times this was not the case,

 and every civilization (and quite often regional cultures within a civilization) had its

 own perception and measurements of time and also some particular expressions for

 8 The famous eclipse of Arbela, for example, is placed by some texts in year 331 BC (e.g., Berggren and

 Jones 2000, p. 29), in other texts in -330 (e.g., Neugebauer 1975, p. 668, n. 30 and the NASA website).
 Steele (2000) even uses both notations: the Year Zero notation in the tables, the Anno Domini notation in the

 text. For a concise but complete discussion of dating conventions see http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEhelp/
 dates.html).

 9 See Mosshammer (2008, p. 34). There are other minor issues on dating, but they do not affect our analysis.

 One of them, however, must be briefly mentioned: Soufffin (2000, p. 14) assigns the date of March 14 and

 not March 13 (namely that provided by all other sources) to the eclipse of year 62. This is probably due to

 the fact that in 1979 the Terrestrial Dynamical time (TD) or, simply, Terrestrial Time (TT), was introduced.

 This parameter, which takes into account relativistic effects in the measurement of time, is used to calculate

 the TD of Greatest Eclipse, namely «the instant when the distance between the center of the moon and the

 axis or earth umbral shadow cone reaches a minimum». Therefore, the TD of Greatest Eclipse is expressed

 without reference to a place, which is the usual way in modern tables. The TD of Greatest Eclipse of that
 observed in Alexandria on March 13, 62, was March 14 at 00:53:05. As a consequence, the date of the
 eclipse without reference to a place is March 14 and not March 13.

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 235

 them. In ancient Greek culture, terms or expressions such as «hour», «day», «after

 three days», «two days ago» and the like, could be polysémie, and it may even be that

 the modern meaning did not feature among those assumed. The issue becomes even
 more delicate when astronomical texts are at issue, in which these terms are crucial.

 In addition, the meaning of the above terms often has, in this context, two levels: the

 technical level and the level of common language.10

 Let's start with hours. In astronomical treatises, we find two kinds of hours: sea

 sonal or unequal or local hours, and equinoctial or equal hours.11 An equinoctial
 hour (henceforth simply denoted «hour») almost matches an ordinary hour of ours:

 it is one of the 24 equal parts into which is divided 1 day. Seasonal hours are usually

 different for day and night. A nocturnal seasonal hour is one of the 12 portions of equal

 length in which a night is divided; a daylight seasonal hour has an equivalent defin

 ition. Obviously, daylight and nocturnal seasonal hours are almost identical around

 the equinoxes. On the other hand, the maximum difference between the daylight sea
 sonal hour and the nocturnal seasonal hour occurs at solstices: At the winter solstice,

 daylight hours last about 48min and nocturnal hours about 1 h and 12min all around

 the Mediterranean sea. Equinoctial hours do not exactly match the hours nowadays
 in use. The current UTC system (Coordinated Universal Time), which defines time

 zones, does not use equinoctial hours.

 So, when we need to indicate the moment of an eclipse, we must choose the time

 system (nocturnal hours12 or UTC time) and be consistent with it, taking into account

 that the UTC time system is not equivalent to an equinoctial hours system.13 Moreover,

 the «nocturnal hour» of a particular place should be deduced from the UTC time zone,

 the hour of the sunset in this place on that particular night and the duration of that

 night. The hour of the sunset must be exact and not related to the time zone.

 The ways Greek culture used to refer to the time in which an event occurs is also

 a crucial issue, but it is sometimes overlooked. Two basic forms of reference can

 be singled out: We shall call them the point way and the range way. The point way
 places an event at a specific time point: «at midnight», for example. On the other
 hand, in Greek Astronomy, the use of the range way was very common: «in the

 third hour», for example. This expression means «between two and three »: in a more

 formalized way, the hour is taken to be an interval, in this case [2,3]. Each way must

 10 Note that the meaning of a specific time expressions in Greek culture can be unclear because of our

 inaccurate understanding of its exact meaning, not because it is intrinsically obscure. We shall return to this

 issue presently.

 ! 1 In the introduction to his translation of the Almagest, Toomer (1984, p. 23), defines and discusses these
 terms.

 12 Recall that a lunar eclipse can only happen during night.

 13 For example, Sidoli (2005, p. 28) says that the starting time of the eclipse of March 13,62, in Alexandria

 was 22:50. Assuming that the UTC time is intended (though it is not specified), the eclipse must occur at
 21:50 in Rome, the time in its time zone, 1 h earlier than in Alexandria, and not at 21:40 as Sidoli claims,

 because in the UTC system the exact longitude of a place does not matter, only its time zone does. Nocturnal

 hours could be used to take into account differences of time due to longitude, but the two systems must not
 be mixed.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 use its own operation pattern; the point way uses classical arithmetic,14 whereas the

 range way must use interval arithmetic, which is substantially different from classical
 arithmetic.15

 236 R. Masià

 Let's continue with days. There is, even today, a basic ambiguity: «day» could mean

 either the 24-h period16 or the period of daylight. In addition, as Toomer points out

 (Toomer 1984, p. 23), another ambiguity arises: our 24-h day is a mean solar day «of

 uniform length ... <but> in antiquity, where the normal means of telling time was the

 sundial, <the ancient day was> usually reckoned by the true solar day, of varying

 length, the time taken by the sun to go from one meridian crossing to the next on a

 specific day».

 Another problem, hardly ever considered, concerning a day considered as a nychte

 meron, is its starting moment. According to Pliny the Elder:

 The actual period of a day has been differently kept by different people: the

 Babylonians count the period between two sunrises, the Athenians that between

 two sunsets, the Umbrians from midday to midday, the common people every

 where from dawn to dark, the Roman priests and the authorities who fixed the

 official day, and also the Egyptians and Hipparchus, the period from midnight

 to midnight.17

 In the biblical context, two methods of day reckoning (from sunset to sunset, or from
 sunrise to sunrise) «coexisted harmoniously» (Bacchiocchi 1985). There has been

 some scholarly discussion about the beginning of the day in Greek culture (see Melville

 1902; Brewster 1980), but most scholars refer to sunset.

 It is worth noting that this issue had already been settled by ancient astronomers; for

 example, Ptolemy avoids any ambiguity in this regard by using «double dates» (Toomer
 1984, p. 12):

 <Ptolemy> frequently characterizes the day of an observation by expressions
 like [...] 'Pachon 17/18' [...] In antiquity the 'civil epoch' of the day was either

 dawn (as in Egypt) or sunset (as in Babylon). In either system, an event which

 took place in the daylight would be on the same 'day' but one which took place

 in the night would be on 'day n' for those using dawn epoch and 'day n +1' for

 those using sunset epoch. Hence ambiguity was possible. Ptolemy uses double

 dates (which are found only for night-time observations) to avoid this ambiguity.

 14 The duration of an eclipse starting at exactly 1:00a.m. and ending at 3:30a.m. is the difference of two

 numbers, 3:30 - 1:00 = 2:30; so the eclipse lasted 2h and a half.

 15 If an eclipse occurs in the third hour, i.e., in the interval [2, 3], and ends in the sixth hour, i.e., in the
 interval [5,6], it has not lasted 6 - 3 = 3h, but [5,6] - [2, 3] = [2,4], i.e., it has lasted «between 2 and

 4h»: the result of an operation on intervals is also an interval (see Cloud et al. 2009).

 16 Called by Ptolemy νυχιϋήμερον, night and day. Toomer's translation does not use a specific term for it,

 and translates it as «day» (Toomer 1984, p. 23). We shall adopt the lexical caique nychtemeron.

 17 «ipsum diem alii aliter observauere: babylonfi inter duos solis exortus, athenienses inter duos occasus,

 umbri a meridie ad meridiem, uulgus omne a luce ad tenebras, sacerdotes romani et qui diem finiere civilem,

 itemaegyptii et hipparchus a medianocte in mediam.» HistoriaNaturalis, 2.79, ed. E. H. Warmington, transi.
 H. Rackham, HUP, 1938.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 237

 In short, there are two basic ambiguities in the ancient conception of a day: It can refer

 to daylight or to the nychtemeron and the beginning of the nychtemeron could be set

 at sunset or at sunrise. Context seldom clears up these ambiguities.

 An issue that will prove crucial in our discussion is that of temporal phrases that

 include the term «day», ημέρα, accompanied by a numeral, i.e., time complements

 used to delimit a certain number of days. The meaning of these complements is not

 uniform, either in the genitive, in the dative or in the accusative (with or without

 preposition). Modern translations appear to be even less homogeneous than the original

 texts; it is easy to find contradictory translations, as we shall see presently.

 In general, if we read in a Greek text that a certain phenomenon happens/will

 happen/has happened in a range of «η days» this could mean two things: The
 elapsed time is η days or the elapsed time is η - 1 days (the latter reading is some

 times called «inclusive timing», since the starting day and the end day are taken

 into account). Thus, we read in Thucydides 4.90.3: ήμέρμ δε άρξάμενοι τρίτη [lit.

 third] ώς οϊκοιίεν ώρμησαν ταύτην τε είργάζοντο και τήν τετάρτην [lit. fourth]

 και της πέμπτης [lit. fifth] μέχρι άριστου, «the work was begun on the third day
 after leaving home, and continued during the fourth, and till dinner-time on the

 fifth» (translation R. Crawley, 1903; emphasis ours, as always henceforth). On the other

 hand, in Athenaeus' Deipnosophistae 83ef, we read: ειτ' αρδεται δια τετάρτης [lit.

 four] ή πέμπτης [lit. five] ημέρας, «it is then watered every three or four days» (transla

 tion Ch. Β. Gulick, Loeb Classical Library, 1927). In general, it appears that the criteria

 for choosing one or another interpretation are unclear. We read in Aeschines, Against

 Ctesifont 77: έβδόμην [lit. seventh] δ' ήμέραν της ιϋυγατρός αύτφ τετελευτηκυίας.
 The translation of Ch. D. Adams (HUP, 1919) reads «and though it was but
 the seventh day after the death of his daughter», while the French transla
 tion by V. Martin (Les Belles Letres, 1962) reads «six jours s'étaient écoulés
 depuis sa mort». Furthermore, Plutarch cites this passage in Demosthenes 22.2:
 έβδόμην ήμέραν της άυγατρός αύτού τειίνηκυίας,ώς ό Αισχίνης φησί, and
 Β. Perrin (Loeb, 1919) translates : «although his daughter had died only six days before,
 as Aeschines says». Another example, from The Online LiddellScott-Jones Greek

 English Lexicon (LSJ). The entry ήμέρα contains this example: «τρίτην [lit. third]

 ήμέραν ήχων two days after one's arrival, Th.8.23», but the translation of R. Crawley

 (J.M. Dent and Co., New York, 1903) reads: «on the third day after his arrival».

 In short, although we have just presented a few examples, it is clear that the choice
 between the inclusive and the non-inclusive form is not a matter of course.18 This

 18 This issue assumes quite bizarre connotations when considering paradigmatic relations between adjec

 tives linked to time intervals. For example, the Great Panathenaea or the Olympica were called penteteric

 festivals, πεντετηρικαί [lit. period of 5 years], but were repeated, according to our way of counting, every
 4years (the same as our modern Olympic games). In the LSJ, πεντετηρικός [lit. period of 5years] is

 defined as «happening every five years, quinquennial, cf. πεντετηρικός; if we look up this last term, it is

 identified with πεντετηρίς [lit. period of 5 years], and the definition reads «festival celebrated every fifth

 year (inclusively)», whereas the entry πενταετηρικός [lit. period of 5 years] reads «falling every four (=five

 inclusive) years, quinquennial». One cannot but get confused by these definitions. The entry τετραετερικός

 [lit. period of 4 years] directs back to τετραετηρίς [lit. period of 4 years], and this entry reads «a quadren

 nial festival», or «period of four years», without indication of inclusivity. Still, another paradigmatically
 related adjective, τριετερίς [lit. period of 3 years] reads «triennial festival, i.e., celebrated every third year

 (inclusively), = in alternate years», and shortly afterward, «cycle or period of three (two) years», which is

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 238 R. Masià

 feature has also produced discussions about the translation of certain expressions of

 this type in the New Testament (see for example, Clark 1978).

 2.3 The treatment of eclipses in the Almagest

 In this section, we shall analyze the expressions used by Ptolemy to denote the

 precise time in which an eclipse occur. We have analyzed 19 eclipses reported in

 the Almagest and also the famous eclipse reported in Geography 1.4.1, observed

 simultaneously in Carthage and Arbela a few days before the battle of Gaugamela.
 Four formulae are used to denote the time in which an eclipse occurs or in
 which a phase of an eclipse occurs; they are, in decreasing order of frequency:

 πρό + genitive (usually translated by Toomer as «at... »), μετά + accusative (usually

 translated as «after ... »), genitive absolute (usually translated with a clause begin
 ning with «when ... »), or only genitive (usually translated as «at ... »). In addi
 tion, all combinations of the two first formulae with the last two are also used.

 For example, in Toomer (1984, p. 191, H302.16-17)19 we read that the eclipse
 starts μετά την άνατολήν μιας ώρας ίκανώς παρελθούσης, «well over an hour

 after moonrise», namely, a μετά+ accusative complement added to a genitive absolute.

 Among the expressions using only the genitive,20 we have found no examples denoting

 a particular hour interval. They always refer to a point in time: «exactly at midnight»

 (p. 191), «at the middle of the sixth hour [of night]» (p. 206) and «at midnight» (p. 208).

 This fact confirms that the simple genitive can be used to indicate a point in time where

 an eclipse occurred, or a particular phase of it.

 Another important fact is that in the Almagest, when the term «eclipse» is used

 without specifying its phase (even if this is not usual), it always refers to the mid

 point of the eclipse. Moreover, in the examples we have found, the eclipse is total
 (Toomer 1984, p. 206 and 208). In Toomer (1984, p. 208, H332.7-11) we read:

 Footnote 18 continued

 obviously self-contradictory. There are no adjectives *διετηρικός and *διετερίς flit, period of 2 years] in

 the LSJ. Another group of adjectives of time is even mote telling in this regard and perhaps worse treated by

 the LSJ: those ending with -ετηρος, with the same meaning as the former group, «period of η years ». In

 the LSJ, there are adjectives of this kind for n = 2,3,4,5,6,9,10,100, but the definitions are not always
 consistent with each other. For η = 3,5,9, the definition is «η years old ». For η = 5, there is another

 adjective with the same ending: πενΟέτηρος, «in the fifth year (inclusively)». For n = 10, δεχαέτηρος,

 «ten-yearly: χρόνος, a space of lOyears ... more freq. as Subst., period of lOyears, a space of lOyears».

 For η = ΙΟΟ,έκατονταέτηρος, «of a hundred years». Probably, η = 2 shows most clearly the issue; in this

 case, the prefix is not a numeral, but a preposition indicating duality, άμφν, and the adjective is άμφιέτηρος,

 «celebrated in yearly festivals». In other words, in this case, we read 'two' literally, but we must interpret

 'one' (inclusive interpretation), whereas for η > 2, we must conclude the contrary (except in one of the

 two words for η = 5). Therefore, either the system of these adjectives is not entirely consistent or it is not
 well understood—or both.

 19 When preceded by the Greek text, the references to Toomer's translation of the Almagest include some
 numbers preceded by Ή', which is a reference to Heiberg's edition as is also partly (i.e., without the
 indication of lines) given in Toomer's book. Thus, H302.16-17 means 'Heiberg's edition, p. 302 lines 16

 17' (all passages quoted happen to be contained in the first volume of this edition). This double reference

 makes also easier to find these passages in Toomer's translation.

 20 This is important since it is the way in which the eclipse of Dioptra 35 is referred to.

 £j Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 239

 τούτων δέ των έκλείψεων πρώτη ... γενομένη δέ τφ β' ετει Μαρδοκεμπάδου
 κατ Αιγυπτίους Θώθ ιη'είς τήν ιιΐ' έν μεν Βαβυλώνι του μεσονυκτίου, «the

 first of these eclipses . ..occurred in the second year of Mardokempad, Thoth[I] 18/19

 in the Egyptian calendar [-719 Mar. 8/9], at midnight in Babylon». «At midnight»,

 τοΰ μεσονυκτίου, is in the genitive, the eclipse was total and lasted 2h, but the total

 phase only took 1 min, at 23:50, according to the NASA website; the term «eclipse»,

 in this case, refers strictly to the midpoint of a total eclipse. On the other hand, Ptolemy

 (Toomer 1984, p. 206) also describes a total eclipse, lasting virtually 1 h with the cen

 tral phase of the eclipse also lasting only an instant, and the expression that refers to

 this moment, ώρας ς' μέσης, «at the middle of the sixth hour», is in the genitive.

 Therefore, both examples show, firstly, that the term «eclipse» may simply refer to the

 central phase of an eclipse, usually a total eclipse, without any explanatory comple

 ment, and, secondly, that the precise time in which the eclipse is total can be expressed

 in the genitive.21

 Finally, we analyze the eclipse of September 20, 331 BC, described in Ptolemy's

 Geography 1.4.1.22 To indicate the time of the eclipse, a genitive is used exactly as in

 the eclipse described in Dioptra 35 : τήν èv μέν Άρβήλοις πέμπτης ώρας φανεΐσαν,

 έν δέ Καρχηδόνι δευτέρας, «the <eclipse> in Arbela takes place in the fifth hour,

 while in Carthage in the second». It was a total eclipse, and the central phase took place
 between 18:52 and 19:56 in Carthage (20:52 and 21:56 in Arbela). The eclipse had
 already begun at sunset and lasted until 21:03 in Carthage (19:46 and 23:03 in Arbela).

 On 20 September, sunset occurs at around 18:00 both in Carthage and in Arbela. The

 description of the eclipse in Carthage is well adapted to the period of total eclipse

 and the description in Arbela differs by about half an hour from the accurate data.23

 Therefore, the eclipse in Arbela also corroborates the hypothesis that the genitive can

 21 AH of this can be explained if we consider the meaning of «eclipse» and its relation with the verb from

 which it derives: έκλείπω, «leave out», «abandon». An «eclipse» can be understood as the entire period in
 which the phenomenon occurs (range meaning) and also as its most remarkable feature (punctual meaning),

 namely the moment in which the moon is covered by the earth's shadow at a maximum degree—that is,

 when the moon is in the strictest sense of the verb «left out»; this very moment can be defined with the

 same word as the entire period: «eclipse». It is telling that sometimes, in the description of a lunar eclipse,

 when the earth's shadow covers the moon to the maximum extent (i.e., at the middle of the eclipse), the verb

 is used without any complement, and in this case indicates the central phase of the eclipse (Toomer 1984,
 p. 253, H419.16): έξέλειπεν ή σελήνη άπ &ρκτων τό ήμισυ της διαμέτρου, «the moon was eclipsed half
 its diameter from the north»; whereas when the beginning of the eclipse is referred to, the main verb used
 is «to begin» and not «to be eclipsed» (Toomer 1984, p. 284, H478.2): ήρξατο έκλείπειν ή σελήνη, «the
 moon began to be eclipsed». To sum up, the verb «to be eclipsed» and the derived noun «eclipse» contain

 in their semantic field the complete duration of the event as weU as the midpoint of it. It should be noted,

 however, that in astronomical texts the noun is usuaUy accompanied by complements that specify the exact

 phase even if the phase is the central phase.

 22 Together with Hero's passage in Dioptra 35, they are the only recorded eclipses in antiquity observed

 in two places simultaneously.

 23 According to Berggren and Jones (2000, pp. 29-30), «Ptolemy's report is [...] in serious error for Arbela

 whether it refers to the middle or the beginning of the eclipse». This conclusion seems to be the communis

 opinio. But the fifth hour in Arbela is, approximately, the interval [22:00, 23:00], and the central phase of

 the eclipse took place in Arbela, as we have seen, in the interval [20:52,21:56]. Therefore, the end of this

 phase of the eclipse almost coincides with the beginning of the fifth hour, which suggests that the error

 is not so serious if we compare it with the mean value of the error on eclipse timings made by the Greek
 astronomers listed in Ptolemy's Almagest: -0.38 (Steele 2000, p. 101) (i.e., -23min).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 240 R. Masià

 be used in time expressions to indicate the central moment of the eclipse (perhaps

 only for total eclipses, as the examples of this kind in Ptolemy are total eclipses).24 Of

 course, a more detailed study of the question is needed, but we can safely say that this

 interpretation is fully compatible with the way eclipses are recorded in Ptolemaic texts

 (we have found no passages supporting the contention that ancient Greek astronomers

 used the beginning of an eclipse as the default reference time).

 3 The text of the eclipse and its interpretation

 We use for Dioptra 35 the new edition in Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, pp. 103-106); the

 still standard edition of the complete treatise is (Schone 1903, in particular p. 302):

 δεδόσθω δή, εί τύχοι, την μεταξύ 'Αλεξανδρείας και 'Ρώμης όδόν
 έχμετρήσαι την έπ' ευθείας, τήν γε έπί κύκλου περιφερείας με
 γίστου του έν τη γη προσομολογουμένου του δτι περίμετρος
 της γης σταδίων έστί μκε καί ετι β, ώς ό μάλιστα τών άλλων
 άκριβέστερον πεπραγματευμένος Έρατοσθένμς δείκνυστιν έν <τω>
 έπιγραφομένω περί της άναμετρήσεως της γης. τετηρήσύω ούν εν
 τε 'Αλεξανδρείςι καί 'Ρώμη <ή> αυτή έκλειψις της σελήνης· εί μεν
 γαρ έν ταΐς άναγραφείσαις εύρίσκεται, ταύτη χρησόμεύα· εί δέ
 ου, δυνατόν έσται ήμάς αυτούς τηρήσαντας ειπείν δια το τάς της
 σελήνης έκλείψεις δια πενταμήνων καί έξαμήνων γίνεσθαι. εστω
 ούν εύρημένη έν τοις είρημένοις κλίμασιν αύτη <ή> εχλειψις, έν
 Άλεξανδρείμ μεν νυκτός ώρας ε έν 'Ρώμη δε ή αύτή νυκτός ώρας
 τρεις ■ δηλονότι τή αύτη νυκτί. εστω δέ καί ή νύξ, τουτέστιν ό
 ήμερήσιος κύκλος καθ' ού φέρεται ό ήλιος έν τή είρημένη νυκτί,
 άπέχων από ισημερίας έαρινής ώς έπί τροπάς χειμερινός ήμέρας ι·

 We translate this passage:

 Then, let it be necessary to measure, say, the path between Alexandria and

 Rome along a line-or rather along a great-circle arc on the earth-if it has been

 24 A comment by Sidoli (2005, p. 258, n. 37) seems to contradict this conclusion: «Steele (2000, pp.
 100-102) shows that early Greek astronomers generally recorded the times of eclipse observations by the

 beginning of the eclipse». We have not found anything that could justify this statement in the whole book of

 Steele. It appears to be a mistake, probably due to a misinterpretation of these words (Steele 2000, p. 101):

 «The eclipse timings made by the early Greek astronomers are listed in Table 3.4. Unlike the Babylonian

 observations, there appears to be a systematic error in the times of all of these observations. The mean

 value of this error is -0.38h. The time of the start of the eclipse in 141 BC is almost an hour early. This is

 noticeably less accurate than the other records in this group which suggests that there may be some problem

 with the record. Britton has suggested that the time may relate to the middle of the eclipse rather than the

 beginning. This would reduce the error to -0.09; however, there is no real justification for making this

 correction and so it seems better simply to say that this record is somehow corrupt» (emphasis added). But

 it is the expression in Ptolemy's Almagest of the eclipse of 141 bc that leaves no doubt as to the exact time

 of the eclipse, not the usage of ancient astronomers: «the moon began to be eclipsed», we read in Toomer

 (1984, p. 284). It is worth noting that (Neugebauer 1975, p. 846, n. 12) suggests, from the eclipse reported

 in Dioptra 35, that «for the discussion of ancient eclipse records it is of interest to notice that there the

 "time" of the eclipse refers to the beginning» without adducing evidence other than the actual eclipse of
 62. This is a circular argument.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 241

 agreed that the circumference of the earth is 252,000 stades-as Eratosthenes,

 having worked rather more accurately than others, showed in his book entitled

 On the Measurement of the Earth. Now, let <the> same lunar eclipse have been
 observed at Alexandria and Rome. If one is found in the records, we will use

 that, or, if not, it will be possible for us to state our own observations because

 lunar eclipses occur at 5 and 6 month intervals. Now, let an eclipse be found <in

 the records>—this one, in the stated regions: in Alexandria in the 5th hour of

 the night, and the same one in the 3rd hour in Rome— obviously the same night.

 And let the night-that is, the day circle with respect to which the sun moves on

 the said night-be 9 (or 10) days from the vernal equinox in the direction of the
 winter solstice.

 Some textual aspects deserve special attention:

 • The original Greek text omits the article in two key expressions «same eclipse» and
 «this eclipse», <ή> αύτη εχλειψις and αύτη <ή> έχλειψις. All editors have
 decided to restore them in both cases.25 Although the restitution of the article is

 required by grammar in the first case,26 it is surprising that in a document with
 so few article restitutions,27 there are two such errors so close.28 The first article

 should be restored, but even so the reference is to an indeterminate eclipse.29

 25 Note that, in both cases, the word that immediately precedes the feminine article ή ends with the Greek

 letter η (êta). It may be that a copyist transcribed only one of the letters η (this kind of quite common scribal

 error is called «haplography»). It is not easy to assess this possibility, but in the whole Dioptra, we have

 found 55 pairs of consecutive words such that the first of them ends with an êta and the second begins with

 the same letter; the feminine article ή features in 40 such pairs. On the other hand, only one restitution

 presents a situation as the one in our passage: it is εϊγε δλη <ή> περίμετρός έστι μκεκαί /β at Schône
 (1903, 306.14). Therefore, it seems unlikely that the absence of both articles in our passage is the result of

 a mistake of copy.

 26 In Greek, when the meaning of αύτός is «the same », as in this case, the term must be preceded by an
 article.

 27 The Teubner edition of Dioptra has only 20 article restitutions. As we have said, the first restitution is

 required but the second is not. A demonstrative+noun may not require an article when the noun with which

 ούτος agrees stands as its Predicate or when the Predicate is not so distinctly separated from the Subject;
 the Greek αύτη έχλετψτς, «this eclipse», is correct. In any rate, even in the presence of the article, the

 meaning of this noun phrase can still be indefinite (see note 29).

 28 In fact, there is also another article restitution a few words before (Schone 1903, 302.16), the dative

 singular masculine, τφ.

 29 The article is required by grammar prescriptions (so that the syntagma is determinate), but its meaning

 can still be definite or indefinite, because the semantic opposition definite/indefinite is there neutralized.

 The same applies to English language, because one must write «the same eclipse», with a determinate

 article, and not «*a same eclipse» which is an incorrect grammatical construction. Other languages, such

 as Catalan, allow using use both determinate and indeterminate articles in this context (indeterminate: «un

 mateix eclipse», determinate: «e/ mateix eclipse»). Therefore, in Greek (and in English), the semantic

 opposition definite/indefinite is neutralized, because the (determinate) article is mandatory, and the def

 inite/indefinite meaning of the expression is dictated by the context. In the present instance, the facts
 that the passage is formulated in a mathematical style (see also infra) and that the next reference to
 «eclipse» does not need the article restitution, as we have seen in note 27 (i.e., it is an indefinite ref

 erence, because Greek has no indefinite articles), suggest that the syntagma «the same eclipse» must be

 read as indefinite. In mathematical texts, neutralization is very common. For example, we read in £7.1.30
 αί τη αύτη εύύείςι παράλληλοι και άλλήλαις είσΐ παράλληλοι, «straight lines parallel to the same
 straight line are parallel to each other» (in Catalan the article must be indefinite: «rectes paral lèles a

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 242 R. Masià

 • The translation of αύτη < ή > έκλειψις must be «this eclipse», and not «the

 same eclipse», as some scholar translates, because the pronoun is demonstrative.

 Moreover, as we have said, it is not necessary to restore the Greek article.

 • In the passage in which specific details of the eclipse are given, there is an evi

 dent articulation of the verbs «observe», τηρέω, and «find», εύρΐσχω, that we have

 emphasized in our translation: «Now, let the same lunar eclipse have been observed

 at Alexandria and Rome. If one is found in the records, we will use that, or, if not, it

 will be possible for us to state our own observations30 because lunar eclipses occur

 at 5 and 6month intervals. Now, let an eclipse be found <in the records>—this

 one, in the stated regions: in Alexandria ... ». The syntagma «in the records»has

 been added in order to further emphasize the articulation of the verbs «observe»

 and «find».31 In addition, we have highlighted the absence of the article and

 recovered the meaning of the demonstrative.32 All of this leads us to suspect

 that the author chose the option of a registered eclipse, although the expression

 falls in the hypothetical mode of expression, in agreement with mathematical

 style.33

 • The passage translated in the previous item is in fact problematic: εστω ούν
 εύρημένη έν τοις είρημένοις κλίμασιν αύτη <ή> έ'κλειψις, έν Άλεξ
 ανδρείμ μεν νυκτός ώρας ε έν ' Ρώμη δε ή αύτη νυκτός ωραςγ, δηλονό
 τι τη αύτη νυκτί. The critical apparatus Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, p. 106) shows

 that the text is corrupted here. The crux is in the description of the eclipse in Rome,

 which reads, literally (without accents and breaths), δε εν αυτής νυκτός ωρας

 τρεις, that the editors correct in this way: δέ ή αύτη νυκτός ώρας γ.34 A dras

 tic correction, because an article is again restituted and the expression ή αύτη, «the

 same », which originally (and without article) appears to refer to «night», becomes

 Footnote 29 continued

 una mateixa recta sôn paral lèles entre elles»). There is no doubt that the noun phrase «the same line·) is

 indefinite even though a definite article is mandatory in Greek and English (but not in Catalan). The first

 article ai, «the» (feminine and plural), is also mandatory in Greek (for the noun is qualified by a comple

 ment in form of a complex syntagma), but not in English « straight lines parallel to the same straight line»,
 because the meaning of the expression is indefinite. Here, we have in Greek, again, the neutralization of

 the opposition definite/indefinite.

 30 The Greek text does not use the noun «observations» but a participle τηρήσαντας qualifying the subject

 of the substantive clause, «<it will be possible for us,> when observing».

 31 The sentence «to find an eclipse in the stated regions» sounds a bit strange in Greek, and it is much more

 reasonable to repeat the complement of the same verb where the verb last appeared, as Greek language

 frequently avoids repeating verb complements when the verb is repeated. Therefore, we must translate «to

 find <in the records> an eclipse in the stated region»). The expression without the repeated complements

 sounds so strange, even in translation, that Souffrin changed the verb («to find») to «to observe» (Soufffin
 2000, p. 13): «Admettons que cette éclipse est observée dans les régions mentionnes». A. Rome makes
 the same slip: «supposons que la même éclipse ait été observée dans les deux régions [...]» (Rome 1923,
 p. 237).

 32 In the translation of Sidoli (2011) the demonstrative could be confused with the adjective αυτός, «the

 same ».

 33 This was already pointed out in Acerbi (2007).

 34 Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, p. 106) proposes Sè της αυτής νυκτός ώρας γ, «and in the same night in the

 3rd hour», deleting the subsequent sintagma δηλονότι τή αύτη νυκτί, «obviously the same night ».

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 243

 a complement of «eclipse». However, the transmitted text is obviously corrupt and

 should be amended, but we must also be aware of the very fact of the corruption.

 • As we have seen in Sect. 2.2, a period of «η days » can be understood, although

 not always, as a period of «η - 1 days» because, in the Greek cultural context, the

 first day of a period can also be counted.

 We can now turn to the interpretation of the passage. We are told that the eclipse is seen

 in Alexandria and in Rome, 9 or 10 days before the vernal equinox, at the third hour of

 night in Rome and at the fifth hour in Alexandria. The first problem, as noted by many

 scholars, seems to be that «the time difference that Hero states between Alexandria and

 Rome is 2:00 h, whereas they are actually only about 1:10 h apart, so that it is clear that

 at least one of these data sets does not correspond to an accurately observed eclipse»

 (Sidoli 2011, p. 56). But these data sets are not as straightforwardly inconsistent as

 it may seem. It should be pointed out, first, that Hero never says that the difference

 between Alexandria and Rome is 2 h: He only sets up the hours of the eclipse, which,

 following the interval arithmetic we have introduced in Sect. 2.2, must lead to the
 conclusion that the time difference between the two cities is [4,5]—[2,3] = [1,3], i.e.,

 between 1 and 3 nocturnal hours, which is a raw approximation but not incorrect (the

 exact difference is 1:10 nocturnal hours only if we consider the difference in longitude

 and assuming that nocturnal hours are equivalent to 1 h on that particular night).

 We can see this in a different way. First of all, note that the local times of the sunset

 in Alexandria and Rome usually do not match, and the difference seems always to be

 of about 7 min in mid-March.35 So, the first nocturnal hour begins at different hours in

 each of these places. With this time datum, it is possible to imagine eclipses occurring

 in the fifth hour in Alexandria and in the third in Rome: If we assume that the night
 starts at 18:07 in Alexandria and at 18:14 in Rome,36 and calculate the exact nocturnal

 hours,37 an eclipse observed between 22:09 and 22:17 in Alexandria would be observed
 between 21:09 and 21:17 in Rome. In Alexandria, this is the fifth nocturnal hour,

 whereas in Rome it is the third nocturnal hour. Therefore, the eclipse could fit the data

 of Dioptra 35.38 However, the eclipse of 62, that was actually observed in Alexandria
 and Rome, was observed at 22:39 in Alexandria and does not fit this interval.39

 35 For example, sunset in Alexandria on March 13, 2013 was at 18:07 and in Rome at 18:14 (see http://

 www.timeanddate.com). We do not know if these times change throughout history—probably they do, but
 the difference will not change, or the change is very small, because the difference in longitude does not

 change, and this is the most important factor in this difference.

 36 As said above, we have taken the 2013 times, because we do not know the exact hour of sunset in the

 year 62.

 37 On March 13, the nocturnal hour is almost 1 h long: in Alexandria, 1:00:30, and in Rome, 1:00:55.

 38 It is worth noting that this range of 87 min (10 if 1 takes into account only the difference in longitude

 between Alexandria and Rome) is 13 % of a whole hour. In other words, 13% of the fifth nocturnal hour in
 Alexandria matches 13 % of the third nocturnal hour in Rome.

 39 Nor do the hours set up by other researchers. Neugebauer and Sidoli give 22:50 for the beginning of

 the eclipse in Alexandria, Souffrin calculates it at 22:34, and the NASA tables we use set it at 22:39. There

 are no great differences, but none of these could lit the description of the eclipse in Dioptra 35. However,

 the NASA website offers an estimate of the error (http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEcat5/uncertainty.html):
 «Morrison and Stephenson (2004) propose a simple parabolic relation to estimate the standard error (σ)

 which is valid over the period 1000 BCE to 1200 CE: σ = 0.8 * t2 seconds, where: t = ^63^1820>>. If

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 244 R. Masià

 A second problem is that «Hero does not state whether the time he gives in Dioptra

 35 is the beginning or the middle of the eclipse» (Sidoli 2011, p. 57). The genitive

 used is not very accurate, but from what we have shown in Sect. 2.2, the fifth hour in

 Alexandria should contain the middle of the eclipse and there is some likelihood that

 the eclipse itself was total. There is another possible meaning of the genitive, which

 is more restrictive: that the eclipse only occurs in this hour.40

 Another issue is the source of the eclipse record: actual observation, tables, or an

 invention (or even a mix of them). The formulation of the text can help us to find out

 the source. The passage is sharply set in a mathematical style: It is introduced by two

 conditional sentences in the present tense, with apodosis in the future tense (the second

 of which also uses a modal expression of possibility). The second sentence introduces

 a fairly crude remark: Eclipses occur in periods of 5 or 6 months. Thus, according to

 the text, in the absence of a suitable eclipse in the tables, it is necessary to wait for an

 actual eclipse before making the calculations; this seems a rather weird requirement.

 Our translation is interpretation-laden, as it assumes that the author chooses to find the

 eclipse <in records>. But the expression which states the finding of the eclipse is set

 in the hypothetical mode: the periphrastic verbal form, έστω εύ ρημένη, is equivalent

 to the imperative passive perfect typical of the mathematical language of proofs. In

 short, the text in which the eclipse is described reveals the usual generalizing intent
 of mathematical texts, and this is even highlighted, as we have seen above, by the

 indefinite character of some crucial syntagmata containing the term «eclipse». This

 fact shows, then, that the option of an eclipse actually recorded in a table or an almanac

 is quite unlikely. By converse, an invented eclipse is more likely.

 In summary, the eclipse data are vague, because we know for sure neither the day

 (this depends on the date of the vernal equinox and on the number of days we should

 subtract, 9 or 10, from it, and even on the interpretation of the term «day»), nor the

 phase in the moment in which it was registered (although the expression employed
 could denote a total eclipse in its full phase), nor the duration (perhaps an eclipse

 lasting a single nocturnal hour?). If this is combined with the fact that the formulation

 is in the hypothetical mode, we can conclude that the details of the eclipse seem not
 to matter to the man who redacted the text; the eclipse description appears to be a

 mere formality and it is probably nothing more than an example. The possibility of

 an eclipse observed by Hero himself must be ruled out as well.41 In any case, it is

 Footnote 39 continued

 we substitute year = 62, the error is 247.25 s, just over 4 min. Therefore, a range for the beginning of the

 eclipse with an almost absolute confidence is [22:35, 22:43], The lower limit is greater by 18 min than the

 third nocturnal hour in Rome. In any case, our ignorance of the exact time of sunset in Alexandria and

 Rome on that day introduces uncertainties that cannot be estimated.

 40 In fact, the optimal eclipse to calculate the distance between two cities is one that lasts only one nocturnal

 hour in both cities, because the observers of the eclipse need not describe any phase of it (beginning, end,

 etc.) to accurately delimit the exact moment of the eclipse. We might think that the number of lunar eclipses

 that lasts only one nocturnal hour is very low, but this is not true: Whatever period of years is chosen, the

 proportion of eclipses that lasts a single nocturnal hour is always close to 18 %.

 41 For the interpretation of the eclipse, we have not used at all the analemmatic construction and its
 explanation, set forth in Dioptra 35. Sidoli (2005, 2011) and Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, pp. 110-115)
 discussed such diagrams and text. The diagram is based essentially on a semicircle representing hours,
 divided into 12 equal parts. Each such part represents a nocturnal hour. We did not use it in our

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 245

 impossible to discard the possibility that the eclipse was a mixture of some or all of

 these elements (observation, recording and invention).

 3.1 Eclipses that actually happened and that fit our interpretation

 Our database of eclipses contains all lunar eclipses that actually happened in Alexan
 dria, after -331 and before +350, namely after the foundation of Alexandria and

 before the upper bound of Hero's life span (see just below), and that fits our interpre

 tation of Heron Dioptra 35 reasonably well. There is no eclipse in this database that

 fits our interpretation of the eclipse exactly.42 If we do not take into account the hour

 in Rome and we count any eclipse, total or partial, in which the beginning matches

 the fifth hour in Alexandria,43 only the eclipse of March 13,62, fits the description.44

 It is difficult to evaluate the suitability of this eclipse, almost unanimously accepted

 from Neugebauer on, as the eclipse that marks the terminus post quem of Hero's life, or

 even the acme of Hero's activity.45 To better evaluate the pertinency of this eclipse, we

 turn to summarize some historiographie assessments of the best timeframe containing
 Hero's life span.

 This is a scholarly debate which involves tricky textual issues and requires a mastery

 of the work of Hero and of the authors who quote him (or seem to quote him), or

 who are quoted by him (or seem to be quoted by him). A fairly accepted reference

 timeframe was established by Drachman, between -150 and +250. This timeframe has

 been accepted virtually without discussion, probably because determining a timeframe

 Footnote 41 continued

 interpretation because, besides being a very simplified geometric representation of the situation, it
 contains a notable inconsistency: The arc of circumference that represents night, called ΘΚΛ, is
 divided into 12 parts; ΘΜ represents five of these 12 parts, because «the eclipse was observed in
 Alexandria in (or from) the fifth hour; therefore, <point> M is in the same position as where the

 sun was when the eclipse occurred», έπειδήπερ πέμπτης ώρας ή έκλειψις έτηρήιϋη έν 'Αλεξάνδρεια ·
 έσται άρα τό Μ όματαγές τφ πρός δ ήν ό ήλιος της έκλείψεως γενομένης. But it is clear that point M

 marks the beginning of the sixth hour (or the end of the fifth hour) and not the beginning of the fifth hour!

 To put it in modem terms, rather than choosing a corresponding range of the fifth hour, the author has

 preferred to simplify matters by choosing the first exact point in time after the fifth hour, corresponding
 to the very beginning of the sixth hour. In short, neither the analemmatic diagram nor the comments on it

 could be used in the interpretation of the text of the eclipse, because they amount to nothing more than a
 graphic simplification.

 42 There is only one eclipse after -2000 and before 350 in the NASA database fitting quite well our text

 of Dioptra 35: the eclipse of March 13, -459. It was almost complete (magnitude 0.931), its middle point
 occurred at 22:16 in Alexandria (i.e., in the spot where Alexandria would be built) and at 21:16 in Rome,
 i.e., at the fifth hour in Alexandria and at the third in Rome.

 43 As far as we know and we have said in Sect. 3, there is no reason to undermine these facts, but most

 scholars seem to pass by them. In the next section, we will assess statistically the consequences of this

 interpretation, even if we have not found any indication to support it.

 44 Removing these two restrictions of our interpretation (eclipse in Rome, reference to the central hour of
 the eclipse), there are other eclipses in the entire NASA database before 350 that fit as well as the one of

 62 of even better our text of Dioptra 35 (March 11, -1631 and March 13 -1520, -999, -980).

 45 There are exceptions to this unanimity: A. Rome, the first scholar who studied the passage exhaustively,

 concluded that «le chapitre 35 de la Dioptra ne se rapporte pas à une éclipse réellement observée,» because

 the data associated with the eclipse in Rome and in Alexandria «sont tellement contradictoires qu'il est
 impossible qu'ils soient obtenus par l'observation» (Rome 1923, p. 248 and p. 247, respectively).

 Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 became a secondary issue since Neugebauer had attached an exact date very close to

 Hero's life, namely 62. Of course, if exact dating becomes something to prove rather

 than a hypothesis, the discussion concerning the optimal timeframe of Hero's life

 comes again to the fore.

 Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, pp. 15-22) reviews all historiographical data on Hero's

 date, and therefore, we refer to it for any further explanation on the data that we offer

 only schematically. We have chosen two intervals. The maximal interval includes only

 two historiographical constraints: Hero is later than (or perhaps contemporary with)

 Apollonius (whose Cutting off of an Area he mentions at Metrica 3.10, 13, 15) and

 earlier than (or contemporary with) Pappus.46 The first maximal interval is therefore
 [-200, +350], A second interval, minimal but quite plausible, is [-50,200]. We need,

 now, to assess, in these intervals, the likelihood of an eclipse chosen by chance.

 246 R. Masià

 4 Statistical considerations

 In this section, we first set up a simple probabilistic framework for lunar eclipses

 within a determined range of time. Essentially, we actually work out the complete
 table of ancient lunar eclipses in Alexandria that occurred in a range of time that

 includes the conjectural life span of Hero. We can easily derive from this table the

 number of yearly nocturnal hours47 with eclipses in this range. This calculation allows

 us to know exactly the probability that, in choosing a random nocturnal hour, in this

 hour, day and month there was an eclipse (from now on, the meaning of the term

 'probability' will be exactly this). This probability can allow us to assess somehow the
 likelihood of the case that the eclipse in Dioptra 35 was chosen by chance. In making

 these calculations, we introduce a number of parameters, and accordingly, we obtain

 a variety of probabilities, depending on the choice of the parameters.48

 4.1 Table building and parameters

 To build the table, we collect all lunar umbral eclipses (total or partial) in Alexandria

 between the given dates49 following these rules:

 • Only month, day, and hour information of the Julian calendar is used. Data con

 cerning the year are not taken into account.

 • The hour is transformed into a nocturnal hour, identified in the table by the appro

 priate Roman numeral. For example, if on a particular day sunset occurs at 17:35

 46 The lower limit of the interval of Hero's life span cannot go beyond -286 (birth of Archimedes; Hero

 mentions him by name), the upper limit beyond, approximately, 320 (the date at which we can locate the

 acme Pappus, the first author quoting Hero in Coll. 8). Raïos (2000), Drachman (1972) reduced this interval
 from different considerations.

 47 We consider a year of 365 days and 1/4, i.e., 365.25 χ 12 = 4,383 nocturnal hours.

 48 Although Souffrin and Neugebauer use probabilities, they do not make their hypotheses explicit. Neuge

 bauer only observes that in a period of five centuries, only one eclipse fits closely enough the one reported

 by Hero; Souffrin also introduces the probability that an eclipse had occurred on a given day of the year in

 the same period of five centuries, but does not explain, as we have seen in note 3 above, what this means or

 what exactly we can deduce from this probability.

 49 The complete table of eclipses can be found in this file: http://www.webcitation.org/6WbQxULEf.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 247

 and sunrise of the next day occurs at 7:10 (so that night has lasted 13 h and 35 min),

 then each nocturnal hour will have been almost 68 min long, and nocturnal hour I

 starts at 17:35 and ends at 18:43, approximately. To calculate the nocturnal hours,

 we have used records of sunrise and sunset in Alexandria throughout 2012.50 We

 call the triplet [nocturnal hour, day, month] a triad.

 • Given one eclipse in the NASA tables, the cell of the triad in which the eclipse

 has occurred is increased by 1. Thus, cells marked with 0 show that in these triads

 there is no eclipse; if the content of a cell is equal or greater than 1, this means

 that in this triad there was at least one eclipse (if it is greater than 1, the eclipses

 obviously have happened in different years).

 These rules derive from a key criterion for associating a triad to an eclipse that actu

 ally happened: The triad must have a nonzero intersection with the period from the

 beginning to the end of the eclipse.51 This criterion is based on our interpretation of

 the text (see Sect. 3) relaxing the restrictions about the exact hour of the midpoint of

 the eclipse: The wording of the eclipse is so vague that we should accept all hours in

 which the eclipse was happening.

 This interpretation is, perhaps, too restrictive, especially on one point: the day of the

 eclipse. The text of Dioptra 35 does not give indications as to whether we should count

 9 or 10 days before the vernal equinox, as already discussed in Sect. 2.2. Nor are we

 told on which day the vernal equinox took place, nor are we presented with any method

 to calculate it.52 We cannot know precisely when the author started his counting of

 days, since it could start the night of the eclipse or the subsequent morning, or even

 the subsequent night (as we have seen in Sect. 2.2, it is not evident whether one should

 count the days from sunset or from sunrise, or whether the term refers to daylight

 day or to nychtemeron). In sum, and beyond any semantic subtleties of the Greek

 language, the exact day of the eclipse cannot be inferred from the text and therefore

 an error margin should be accepted: The minimum of latitude is 1 day (before or after

 50 After almost 2000 years, some of these data may have slightly changed but the error is small. Moreover,

 this error is probably much less than the error in the calculation of time in antiquity and, therefore, can be

 considered negligible. The data are drawn from http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/astronomy.html?
 n=426&month= 12&year=2012&obj=sun&afl=-11 &day= 1.

 51 For example, the triad [v, 13, March], i.e., the nocturnal time interval [4,5] of March 13 (starting at

 22.139 and ending at 23.144 in decimal format and UTC at Alexandria) is associated to the eclipse of March

 13,62 (whose beginning is at 22.65 and the end at 1.67 the next day, in decimal format) because the interval

 of the eclipse and the triad have a non-zero intersection.

 52 We read in (Sidoli 2011, p. 57): «If the time of the equinox was observed using an instrument like the

 equinox rings that Hipparchus and Ptolemy, quoting and discussing him, say were set up in Alexandria

 then it will not have been observed until the sunrise of 23 March. Another possibility is that the date of the

 equinox was taken from a calendrical type device, like a parapegma. In either case, the lunar eclipse could

 have been recorded as 10 days prior to the equinox and we are left with only some uncertainties concerning

 the stated times of the observations.» However, Sidoli does not seem to note that 10 days could well be

 interpreted as 9days. His intention is to make the date and time of the actual equinox (18:33 in year 62 as

 stated in http://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/seasons.html?year=50&n=426) to agree with the data of

 the text: 10days before the vernal equinox must be 13 March. What is plainly true, however, is that the exact

 time that the author of the text (or his source) considered to be the vernal equinox is totally unknown. In

 fact, the vernal equinox occurs in a movable date over long periods of time, phenomenon due mainly to the

 precession of equinoxes and already known to Hipparchus, about 150BC (see Neugebauer 1975, pp. 292ss.).

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 248 R. Masià

 the eclipse).53 Thus, the calculations must be repeated with the following extension of

 the key criterion: The triad must fit some instant between the beginning and the end

 of an eclipse that actually happened, or of an eclipse that actually happened exactly

 1 day before or exactly 1 day after. Our first parameter is, therefore, whether to perform

 calculations according to the key criterion (KC) or to the extended key criterion (EKC).

 Neugebauer and other scholars based their conviction that the reported eclipse is

 that of year 62 on the fact that the eclipse of 62 is unique over a long period during

 antiquity. Accordingly, we can impose this restriction: In the triad's hour, the eclipse

 must be unique among all registered eclipses. The parameter uniqueness covers this
 situation.

 Another important parameter must be defined before starting calculations: The

 length of the time interval, measured in years, in which Hero's life span is entirely

 included. We shall call any such interval the scenario. The eclipses that actually hap

 pened taken into account in our calculations are exactly those that happened within

 the selected scenario. As said in Sect. 3.1, this scenario can only be set up with his

 toriographical criteria and we have chosen only two of them: a maximal scenario,
 [—200, +350], and a minimal, but reliable, scenario, [-50, +200], Of course, statis

 tics cannot do anything to decide between them; on the contrary, the results obtained

 depend on the scenario adopted.

 In selecting the scenario, we have introduced a simplification, since in general the

 relevant intervals for observed eclipses and for recorded eclipses are different. The

 former only can coincide with Hero's presumed life span, while in the second case, the

 lower bound of the interval can be further lowered. In the first case, a range too wide

 seems unrealistic, whereas a range too close to Hero's acme in his lower limit would

 rule out past eclipses that Hero could have had at hand. As these situations are too
 complex, another parameter is needed. We shall focus only on two basic frameworks,

 namely the intervals within which the observed eclipses are selected, for each scenario:

 1. The framework exactly matches the scenario.

 2. The framework extends the lower limit of the scenario, including the possibility

 that the eclipse could be drawn from an almanac.

 We have established, therefore, four parameters: key criterion/extended key crite

 rion, uniqueness, scenario, and framework. In the next section, we present the result

 tables for any combination of them, grouped by framework and scenario, and discuss
 them.

 4.1.1 Results and discussion

 In the first framework, we consider only the interval of Hero's life span. With scenario

 1, [-200,350] (see Table 1), there is an eclipse in 30.8 % of all nocturnal hours. Thus,

 if a triad is randomly chosen in this scenario, the probability that this triad fits, at least,

 one eclipse is almost 0.31. If the eclipse must be unique (almost 80 % of the triads with

 53 As a matter of fact, this suggestion seems to be accepted by all scholars, though not explicitly. So,
 Sidoli finds eclipses that «were 9-12 days before the equinox for this period»; an eclipse in this range
 would immediately become an acceptable candidate precisely because the exact day of the eclipse cannot

 be accurately determined.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 249

 Table 1 Table of eclipses occurring between -200 and 350

 Total 0 With eclipse
 KC Total 0 With eclipse

 Total
 Total

 1
 1

 2
 2

 3
 3

 4,383
 4,383

 3,035
 3,035

 1,348
 1,348

 1,077
 1,077

 249
 249

 22
 22

 P 1
 Ρ 1

 0.692 0.308
 0.692 0.308

 0.246 0.057 0.005
 0.246 0.057 0.005

 0.799
 0.799

 0.185
 0.185

 0.016
 0.016

 EKC Total
 EKC Total

 0
 0

 With eclipse
 With eclipse

 Total
 Total

 1
 1

 2
 2

 3
 3

 4
 4

 #h 4,383
 #h 4,383

 1,378
 1,378

 3,005
 3,005

 P 1
 Ρ ι

 0.314 0.686
 0.314 0.686

 1,585
 1,585

 979
 979

 376
 376

 59
 59

 5
 5

 6
 6

 #h
 #h

 pie
 pie

 pie
 pie

 0.362 0.223 0.086 0.013 0.001
 0.362 0.223 0.086 0.013 0.001

 0.527
 0.527

 0.326
 0.326

 0.125
 0.125

 0.020
 0.020

 0.002
 0.002

 Without error in the day (KC) or with an error margin of 1 day (EKC). Nocturnal hours (#h) without eclipse

 (0) or with some eclipse. Probability of each set (p), and conditional probability (pie) that only one, or only

 two, or only three ... eclipses coincided with this triad, knowing that an eclipse has actually happened

 eclipses contain only one eclipse), the probability that the triad fits the only eclipse

 in this hour is almost 0.25. If we perform calculations according to the extended key

 criterion, the probability that a given triad fits an eclipse grows substantially and is

 more than twice the probability that no eclipse occurs. Moreover, the probability that it

 fits only one eclipse is high, 0.362, greater than the probability that no eclipse occurs.

 In scenario 2 (see Table 2), there is an eclipse in 15.3 % of all nocturnal hours.

 Thus, if a triad is randomly chosen in this scenario, the probability that this triad fits,

 at least, one eclipse is 0.153. If the eclipse must be unique (more than the 85 % of the

 triads with eclipses contain only one eclipse), the probability that the triad fits the only

 eclipse in this hour is almost 0.131. With the extended key criterion, the probability

 that no eclipse occurs (0.632) is almost twice the probability that there is an eclipse

 (0.368), and is nearly three times the probability that it fits only one eclipse (0.24).

 In the second framework, we extend the lower limit of the scenarios. In the case of

 scenario 1, we choose year -330, whereas in scenario 2, year —200.54 Thus, scenario
 1 is now calculated on the interval (-330,350], while scenario 2 on the interval

 [-200, 200] (see Table 3 for scenario 1, and Table 4 for scenario 2).

 With scenario 1, [-330,350], there is an eclipse in 35.7 % of all nocturnal hours;

 therefore, the probability that a triad randomly chosen fits, at least, one eclipse is

 0.357. If the eclipse must be unique (76 % of the triads with eclipses contain only one

 eclipse), the probability that the triad fits the only eclipse in this hour is 0.271. If we

 54 In the first case, we extend the lower limit to the foundation of Alexandria. In scenario 2, we extended

 the lower limit by 150 years to make it coincide, roughly, with the birth of Hipparchus. In any case, it is

 very difficult to give precise margins without knowing what and how ancient almanacs were actually used.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Table 2 Table of eclipses occurring between -50 and 200

 250 R. Masià

 KC Total 0 With eclipse
 Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 1
 Total 1

 #h 4,383 3,712 671
 #h 4,383 3,712 671

 p 1 0,847 0.153
 ρ 1 0,847 0.153

 573 96 2
 573 96

 0.131 0.022 0.000
 0.131 0.022 0.000

 pie 0.854 0.143 0.003
 pie 0.854 0.143 0.003

 EKC Total 0 With eclipse
 EKC Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 12 3 4
 Total 1

 #h 4,383 2,770 1,613
 #h 4,383 2,770 1,613

 p 1 0.632 0.368
 ρ 1 0.632 0.368

 1,053 424 129 6
 1,053 424 129 6 1

 pie 0.653 0.263 0.080 0.004
 pie 0.653 0.263 0.080 0.004 0.001

 0.240 0.097 0.029 0.001
 0.240 0.097 0.029 0.001 0.000

 Without error in the day (KC) or with an error margin of 1 day (EKC). Nocturnal hours (#h) without eclipse

 (0) or with some eclipse. Probability of each set (p), and conditional probability (pie) that only one, or only

 two, or only three ... eclipses coincided with this triad, knowing that an eclipse has actually happened

 perform calculations according to the extended key criterion, the probability that a

 given triad fits an eclipse grows substantially, almost three times the probability that

 no eclipse occurs, 0.743. Moreover, the probability that it fits only one eclipse is high,

 0.331, greater than the probability that no eclipse occurs (0.292) (Table 3).

 In scenario 2 (see Table 4), if a triad is randomly chosen, the probability that this

 triad fits at least one eclipse is 0.238. If the eclipse must be unique (82 % of the triads

 with eclipses contain only one eclipse), the probability that the triad fits the only

 eclipse in this hour is almost 0.2. With the extended key criterion, the probability that

 no eclipse occurs (0.439) is lower than the probability that there is an eclipse (0.561),

 and is greater than the probability that it fits of only one eclipse (0.341), but there are

 no big differences.

 Finally, Table 5 shows the 16 different results of the probability that an ancient

 eclipse is going on at a random nocturnal hour, covering a large spectrum from 0.131

 (scenario/framework [-50,200], normal key criterion and unique eclipse) to 0.743

 (scenario/framework [-330,200], extended key criterion and non unique eclipse).

 4.1.2 Some statistical simplifications and issues

 In processing our statistical data, we have tacitly adopted some simplifications. First,

 the calculations assume that each hour has the same probability of being chosen. Since

 nocturnal hours do not have the same duration (i.e., their probability distribution is

 not uniform), a slight deviation of the results (less than 4 or 5 %) may occur. Second,

 in leap years there is an extra day, February 29 according to our conventions, on

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 251

 Table 3 Table of eclipses occurring between -330 and 350

 Total 0 With eclipse
 Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 1
 Total 1

 #h 4,383 2,820 1,563
 #h 4,383 2,820 1,563

 p 1 0.643 0.357
 ρ 1 0.643 0.357

 1,188 315 52 7 1
 1,188 315 52 7

 0.271 0.072 0.012 0.002 0.0(
 0.271 0.072 0.012 0.002

 pie 0.760 0.202 0.033 0.004 0.0(
 pie 0.760 0.202 0.033 0.004

 EKC Total 0 With eclipse
 Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 1 2 3 4 5
 Total

 #h 4,383 1,125 3,258
 #h 4,383 1,125 3,258

 p 1 0.292 0.743
 ρ 1 0.292 0.743

 1,452 1,103 498 152 43
 1,452 1,103 498 152 43

 pie 0.446 0.339 0.153 0.047
 pie 0.446 0.339 0.153 0.047

 0.331 0.252 0.114 0.035
 0.331 0.252 0.114 0.035

 Total 0 With eclipse
 Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 1
 Total 1

 #h 4,383 3,340 1,043
 #h 4,383 3,340 1,043

 p 1 0.762 0.238
 ρ 1 0.762 0.238

 859 179 5
 859 179 5

 0.196 0.041 0.001
 0.196 0.041 0.001

 pie 0.824 0.172 0.005
 pie 0.824 0.172 0.005

 EKC Total 0 With eclipse
 Total 0 With eclipse

 Total 12 3 4
 Total

 #h 4,383 1,922 2,461
 #h 4,383 1,922 2,461

 p 1 0.439 0.561
 ρ 1 0.439 0.561

 1495 702 247 15
 1495 702 247 15

 0.341 0.160 0.056 0.003
 0.341 0.160 0.056 0.003

 pie 0.607 0.285 0.100 0.006
 pie 0.607 0.285 0.100 0.006

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Without error in the day (KC) or with an error margin of 1 day (EKC). Nocturnal hours (#h) without eclipse

 (0) or with some eclipse. Probability of each set (p), and conditional probability (pie) that only one, or only

 two, or only three ... eclipses coincided with this triad, knowing that an eclipse has actually happened

 Table 4 Table of eclipses occurring between -200 and 200

 Without error in the day (KC) or with an error margin of 1 day (EKC). Nocturnal hours (#h) without eclipse

 (0) or with some eclipse. Probability of each set (p), and conditional probability (pie) that only one, or only

 two, or only three ... eclipses coincided with this triad, knowing that an eclipse has actually happened

 Table 5 Sum up of the probabilities that a triad randomly chosen fits an actually happened eclipse, depend

 ing on four parameters

 252 R. Masià

 Scenario
 Scenario

 Framework
 Framework

 EKC
 EKC

 KC
 KC

 All ec.
 All ec.

 Unique ec.
 Unique ec.

 All ec.
 All ec.

 Unique ec.
 Unique ec.

 [-200, 350]
 [-200, 350]

 [-50,200]
 [-50,200]

 [-330, 350]
 [-330, 350]

 [-200, 350]
 [-200, 350]

 [-200, 200]
 [-200, 200]

 [-50,200]
 [-50,200]

 0.743
 0.743

 0.686
 0.686

 0.561
 0.561

 0.368
 0.368

 0.331
 0.331

 0.362
 0.362

 0.341
 0.341

 0.24
 0.24

 0.357
 0.357

 0.308
 0.308

 0.238
 0.238

 0.153
 0.153

 0.271
 0.271

 0.246
 0.246

 0.196
 0.196

 0.131
 0.131

 which actual eclipses might have occurred. We have made minor corrections to the

 tables to include these eclipses, and this has obviously affected, although minimally,

 the results. Finally, an issue: The modern calculation of ancient eclipses and vernal

 equinoxes differs depending on our modern source (NASA, Oppolzer tables,...), and

 usually, there is no information about the error margin of these calculations.55

 5 Conclusions

 A passage in Hero of Alexandria's Dioptra 35 gives some data of an eclipse allegedly
 observed in Alexandria and in Rome that has traditionally been associated with the

 eclipse that actually happened in Alexandria on March 13, ad 62. A careful analysis of

 this text shows that the description of the eclipse is vague and its formulation nicely fits

 the hypothetical mode of expression, very much in the demonstrative style of Greek

 mathematics. Our interpretation of these data does not match any eclipse in the largest

 interval that covers Hero's life span, from the foundation of Alexandria (—330) to the

 age of Pappus (350). All of this leads us to think that the eclipse was invented, or, at

 least, that the author of the text did not bother to chose a real one. If, going against the

 wording of the text, we insist on supposing that he did, we are led to suppose that the

 reported eclipse actually happened, it was quite likely extracted from an almanac and

 not observed by the author. Even the possibility that the author reworked the data of

 a recorded eclipse cannot be ruled out.56 Finally, there are no arguments supporting

 the thesis that the eclipse, if it actually happened, was observed by Hero.

 If we relax the interpretation of the text (we accept that the nocturnal hour described

 in the text could be any one throughout the eclipse and we rule out the description of

 the eclipse in Rome), the only eclipse, in the largest interval that covers Hero's life

 span, that matches this relaxed interpretation is the one of March 13, ad 62. Even if

 we accept this relaxed interpretation, it does not rule out that the eclipse was chosen

 by chance, and not observed or taken from a record. The only way to shed some light

 55 We assume that the error margin is not too big, but we cannot assure what is the precise meaning of not

 56 Hypothesis launched in Acerbi and Vitrac (2014, p. lll(*v)) to justify some geometric operations
 performed in Dioptra 35: «Ici, on mesure tout l'intérêt d'avoir placer l'éclipsé dans la troisième heure à

 Rome : si on la plaçait dans la quatrième heure, il faudrait faire la trisection de l'arc ΤΣ (ou de l'angle au
 centre correspondant) ; en toute généralité, l'opération n'est pas si simple».

 too big.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 253

 on the issue is to use the probabilistic approach. It is for that reason that we created the

 complete table of ancient lunar eclipses in Alexandria in a range of time that covers

 Hero's life span so that it includes all the nocturnal hours with eclipses. With this table,

 we have worked out the probability that a nocturnal hour randomly chosen coincides

 with an ancient eclipse in this range, using four adjustable parameters: the scenario,

 that is, a timeframe containing Hero's life span; the key criteria (the eclipse time must

 fit an assigned triad [hour, day, month] or, less strictly, the eclipse time must fit the

 month and the hour, but an error margin of 1 day is allowed on the day); the uniqueness

 of the eclipse; the framework, that is, the lower limit of the scenario. The results form

 a probability range that is very wide, from 0.131 to 0.743. If we had to identify one

 combination of parameters as the most plausible, we would pick up scenario 2 from

 framework 2, with a margin of error of 1 day and without uniqueness.57 In this case,

 the probability is 0.561, that is to say that, even in this relaxed interpretation of the

 text, it is not at all unreasonable to think that the eclipse was chosen by chance.

 In summary, all indices we found point to the fact that the eclipse was invented as

 an example and, for that reason, that it cannot be used as a marker for Hero's life span.

 The methodology we have set up is based on the linguistic data of Hero's text and

 the statistical data of ancient eclipses. It is not a confirmative methodology, such as

 some researchers seem to adhere to (underlining some facts and undermining some

 others): We do not wish to refute or confirm any particular hypothesis, we only present

 all the facts that are known and we assess these facts, in some cases associating some

 probabilities to a fact, and in some cases acknowledging our ignorance of some aspect
 of the issue.

 Other methodological points concerning the whole issue can be summarized as

 follows:

 • Any statistical analysis should clearly distinguish factual and textual data, that

 is, ancient eclipses that actually happened from reported eclipses (and a margin

 of error should also be taken into account in the calculations). Mixing these two
 elements may give rise to circular arguments.

 • The building of the table of eclipses has a number of adjustable parameters, and

 the results happen to differ appreciably depending on the values adopted for them.

 Such a decision obviously precedes the calculation of probability.

 • The size of the time intervals associated to the scenario and to the framework

 induces an evident distortion of the results: As the size gets greater, the probability

 gets closer to 1, and as the size decreases, the probability gets closer to 0. In any

 case, if these interval is too large or too narrow, the model seems quite useless—and,

 moreover, we have no idea of the right size that the intervals must have to obtain

 maximal information: If they are too large, almost all nocturnal hours contain an

 eclipse that actually happened and this very fact offers no additional information

 57 See Sect. 3.1. It is in fact reasonable to extend the lower limit of the scenario to consider eclipses recorded

 up to -200. Moreover, there is no plausible argument that justifies assuming uniqueness (apart from the

 circular argument that the eclipse of year 62 is unique); on the contrary, there are many triads with a unique

 eclipse and, in fact, it is merely a prejudice that it is more likely that the eclipse is real if the eclipse fits a

 unique eclipse in tables. Finally, the error margin of 1 day is needed because the text does not specify the

 actual day of the eclipse—in fact it specifies no day at all—and contains textual and factual ambiguities
 that make an accurate calculation of the day impossible.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 254 R. Masià

 about the authenticity of an eclipse; if they are too narrow, few nocturnal hours

 contain an eclipse that actually happened, but we could, in fact, have the exact

 timespan of Hero in this narrow interval.

 • The interpretation of the results of the probabilistic model must be accurate and

 careful. In our case, we have picked the interval [—50,200] with framework 2, and

 the probability associated to it is 0.561. This probability does not mean that the

 random choice of the data of the eclipse is more likely than the deliberate choice of

 a specific eclipse that actually happened (observed or recorded). This probability

 only translates a plain fact: The number of nocturnal hours with an eclipse in

 the conditions made explicit by the chosen parameters is the 56.1 %. This is the

 only information we can be assured of. This information does, however, refute the

 assertion, implicit in some scholars' work, that the eclipse of Dioptra 35 is highly

 unlikely to have been invented by the author; this last statement would need some
 indication other than the researcher's intuition.

 In short, the incompleteness and vagueness of the information concerning the phenom

 enon described in Dioptra 35 cannot be overcome by any probabilistic processing of

 the data concerning ancient eclipses, but this kind of processing may help the historical

 and linguistic analysis, especially to sideline, or even discard, unfounded claims.

 Acknowledgments I am grateful to Bernard Vitrac for his insightful comments and remarks at every

 stage of elaboration, which improved the argument and avoided a serious mistake. Special thanks are given

 to Fabio Acerbi for critical scrutiny of the typescript and detailed remarks.

 References

 Acerbi, Fabio. 2007. Hero of Alexandria. In New dictionary of scientific biography, ed. Noretta Koertge,

 vol. 6, vol. iii, 283-286. Detroit: Charles Scribner's Sons.

 Acerbi, Fabio. 2012.1 codici stilistici dellamatematicagreca: Dimostrazioni, procedure, algoritmi. Quaderni

 Urbinati di Cultura Classica 101: 167-216.

 Acerbi, Fabio, and Bernard Vitrac. 2014. Héron d'Alexandrie, Metrica. Pisa-Roma: Fabrizio Serra Editore.

 Bacchiocchi, Samuele. 1985. The time of the crucifixion and resurrection. Michigan: Biblical Perspecives.

 Berggren, John Lennart, and Alexander Jones. 2000. Ptolemy's geography. Princeton: Princeton University

 Press.

 Brewster, Patricia Louise. 1980. Time and the Athenian citizen: The practical aspect of time in Ancient

 Athens. Master Thesis. Ontario: McMaster University.

 Clark, David J. 1978. After three days. The Bible Translator 30: 340-343.

 Cloud, Michael J., Ramon E. Moore, and R. Baker Kearfott. 2009. Introduction to interval analysis. Philadel

 phia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

 Drachman, Aage G. 1950. Heron and Ptolemaios. Centaurus 1: 117-131.

 Drachman, Aage G. 1972. Hero of Alexandria. In Dictionary of scientific biography, ed. Charles Coulston

 Gillispie, vol. 6,310-315. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

 Keyser, Paul. 1988. Suetonius Nero 41.2 and the date of Heron Mechanicus of Alexandria. Classical

 Meeus, Jean. 1998. Astronomical algorithms. Richmon: Willmann-Bell.
 Melville, Boiling George. 1902. Beginning of the greek day. The American Journal of Philology 23: 428

 Philology 83: 218-220.

 435.

 University Press.

 Mosshammer, Alden A. 2008. The easier computus and the origins of the christian era. Oxford: Oxford

 NASA Eclipse Web Site, http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse.html. Accessed 30 August 2013.
 Neugebauer, Otto. 1938. Ûber eine Methode zur Distanzbestimmung Alexandria-Rom bei Heron. Det

 Kongelige Danske Videnskabemes Selskab 26(2): 3-26.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On dating Hero of Alexandria 255

 Neugebauer, Otto. 1975. A history of ancient mathematical astronomy, vol. 3. New York: Springer.
 Raïos, Dimitris. 2000. La date d'Héron d'Alexandrie: témoignages internes et cadre historico-culturel.

 In Autour de LA DIOPTRE d'Héron d'Alexandrie, ed. Gilbert Argoud, and Jean-Yves Guillaumin,
 19-36. Saint-Étienne: Publications de l'Université de Saint-Étienne.

 Rome, Adolphe. 1923. Le problème de la distance entre deux villes dans la Dioptra de Héron. Annales de

 la Société Scientifique de Bruxelles 42:234-258.

 Schfine, Hermann. 1903. Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia, vol. III. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.
 Sidoli, Nathan. 2005. Heron's Dioptra 35 and analemma methods: An astronomical determination of the

 distance between two cities. Centaurus 47: 236-258.

 Sidoli, Nathan. 2011. Heron of Alexandria's date. Centaurus 53: 55-61.

 Souffrin, Pierre. 2000. Remarques sur la datation de la Dioptre d'Héron par l'éclipsé de lune de 62. In
 Autour de LA DIOPTRE d'Héron d'Alexandrie, ed. Gilbert Argoud, and Jean-Yves Guillaumin, 13
 17. Saint-Étienne: Publications de l'Université de Saint-Étienne.

 Steele, John M. 2000. Observations and predictions of eclipse times by early astronomers. Dordrecht:

 Kluwer Academic Publishers.

 Toomer, Gerald James. 1984. Ptolemy's almagest. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

