 

 

 

 

On Jacobi's transformation theory of elliptic functions
Author(s): Alberto Cogliati
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 4 (July 2014), pp. 529-545
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569618
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:57 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2014) 68:529-545
 DOl 10.1007/s00407-013-0131-3

 On Jacobi's transformation theory of elliptic functions

 Alberto Cogliati

 Received: 4 July 2013 / Published online: 12 October 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract The main interpretative challenge set by the Fundamenta Nova Theoriae

 Functionum Ellipticarum lies in Jacobi's transformation theory upon which the entire

 theoretical edifice of the treatise depends. Unfortunately, Jacobi did not convey any

 indication of how he attained his general formulae for rational transformations of ellip

 tic functions. He limited himself to providing a posteriori verification of the validity of

 his claims. The aim of this paper is precisely to describe the heuristic path by which in

 1827 Jacobi succeeded in finding these transformation formulae. The proposed histor

 ical reconstruction will hopefully shed new light upon the emergence in Jacobi's work

 of the inversion process of elliptic integrals of the first kind and thus of the elliptic
 function sinamw itself.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 529
 2 The genesis of the theory 531
 3 "Demonstratio theorematis.. 534
 4 Further developments 541
 5 Appendix: algebraic derivation of third-order transformation 543

 1 Introduction

 Jacobi's Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum Ellipticarum represents a landmark

 in the history of analysis; in it, a systematic treatment of the emerging theory of elliptic

 Communicated by: Umberto Bottazzini.

 A. Cogliati (IS)
 Université degli Studi di Milano, Via C. Saldini 50, 20133 Milano, Italy
 e-mail: alberto.cogliati@unimi.it

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 530 A. Cogliati

 functions was provided for the first time. Despite its undisputed importance and long

 lasting influence throughout the 19th century, this treatise, which is almost two hundred

 pages long, is nonetheless difficult to understand, because of both the algorithmically

 oriented character of the mathematical formulation of the theory and the extremely

 synthetic style of presentation, which, in this respect, seems to be strongly affected by

 its being written in Latin.

 From a purely historical standpoint, the main interpretative challenge set by the

 Fundamenta lies in Jacobi's transformation theory upon which the entire theoretical

 edifice of the treatise heavily depends. There are two reasons for this. First, essential

 components of the whole of Jacobi's elliptic function theory—such as the theory of

 modular equations, the theory of multiplication, and the introduction of the celebrated

 theta functions—were presented by Jacobi as by-products of his preliminary investi

 gations of the transformation problem for elliptic integrals of the first kind. Second, the

 way in which the well-known formulae for rational transformations of any order were

 attained was obscured by Jacobi's peculiar mode of presentation, which consisted in

 conveying the relevant formulae without any contextual justification whatsoever and

 with proofs being given only at a later stage.

 The reader has the feeling that Jacobi's discoveries were the product of an act of

 divination or, at best, the result of a fortunate sequence of trial and error. The remarks of
 the Italian astronomer and mathematician, Giovanni Plana, who seemed to have shared

 this feeling and, at the same time, tried to reduce it by improving the readability of

 Jacobi's results, are a good example which is worth quoting:

 By reflecting upon the proof provided by Jacobi, one does not understand easily

 by what chain of ideas he could have achieved the singular form that he gives
 to a certain rational function of one variable which represents the basis and the

 point of departure of his demonstration. Chance could not produce such a hidden
 result.1

 Here, Plana was referring to the first proof conveyed by Jacobi in (Jacobi 1827c), but

 his critique could aptly be repeated for the reformulation of the theory provided in the
 Fundamenta Nova.

 Similar objections were put forth by Legendre in his report on Jacobi's theory,

 which was published in Nr. 130 of the Astronomische Nachrichten:

 [...] it is regrettable that the author fulfills the aim which he has imposed to him

 self by a sort of divination, without sharing with us the secret whose conception

 has progressively led him to the form for 1 - y which is required in order to

 satisfy the conditions of the problem.2

 1 En réfléchissant sur la métaphysique de la démonstration donnée par Mr. Jacobi, on ne comprend pas

 facilment par quel enchaînement d'idées il a pû être conduit à la forme singulière qu' il attribue à une certaine

 fonction rationelle d'une seule variable, qui constitue la base et le point de départ de sa démonstration. Le

 hasard ne saurait enfanter un résultat aussi profondément caché (Plana 1829,333).

 2 [...) on doit regretter que l'auteur remplisse la tâche qu'il s'est imposée par une sorte de divination, sans
 nous mettre dans le secret des idées dont la filiation l'a amené progressivement à la forme que doit avoir

 1 — y pour satisfaire aux conditions du problème (Legendre 1828a, 203).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 531

 The aim of the present paper is precisely to describe and explain in full detail the

 heuristic process by which Jacobi obtained these transformation formulae. The pro

 posed historical reconstruction will also shed new light upon the emergence in Jacobi's

 work of the inversion process of elliptic integrals of the first kind and thus of the elliptic
 function sinamn itself.

 Indeed, I believe that a close examination of Jacobi's early researches on transfor

 mation theory in the period June-December 1827 will illuminate some crucial loci of

 the Fundamenta and partially dissolve the aura of obscurity which surrounds them.

 No historical investigation on Jacobi's theory of elliptic functions can avoid a com

 parison with Abel's contemporary work3 on the same subject. However, this is not

 my main goal. I will limit myself to some sporadic remarks when such a comparison

 sheds light on Jacobi's own investigations.

 2 The genesis of the theory

 According to (Koenigsberger 1904,35-36), Jacobi began his research on the transfor

 mation theory of elliptic integrals in the winter of 1826-1827. Like Abel, who seemed

 to have taken an interest in the subject after reading Gauss's hints about the theory

 of cyclotomy contained in the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Jacobi's choice is likely

 to have been triggered by the work of Gauss as well. In particular, it was his atten

 tive study of a celebrated memoir (Gauss 1818) on the determination of the secular

 variations of the orbit of a planet that is subject to the influence of another planet that

 fostered his first steps into the realm of a new mathematical discipline: elliptic function

 theory. On that occasion, Gauss had tackled and solved the problem of reducing the

 elliptic differential

 yJ{A - a cos ΕΫ + (Β-b sin Ε)2 + C2

 to a simpler form, namely:

 dΡ

 \J G + G' cos2 Ρ + G" sin2 Ρ

 As Gauss proved in full detail, it turned out that such a reduction could be attained by

 means of a rational transformation of type

 a + a' cos Ρ + a" sin Ρ

 cos Ε —

 γ + γ' cos Ρ + γ" sin Ρ

 . „ β + β' cos Ρ + β" sin Ρ (

 sin Ε = ——-,

 γ + Υ cos Ρ + γ" sin Ρ

 if the 9 coefficients α,..., γ" are properly chosen.

 (»

 (2)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 3 On Abel's fundamental contributions to elliptic function theory, see (Houzel 2004) and (Bottazzini and
 Gray 2013, Chap. I).

 532 A. Cogliati

 Jacobi soon discovered that he could provide a generalization of Gauss's theorem

 to the case of elliptic-type integrals of 2 variables. In his words:

 While, on several occasions, I devoted myself to that illustrious paper, I realized

 that the same analysis could be employed to obtain an outstanding transfor

 mation of some double integral. I believe that the result is all the more worth

 communicating to geometers since the theory of double integrals appears to be

 very much neglected.4

 His achievements resulted in a short paper published in June 1827 in Crelle 's Journal

 under the title De singulari quadam duplicis Integralis trasformatione, (Jacobi 1827a).

 Almost at the same time, under the stimulus of these researches, Jacobi began his first

 systematic investigations of the theory of elliptic integrals himself. The subject had

 recently been elevated to the rank of an autonomous and promising discipline by the

 indefatigable, solitary work of Adrien-Marie Legendre, who had been dealing with it

 for almost twenty years. Starting in the late 1780s, Legendre had provided a thorough

 examination of the subject that essentially consisted of the complete classification of

 elliptic integrals into three distinct kinds and the elaboration of suitable techniques for

 constructing numerical tables, thus enriching the mathematical treatment of known

 transcendental functions beyond the elementary cases of the exponential and trigono
 metric functions.

 Transformation theory turned out to be essential for this general aim. For the sake of

 simplicity, we will limit ourselves to considering the case of the (so-called) quadratic

 transformations of elliptic integrals of the first kind. We will follow Legendre's discus

 sion contained in (Legendre 1825, Chap. XVII). In Legendre's words, his motivation
 was the following:

 We will now see how one can, by a very simple law, form an infinite number of

 elliptic functions of the first kind which differ one from another both by module

 and amplitude and which, nonetheless, have the most remarkable property of

 being in constant ratios.5

 Indeed, by denoting with F {φ, c), the elliptic integral of the first kind

 Φ

 m.c)  -s  y/l - c2 sin2 φ

 ο

 d φ

 Legendre obtained the following important result:

 Theorem 1 (Legendre 1825) Let F(0, c) and Ρ(φ', c') two elliptic integrals with
 amplitudes and modules subject to the following two conditions: sin(2φ' - φ) =

 4 Dum egregiae illi commentationi identidem incumbebam, non fugit me, eandem fore analysin ad duplicis

 Integralis cujusdam insignem transformationem adhiberi posse, quam communicare cum geometris eo

 minus dubito, quod duplicium Integralium theoria valde jacet (Jacobi 1827a, 234).

 5 Nous allons faire voir qu'on peut, par une loi très simple, former une infinité de fonctions elliptiques de

 première espèce, qui diffèrent les une des autres tant par le module que par l'amplitude, mais qui ont la

 propriété fort remarquable d'être entre elles dans des rapports costans.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 It should be observed that the relevant transformation sin φ ι—► sin φ' is quadratic

 only in a broad sense, since in this case, irrationalities do appear.

 Legendre exploited the existence of this transformation for the numerical compu

 tation of elliptic integrals by constructing a doubly infinite scale (échelle) of modules

 ..., c00, c°, c, c', c"... iteratively defined by c' = and its backward counterpart
 co _ i-ZT?

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 533

 csin0, c' = Then one has:

 Jacobi's first results were precisely concerned with the extension of Legendre's

 transformation theory. In a letter dated June 13,1827 to H. C. Schumacher, the founder

 of the Astronomische Nachrichten, Jacobi announced the discovery of an infinite num

 ber of rational transformations for elliptic integrals of the first kind. The communica

 tion did not contain any proofs, but Jacobi was able to exhibit explicit expression for

 transformations of order 3 and 5 together with a sketchy discussion of related issues

 concerning the multiplication problem.

 Reactions to Jacobi's announcement ranged from Gauss's icy indifference to Legen

 dre's loyal acknowledgement of the scientific value of Jacobi's achievements. In a letter

 to Schumacher, Gauss expressed his intention to refrain from making any judgement

 on Jacobi's work saying that he was perplexed by the habit of publishing statements

 without proof or any justification whatsoever. At the same time, he wrote that he could

 find nothing new in Jacobi's announcement, since he was in possession of even more

 general results even though he had not published any.

 On the contrary, Legendre's reception was enthusiastic and very encouraging, as

 emerges from the well-known epistolary exchange with Jacobi that had begun on
 August 5, 1827. This is the date of the first letter which Jacobi sent to the unani

 mously recognized master of elliptic integrals in order to present the results of his

 early researches. He wrote the following:

 Sir, a young geometer dares to present to you some discoveries of his own in the

 realm of elliptic function theory to which he has been led by the restless study of

 your beautiful works. It is to you, Sir, that this brilliant branch of analysis owes

 its high degree of perfection to which it has been driven. It is only by marching

 along the footsteps of such a great master that geometers will be able to take

 it beyond the boundaries which have been imposed to this discipline thus far.

 Then, it is you the person to whom I feel obliged to offer what is to follow as

 loyal tribute of admiration and gratitude.6

 6 Monsieur, un jeune géomètre ose vous présenter quelques découvertes faites dans la théorie des fonctions

 elliptiques, auxquelles il a été conduit par l'étude assidue de vos beaux écrits. C'est à vous, Monsieur, que

 cette partie brillante de l'analyse doit le haut degré de perfectionnement auquel elle a été portée, et ce n'est

 qu'en marchant sur les vestiges d'un si grand maître, que les géomètres pourront parvenir à la pousser au

 delà des bornes qui lui ont été prescrites jusqu'ici. C'est donc à vous que je dois offrir ce qui suit comme
 un juste tribut d'admiration et de reconnaissance (Jacobi's Werke, 1,390).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 534 A. Cogliati

 Legendre informed Jacobi that he already knew of the existence of the module
 scale associated to the number 3 (indeed, this discovery of his was already con
 tained in (Legendre 1825, Chap. XXXI) unknown to Jacobi); nonetheless, as he
 fully recognized the discovery of a third scale associated with the prime number

 5 was of the uttermost importance, not to speak of the assertion that there exists

 a rational transformation corresponding to every prime number. At first, Legendre

 had to admit that he doubted the validity of such an audacious statement. However,

 upon reading Jacobi's more detailed letter of August 5, he convinced himself that

 the young geometer could actually rely upon a solid theoretical framework rather

 than on an unrigorous inductive methodology. For this reason, Legendre urged Jacobi

 to provide more analytical details shedding light on the undeniable efficiency of his

 techniques.

 3 "Demonstratio theorematis..

 Already on November 18, 1827, Jacobi had completed a short paper, to appear in
 the Astronomische Nachrichten Nr. 130, which set out the foundations of his trans

 formation theory of elliptic integrals, and at the same time, he provided the first

 proof of his ground-breaking announcements. At the start of the paper, he wrote the

 following:

 In the 123th number of the Astr[onomische] N[achrichten] I conveyed some

 properties of elliptic functions which appeared to be new and worth of the inter

 est of geometers. The researches to which those results gave birth had advanced
 further and offer, if I am not mistaken, an outstanding extension of Legendre's

 theory. Although I cannot determine yet the time by which it will be possible

 to complete a treatise comprising all these investigations, I hope that geometers

 will appreciate that I briefly convey a fragment of these researches, namely
 the proof of a fundamental theorem in the transformation theory of elliptic
 functions.7

 Jacobi's transformation theory consists of two essentially distinct steps: a purely alge

 braic one relying only on the manipulation of polynomials and the counting of arbitrary

 constants, and an analytical-transcendental one by means of which the explicit expres

 sion for the sought-for transformations could be attained. In this respect, the inversion

 of elliptic integrals and the complexification process turned out to be decisive for fur

 ther investigation; in spite of that, they played no part at all in the elaboration of the

 preliminary algebraic component of the theory, as will be seen.

 7 Proprietates functionum ellipticarum quasdam in n. 123 Astr. N. tradidi, quae novae atque attentione

 georaetrarum non indignae videbantur. Disquisitiones, quibus illae originem debent, exinde ulterius contin

 uatae sunt egregiainque, ni fallor, amplificationem theoriae a Legendre datae praebent. Cum autem tempus,

 quo tractatui, hasce disquisitiones complectenti, finem imponere licebit, definire nondum queam, geometris

 non ingratum fore spero, si fragmentum harum disquisitionum, demonstrationem scilicet theorematis in
 doctrina de transformatione functionum ellipticarum fundamentalis, hie breviter exponam (Jacobi 1827c,

 133).

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Jacobi's starting point in (Jacobi 1827c) consisted of finding conditions on poly

 nomials U(x), V(x) that guarantee the possibility of transforming the differential

 *JY(y) V(1 - ay)(l - a'y)(l - ot"y){ 1 - a"'y)

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 535

 expression

 into

 dy dy

 dx dx

 M^X(xj MV( 1 - βχ){\ ~ β'χ)(1 ~ β"χ)(1 ~ β"'x) '

 where Μ designates a constant quantity, by means of a rational substitution y =

 U(x)/V(x). When the expression for y is substituted in Eq. (4), as a consequence of

 (4)

 (5)

 V4y ^y = ^ = (V - aU)(V - a'U)(V - a"U){V - a"'U)

 and of

 one obtains

 dx dx

 VT~ _i/T"
 dx dx

 dy
 Vf VG(U, V) '

 . Indeed, since U and V are supposed to contain no common factors, it is

 where G(U, V) indicates the homogeneous 4th order function V4Y (y = y). Now,
 Jacobi supposed, if G(U, V) contains a quadratic factor (χ - γ)2, then (x — y) divides
 Vlx ~
 clearthat (x-y)2 must divide one of the terms (V-aU), (V-a'U), (V-a"U), (V —
 a"'U) only. Otherwise, suppose that there exist polynomials W(x), W'(x) such that
 (V —aU) = (x-y)W(x) and (V-a'U) = (x — y)W(x), then it is easy to see that
 U(x) and V(x) have (x — y) as a common factor, contrary to the hypothesis. As a
 consequence of this, and of the identity = (V-yU)^--U -^(V-yU),
 Jacobi observed that if G(U, V) contains a square factor (x - y)2, then (x - y) also
 divides V§ - U%.

 Thus, if G{U, V), which is of degree 4n in the variable χ (η being the maximum

 exponent of χ in the polynomials U, V), contains 2n -2 such square factors so that

 G(U, V) = (1 - βχ){\ - β'χ){\ - β"χ){\ - β"'χ)Τ2(χ),

 then Τ divides V ^ - U . Since the degree of V ^ - U cannot be greater than
 2η - 2, there exists a constant M such that = T/M.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4f) Springer

 536 A. Cogliati

 The following theorem, which Jacobi considered to be fundamental for the entire

 transformation theory,8 was thus proved.

 Theorem 2 Let U, V, Τ be polynomials (functiones rationales intégras J in the vari
 able χ such that

 (V - aU)(V - a'U)(V - a"U)(V - a"'U)

 = (1 - βχ)(ί - β'χ)(1 - β"χ)(I - β"'χ)Τ\χ), (6)

 then the expression

 dy dy

 dx dx

 *>/Y(y) -ν/(1 - ay)(l - a'y)(l - a"y)( 1 - a'"y) '

 as a result of the substitution y = U(x)/V(x), is transformed into

 MjXÎxj MV(1 - βχ)(1 - β'χ)(ΐ - β"x)(Ι - β"1 x) '

 where Μ indicates a constant quantity.9

 Jacobi pointed out that the result could easily be applied to elliptic integrals of

 the first kind. Indeed, it suffices to set a = —a' = 1, α" = —a'" = λ and β =
 -β' = 1, β" = —β'" = k in order to obtain a rational substitution, which transforms

 να-Λα-λ2}-2) V(i-*2)0-*2*2)'

 into

 It should be remarked that this theorem does not by itself guarantee the existence

 of rational transformations of any order. It only asserts that if one is able to produce

 polynomials U, V satisfying (6), then y = U/V is the desired transformation.

 A rough computation of the number of unknown constants involved, which Jacobi

 provided in a letter to Legendre and much later in the Fundamenta Nova, makes it

 clear that the determination of the coefficients of U and V should be possible since the

 number of unknown coefficients is greater than the number of necessary conditions to

 be imposed. When reconstructing the heuristic path which had led him to the conjecture

 concerning the existence of transformations of any prime order, Jacobi explained that

 his first discovery consisted of the equation Τ = V — ί/^j, from which he could
 draw the conclusion that the deduction of transformations of any order was possible

 because, as he wrote to Legendre, it could be traced back to a problème d'Analyse

 algébrique déterminé (a determined problem of algebraic Analysis).

 However, this simple argument is not sufficient to guarantee the existence of rational

 transformations, as Poisson explicitly observed in his report on Jacobi's Fundamenta
 Nova.

 8 Theoremate hoc fundamentum transformationis trascendentium ellipticarum continetur (The foundations

 of the transformation of elliptic transcendents are contained in this theorem) (Jacobi 1827c, 135).

 9 (Jacobi 1827c, 135).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 537

 Nonetheless, this enumeration of unknown quantities and conditional equations

 is not sufficient to guarantee a priori the possibility of equation (2); since it

 might happen that the conditional equations are incompatible and that one cannot

 satisfy them either with real values or with imaginary values of the unknowns,

 despite the fact that the number of the latter is greater than that of equations.10

 For this reason, the actual existence of transformations of any order could be attained

 only by producing polynomial functions satisfying the hypothesis of theorem (2).

 Already in the above-mentioned letter on August 5 to Schumacher, Jacobi had com

 municated, without proof, the general form for the pth order transformation (p being

 an odd number) equation by means of the following trigonometric expression:

 (π ψ\ (π φ\ tan21*^ tan αΡ~}±φ

 t£m ( 4 ~ 2 ) = ten \4 * l) tan^ ' ' ' tan αΡψφ ' (?)

 where am is so chosen as to satisfy the relation F(k, am) = jK, and it is agreed that
 the upper sign is to be taken when ρ is of the form An+\ and the lower sign when it is of

 the form 4n -1. The first rigorous proof of (7) was provided by J acobi only in December

 1827 when, after reading Abel's memoir, he explicitly introduced the inverse function

 sinam£ to denote the sine of the angle (amplitude>) φ that satisfies the relation

 ==/ ί

 \J\ - k2 sin2 φ

 ο

 It should be observed that already in (7) Jacobi implicitly made use of the
 inverse function. Indeed, the coefficients am are defined precisely by the relations

 sinam =sinam|A\ where K, the so-called complete integral, is defined to be equal to

 ÏÏ j j

 =. Nonetheless, it is still unclear whether Jacobi had the idea of inverting

 elliptic integrals before getting to know Abel's results. One can safely say that Abel's

 emphasis on the necessity of dealing with inverse functions from the very beginning of

 his investigation has no match in Jacobi's early researches. While in Abel's Recherches

 (Abel 1827, 1828) the inversion process appeared as a preliminary step to highlight
 essential properties of elliptic functions such as double periodicity, Jacobi was led to

 the inversion of elliptic integrals in a somehow indirect way through his detailed study

 of transformation theory. We will see later on how the coefficients sinam j Κ emerged
 in a quite fortuitous form along a very interesting heuristic path.

 How can one evaluate the impact played by Abel's work on Jacobi's discovery of

 the existence of rational transformations of any order as proven in (Jacobi 1827c)?

 Despite the fact that the proof provided in (Jacobi 1827c) made no use of either

 10 Mais cette énumération des inconnues et des équations de condition ne suffit pas pour établir a priori la

 possibilité de l'équation (2); car il pounrait arriver que les équations de condition fussent incompatibles, et

 qu'on n'y pût satisfaire, ni par de valeurs réelles, ni par des valeurs imaginaires des inconnues, quoique le
 nombre de celles-ci fût plus grand que celui des équations (Poisson 1831, 87). By Eq. (2) Poisson referred
 to Eq. (6) above.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ô Springer

 538 A. Cogliati

 complexification or of double periodicity so fundamental for Abel's Recherches, the

 introduction of the function sinamu turned out to be essential. In particular, Jacobi

 exploited the single periodicity sinam(« + 4K) = sinamu in order to deduce algebraic

 properties required for the application of Theorem (2). It should be remarked that in

 his previous investigations, Jacobi had merely limited himself to considering specific

 values of the function sinamu, namely those corresponding to rational multiples of the

 complete integral Κ. It was only in (Jacobi 1827c), after reading Abel, that the abstract

 notion of the inverse function was given autonomous status and, consequently, was

 made the central object of his analysis.

 The structure of the proof provided by Jacobi was quite simple in principle. He

 rewrote the transformation (7) in the following form:11

 y=u=x AAm=1

 (8)

 x2

 sin2 am^

 , ,22-2 2m Κ
 1 - rjt sin am

 ll«=l

 and he verified a posteriori that the polynomials U and V satisfy the hypotheses of
 Theorem (2).

 In order to do that, Jacobi relied upon an outstanding symmetry property of the

 differential equation

 yjï -y2)(i -k2y2) My/( 1 -*2)(1 -*2x2)

 (9)

 according to which the Eq. (9) remains invariant upon simultaneous substitution of χ

 by and of y by ^. As a consequence of this, Jacobi succeeded in providing explicit
 expression for the quantities 1 ± y, 1 ± λγ from which he could draw the conclusion

 that there exists a polynomial function Τ (χ) such that

 (V -UXV + U)(V - W)(V + kU) = (1 - χ2) (1 - k2x2) T2(x), (10)

 as was required by the purely algebraic statement of Theorem (2).

 It should be remarked, as in (Legendre 1828a), that such a computational trick,

 which Legendre called double substitution principle, played a decisive role in the

 proof, since a direct verification of the formula (8) would otherwise be forbidding. In

 this respect, Legendre wrote the following:

 The difficulty which one experiences here is such that there would not be any hope

 of attaining the general demonstration, had not Jacobi found a very ingenious

 way of avoiding the substitution of the formulae into the differential equation

 11 It is by no means trivial to prove that the two expressions are indeed equivalent. A careful verification
 of this fact was provided in (Legendre 1828b, 5-6).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 539

 which consists in exploiting a particular property of this equation which is shared

 by its integrals too.12

 We now tackle the question of how Jacobi could have come to his conjecture. Once

 again, the already mentioned letter to Legendre (April 1828) turns out to be very

 enlightening. Jacobi wrote the following:

 You wanted me to have given the chain of ideas which led me to my theorems.

 However, the path which I pursued is not susceptible to geometrical rigor. Once

 the result was found, one could replace it with another one which could be

 achieved in a purely rigorous way. Then, it is for you only, Sir, that I add what
 follows:

 The first thing which I found (in March 1827) was the equation Τ = ;

 from which I recognized that, for any number n, the determination was a known

 problem of algebraic analysis, the number of arbitrary constants being always

 equal to the number of conditions. By means of undetermined coefficients, I

 was able to produce the transformations of order 3 and 5 [...] By a fortunate

 groping, I noticed in both these cases the complementary transformation giving

 rise to the multiplication formula. At that moment I wrote my first letter to Schu

 macher, the method being general and verified by some examples. Afterward,

 by a closer examination of the two transformations ζ = y = a'i+fxf
 written in the form which I conveyed in my first letter, I discovered that by

 putting χ =sinam^, ζ must vanish and, since, in the mentioned form, j was
 positive, I concluded that y also vanished. In this manner, I found by induction

 the factorization; this being confirmed by some examples, I conveyed the general

 theorem in my second letter to Schumacher.13

 As will be shown in the appendix, Jacobi was able to obtain the expression for third

 order transformations by purely algebraic means. The first transformation, which he

 12 La difficulté qui se présente ici est d'une telle nature qu'il ne resterait guère d'espoir de parvenir à la
 démonstration générale, si Mr. Jacobi n'eût trouvé un moyen très ingénieux d'éviter la substitution à faire

 dans l'équation différentielle, et d'y suppler par une propriété particulière de cette équation qui doit être
 commune aux intégrales qui la représentent (Legendre 1828a, 204).

 13 Vous auriez voulu que j'eusse donné la chaîne des idées qui m'a conduit à mes théorèmes. Cependant
 la route que j'ai suivi n'est pas susceptible de rigueur géométrique. La chose étant trouvée, on pourra y

 substituer une autre sur laquelle on aurait pu y parvenir rigoureusement. C'est ne donc que pour vous,
 Monsieur, que j'ajoute le suivant: La prémière chose que j'avais trouvée (dans le mars 1827), c'était

 l'équation Τ = - —g- ; de là je reconnus que, pour un nombre η quelconque, la détermination était
 un problème d'Analyse algébrique déterminé, le nombre des constantes arbitraires égalant toujour celui des

 conditions. Au moyen des coefficients indéterminés, je formai les transformations relatives aux nombres 3 et

 5 [...] Par un tâtonnement heureux, je remarquais dans ceux deux cas l'autre transformation complémentaire

 pour la multiplication. Là j'écrivis ma prémière lettre à M. Schumacher, la méthode étant générale et vérifiée

 par des examples. Depuis, examinant plus de proche les deux substitutions ζ = , y = α'χ+^'ϊ3

 \+ciyi l+c'xz

 et comme, dans ladite forme, g était positif, j'en conclus que y devra s'évanouir aussi. De cette manière
 je trouvai par induction la résolution en facteurs, laquelle étant confirmée par des examples, je donnai le
 théorème général dans ma seconde lettre à Schumacher (Jacobi's Werke 1,415-416).

 h

 ί) Spring* ;er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 sous la forme présentée dans ma première lettre, je vis qu'étant mis χ = sinam^r-, ζ devra s'évanouir,

 referred to in the above letter to Legendre as ζ = was written in (Jacobi 1827b,

 p. 34) in the following trigonometric form:14

 540 A. Cogliati

 The second transformation y = took on the following form:

 sirn/s = j r————τ —. (11)

 sin φ

 <o

 +

 . α ,

 (τ) | sin2 0 j

 c2 + | :.·) M

 | sin2 φ

 sin θ Γ-3ac + (2^)2 sin2 #1

 sin φ — ——=— , . .. ,—;—-. (12)
 a2 - 3 (-γ:) ) sin2 θ

 We are now in the position to fully understand Jacobi's observation. As a consequence
 of the relation

 άψ 3d0

 \/l - κ sin2 φ ν7! - κ sin2 θ

 = (^) . (13)

 it is clear that ζ (= sin ψ), when considered as a function of χ (= sin θ), vanishes

 when χ = sinam^. Indeed, if F (ψ, Jlc) — 3 F (am^, </ic) = 2 K, then, since

 π/2 π
 r djr _ r άψ
 J J\ - κ sin2 φ J J\ - κ sin2 φ
 0 r π/2 v Y

 ψ = ti and ζ (x — sinam^) = 0. Now, in order to conclude that y (sinam^·) = 0,
 we have to prove that the product ac in (11) is positive. Indeed if, by absurdum

 y (sinam-^·) Φ 0, we would have

 which contradicts the requirement that ac > 0.

 In order to prove this, we observe that the transformation (11) satisfies the following

 differential relation

 14 With a slight change in notation. A minor misprint contained in the first formula of Théorème I (Jacobi

 1827b, 34) should be pointed out The square outside the square bracket must be shifted to the term sin φ.
 A corrected version of the formula is contained in (Jacobi's Wetke, 1,32).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 541

 άψ d φ

 (14)

 If we insist, as Jacobi did, that the modules of the two elliptic integrals lie between

 -1 and 1, we see that 1 < § < 3 and thus that ac > 0, which is what was to be
 proved. In this respect, it is interesting to note that the limitation of Jacobi's analysis

 to the real domain, though provisional, turned out to be providential at this stage of

 the discovery process.

 By pursuing the heuristic path here described, Jacobi thus deduced the correct

 factorization of the numerator of (7) in the order 3 case. Indeed, as a consequence of the

 oddness of the function ( 12), the existence of the other zeros, - sinam and 0, follows

 immediately. As for the generalization of the formula to any prime number p, at least

 until November 1827, it remained a fortunate and audacious conjecture, despite the

 fact that Jacobi had venture claimed it already in August of that year. As he confessed to

 Legendre, the proof of the theorem was attained only at a later stage.15 In this respect,

 it is interesting to emphasize that Jacobi's confidence in the efficiency of his techniques

 extended well beyond his capability of providing rigorous proofs. Of course, as with

 the whole of mathematical knowledge, standards and rules for public communication

 of mathematical results are not immutable entities; as such, they too are subject to

 developments imposed by history. But at the same time, Gauss's above-mentioned

 sharp reproach of the bad habit of publishing statements of theorems without contextual

 proof is a sign of a changing attitude toward standards of rigor and prerequisites for

 publication. Finally, I suggest that Jacobi's audacity could be explained by his faith

 in the purely algebraic method that consists in the counting of arbitrary constants and

 conditional relations that might have induced him to underestimate caveats like those

 pointed out by Poisson in his Rapport.

 4 Further developments

 On September 9, 1828, Jacobi wrote to Legendre that his researches of the last 18

 months, in which all of his energy and attention had been absorbed, night and day,

 by the study of elliptic functions, would be gathered into a petit ouvrage under the

 title: Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum Ellipticarum. Despite Jacobi's modest

 estimate, the result was by no means petit·, on the contrary, the treatise stood out for

 his thoroughness and systematic character, which assured him a long-lasting influence

 upon investigations to come.

 As for transformation theory, to which the first part of the Fundamenta Nova was

 devoted, Jacobi did not limit himself to presenting his previous results again. On the

 contrary, he conveyed a reformulation of the entire theory which provided a powerful

 extension of the version contained in (Jacobi 1827c).

 15 (Jacobi's Werice, 1,416).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Φ Spring» ;er

 542 A. Cogliati

 In this respect, to be sure, the reading of Abel's works played an essential role in

 shaping Jacobi's reformulation of his previous ideas, as the epistolary exchange with

 Legendre witnesses. The centrality of the inversion of elliptic integrals, the recourse to

 the complexification of the argument of the function sinamu, and the focus on double

 periodicity should be regarded as a direct manifestation of Abel's decisive influence.

 This is not to underestimate Jacobi's contributions to elliptic function theory. On the

 contrary, the historians' problem consists in placing his contributions in the proper

 context. While, despite their undisputed ingenuity and sagacity, Jacobi's early investi

 gations were more in the spirit of Legendre's work, the Fundamenta Nova represented

 a departure from that tradition. Although Jacobi maintained his own priorities and

 peculiarities, he was able to enrich them with the stimuli which he had long been

 absorbing from Abel.

 Not only was transformation theory endowed with a brand new depth, but also its far

 reaching consequences were carefully investigated. As for transformation theory, the

 introduction of complex arguments for the function sinamu—via what Jacobi called

 théorème fondamental de Abel, i.e., the equation sinam(i£, k) = i tan(£, k') (with
 k'2 = 1 - k2)—played a dominant role. It allowed Jacobi to extend the number of

 possible rational transformations of a given order; it turned out that there exist ρ + 1

 of them if ρ is the order of the transformation.

 Perhaps, the more striking consequence of this new systematization consisted in the

 well-known development of elliptic functions sinamu and cosamu into ratios of infinite

 products. These achievements directly stemmed from transformation theory. Indeed,

 Jacobi succeeded in obtaining a special type of transformation, which he called prima

 transformatio supplementaria, that allowed him to express the function sinamfriu, k)

 in terms of sinam(·^, λ). By replacing u with ft and taking the limit for η -» oo, he
 obtained the following expansion for sinamu:

 where y = sin and Κ = [Σ2 —=ÉÈ===, Κ' = [Σ2 , d^ ,=====■

 } ΊΚ J0 Vl~*2sinV 0 Vl-(l~*2)2sin20

 This and similar formulae were exploited to obtain the well-known infinite product

 developments of the module k and the complete integral Κ with respect to

 sinamu = /Λ 7 (15)

 IK, ('-=%)

 * nr., (' - -TEpr)

 Κ
 q = exp~F'

 A crucial step was finally represented by the introduction of the theta function

 0(u) = 0(O)exp J Z(i)df, (16)

 U

 ο

 4t) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 543

 where Z(t ) was defined in terms of the elliptic integrals of first and second kind, which

 was to play a completely anew foundational role in his later formulation of the theory.

 In Jacobi's skillful hands, elliptic function theory and its plethora of new formulae

 attained complete autonomy. The Fundamenta Nova somehow marked the dawn of an

 independent discipline that, along with many fruitful applications in the realm of num

 ber theory and projective geometry, was to acquire a decisive role in the development

 of nineteenth-century analysis.

 5 Appendix: algebraic derivation of third-order transformation

 The first published version of the algebraic deduction of the existence of third-order

 transformations is contained in Jacobi's Fundamenta Nova. Such a delayed appearance

 somehow betrayed the actual historical development of the theory. Nonetheless, at the

 same time, the fact that Jacobi decided to include it in his first systematic presentation

 of the dawning theory elliptic functions is highly indicative of the strategic role played

 by algebraic considerations in the discovery path pursued by Jacobi. Even more so,

 since the algebraic treatment of transformations of order 3 (and 5) was presented

 as a useful exemplification of an extensive preliminary, algebraic investigation on

 transformation theory.

 Before discussing the particular case of order 3, it is first necessary to cany out

 some general consideration concerning transformations of odd order ρ = 2m + 1.

 The case of interest will then represent the easiest possible eventuality (m = I).

 By following Jacobi, we will consider a general rational transformation of the

 following form:

 U x [a + a'x2 + a"x4 -I Κ a^x2m)

 y=V= l + b'x2 + b"x* + --- + b(mh2m ' (17)

 In order to attain the desired transformation, we have to require the following equations
 to be true:

 V + U = (l+x)A2(x), (18)
 y - U = (1 - x)B2(x), (19)
 y + λϋ = (1 + kx)C2{x) (20)
 y - kU = (1 - kx)D2(x). (21)

 As for the counting of conditional relations and arbitrary coefficients, to which Jacobi

 referred in his April 1828 letter to Legendre, it seems useful to recall what Jacobi
 wrote

 Here too, one has to satisfy equations (1), (3) [i.e. (18), (20)] only, from which, by

 changing χ in -x, the other two follow directly. In order for V + U and V + XU

 to satisfy these equations it is necessary that each of them contains m linear

 factors pairwise equal; to this end, 2m conditional equations must be satisfied to

 which one has to add that V + U contains the factor (1 -fx). Therefrom it follows

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 544 A. Cogliati

 that the number of conditional equations is 2m + 1 which coincides with the
 number of undetermined quantities a, a', a",b', b" b{m). Hence,
 the problem is determined in this case too.16

 At this point, Jacobi introduced a lemma which highly simplifies the task. Referring

 to equations (18) and (20) above, he states the following:

 I affirm that if the functions U, V are determined in such a way that, by replacing

 χ with jj, y = γ is transformed in ^ then any of the two equations
 directly follows from the other.17

 Thus, if one puts U = xF(x2), V = <p(x2) and one supposes, according to the

 Now, in order to obtain the expression for the 3rd-order transformation, let us

 suppose m — I. Thus, we have U = χ (a + a'x2) and V = 1 + b'x2. In addition,

 previous lemma, that F(x2) = y —-—x2m<p f j, then the only condition to be
 imposed reduces to the requirement that the quantity

 /pm+T / ι \

 + ^ y + u

 l+x 1 + χ

 is a square factor.

 and

 /—

 As a consequence of this, if we assume A2 to be of the form ( 1 + ax)2 it is sufficient

 to require that V + U = (1 + x)A2. We thus find the following:

 α = 1 + 2α, α' = α2, b' = a(2 +α), where a = j^~. (23)

 Jacobi thus easily obtained the transformation sought for which, despite a different

 choice of parametrization, coincided with the one conveyed in the first letter to Schu

 macher (Jacobi 1827b, 34):

 (1 + 2a)x + a2*3

 y = 1 +α(2 + «)*2 · (24)

 16 Hic quoque solummodo aequationibus (1), (3) [i.e. (18), (20)] satisfaciendum erit, quippe e quibus
 mutando χ in-x duae reliquae sponte manant. Ut illis satisfiat, et V + U et V + XU singulae m vicibus

 duos inter se aequales habeant factores lineares necesse est, quem in finem 2m aequationibus condition
 alibus satisfaciendum erit, quibus una accedit, ut insuper V + U nanciscatur factorem (1 + x). Hinc
 numerum aequationum conditionalium esse videmus 2m + 1, qui et ipse est numerus indeterminatarum
 a, a', a" a(m' ; b', b" b<m^. Unde et hoc casu determinatum est problema (Jacobi 1829, §10).

 17 Iamdico,siquidemitafunctiones U, V determinentur,ut,loco* posito ^.abeaty = y in = jjj,
 aequationes illas alteram ex altera sponte sequi (Jacobi 1829, §12).

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Jacobi's transformation theory 545

 References

 2: 101-181.

 Abel, N.H. 1827. Recherches sur les fonctions elliptiques. Journalflir die reine undangewandteMathematik

 Abel, N.H. 1828. Recherches sur les fonctions elliptiques. Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik

 3:160-190. Also in [Abel's Oeuvres complètes, 1,263-388].

 Abel, N.H. 1881. Oeuvres complètes de Niels Henrik Abel, eds. Sylow, L„ and S. Lie, 2 vol. Christiania

 Bottazzini, U., and J. Gray. 2013. Hidden Harmony—Geometric Fantasies: The rise of complex function

 (Oslo): Grpndahl and spn.

 theory. New York: Springer.

 Gauss, C.F. 1818. Determinatio attractionis quam in punctum quodvis positionis datae exerceret planeta

 si eius massa per totam oibitam ratione temporis quo singulae partes describuntur uniformiter esset

 dispertita, Commentationes societatis regiae scientiarum Gottingensis recentiores, vol. iv. pp 21-48

 Houzel, C. 2004. The work of Niels Henrik Abel, in [Laudal and Piene, p. 21-179].
 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1827a. De singulari quadam duplicis Integralis transformatione. Journal fir die reine und

 angewandte Mathematik 2: 234-242. Also in [Jacobi's Werke, ID, p. 55-66],

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1827b. Extraits de deux lettres de Mr. Jacobi de l'Université de Kônigsberg à l'éditeur,

 Astronomische Nachrichten, Nr. 123:33-38. Also in [Jacobi's Werke, I, p. 29-36],

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1827c. Demonstrate theorematis ad theoriam functionum ellipticarum spectantis,

 Astronomische Nachrichten, Nr. 127:133-142. Also in [Jacobi's Werke, I, p. 37-48],

 Jacobi C.G.J. 1829. Fundamenta nova theoriae functionum ellipticarum, Sumptibus fratrum Borntrâger,

 Regiomonti. Also in [Jacobi's Werke, I, p. 49-239].

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1881-1891. C.G.J. Jacobi's Gesammelte Werke. Borchardt C.W., and Weierstrass, K. (eds).

 7 vols, and Supplementband. G. Reimer, Berlin.

 Koenigsbeiger, L. 1904. Festschrift zur Feier der hundersten wiederkehr seines Geburstages. Leipzig:

 Laudal, O.A., and R. Piene. (eds.) 2004. The legacy of Niels Henrik Abel: The Abel bicentennial, Oslo

 2002. New York: Springer.

 Legendre, A.-M. 1825. Traité des fonctions elliptiques et des intégrales euleriennes. Paris: Tome Premier,

 Teubner.

 Huzard-Courcier.

 Huzard-Courcier.

 Legendre, A.-M. 1828a. Note sur les nouvelles propriétés des fonctions elliptiques découvertes par M.

 Jacobi. Astronomische Nachrichten, Nr. 130: 201-205.

 Legendre, A.-M. 1828b. Traité des fonctions elliptiques et des intégrales euleriennes. Paris: Tome Troisième,

 Plana, G. 1829. Méthode élémentaire pour décrouvir et démontrer la possibilité des nouveaux théorèmes sur
 la théorie des transcendentes elliptiques publiés par Mr. Jacobi [etc.]. Memorie délia Reale Accademia
 delle Scienze di Torino 33: 333-356.

 Poisson, S.D. 1831. Rapport sur l'ouvrage de M. Jacobi intitulé: Fundamenta nova theoriae functionum
 ellipticarum, (Lu à l'Académie des Sciences, le 21 décembre 1829). Mémoires de l'Académie Royale
 de Sciences de l'Institut de France 10: 73-117.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:57:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

