 

 

 

 

On Kepler's system of conics in "Astronomiae pars optica"
Author(s): Andrea Del Centina
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 6 (November 2016), pp. 567-589
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913470
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:56 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913470?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:567-589 rwMark
 DOI10.1007/S00407-016-0175-2 >5/

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 Andrea Del Centina1

 Received: 30 November 2015 / Published online: 9 February 2016
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016

 Abstract This is an attempt to explain Kepler's invention of the first "non-cone-based"

 system of conics, and to put it into a historical perspective.

 1 Introduction

 Likely in 1603, in the course of writing Ad Vitellionem paralipomena quibus astrono
 miae pars optica traditur [Supplements to Witelo by which the optical part of
 astronomy is explained] (1604,2000), Johannes Kepler decided that he had to under
 take a study of conic sections independently of his predecessors Apollonius and
 Witelo,1 to be carried out from "a mechanical, analogical and popular" point of view.

 This study resulted in a short discussion titled De coni sectionibus [On the sections

 of a cone] (Ch. IV, sect. 4, pp. 92-96), in which Kepler introduced his principle of
 analogy and described, for the first time in history, a "non-cone-based" system of

 conics in which all possible types of conic sections appear.

 In Greek mathematics each conic was treated separately. Archimedes considered

 the ellipse, parabola and hyperbola, respectively, as the section of an acute-angled,

 1 Erazmus Ciolek Witelo (c. 1230, after 1275), was author of Perspective printed for the first time only

 in 1535, a treatise on optics largely based on the Latin version of Kitab-al-manazir (The book of optics)

 by the Persian Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen). It is to Witelo's Perspectiva to which Kepler was referring

 in the title of his work. Likely Kepler used Risner's Opticae thesaurus (1572) containing the works of
 Witelo and Ibn al-Haytham.

 Communicated by: Noel Swerdlow.

 IS Andrea Del Centina

 a.delcentina@unife.it

 1 Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica, University di Ferrara, Via Machiavelli, 35,

 44100 Ferrara, Italy

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 568

 A. Del Centina

 right-angled and obtuse-angled cone by a plane orthogonal to a line-generator of the
 cone itself.

 Apollonius presented the ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola, as the intersection of
 only one (double) cone by a suitably inclined plane, but continued to consider each

 conic in a separate plane, although he discovered that conics of the same type have

 analogous properties.

 For instance, Apollonius proved that for any ellipse (hyperbola) two special points

 exist (that, as we will see below, Kepler named "foci") such that the sum (the dif

 ference) of their distances from any point of the ellipse (hyperbola) is constant. He

 determined those points by a process of "application" of area, which amounted to

 dividing the transverse axis into pairs of segments whose product equals the square of

 the conjugate semi-axis (Taylor 1881, p. xliv). He also showed that at any point of the

 ellipse (hyperbola) the tangent makes equal angles with the lines through that point
 and the foci. Nevertheless, Apollonius missed any focus of the parabola, because in

 this case the area to be "applied" and the axis to which it was to be applied are infinite

 (Taylor 1883, p.14). The earliest trace of the focus of the parabola can be found in the

 works of Pappus, see (Taylor 1883, p. 15).

 This view was maintained in the Renaissance, transmitted through Commandino's

 translations into Latin of the works of Archimedes, Apollonius and Pappus (1558,

 1566, 1588). Thus the De coni sectionibus may be seen as the first attempt to unify

 the theory of conic sections: Kepler showed, by applying his principle of analogy, that

 one can pass "continuously" from any conic of his system into any other conic of that

 system. In the same section he also gave the concept of "point at infinity", by defining

 the second focus of the parabola, that he called "caeco foco" (blind focus).

 The principle of analogy—which is an archetype of the later principle of continuity

 used by Gaspard Monge and his disciples in the nineteenth century—has been com

 mented by several authors,2 and it is not among our aims to discuss this topic in depth

 here. What is of interest for us is the system of conics Kepler introduced by the figure

 here reproduced in Fig. 1.

 Kepler, as we will see, imagined that one focus, a, is held fixed and the other, b, is

 allowed to move along the axis if, resulting in the continuous change from one conic
 to another.3

 Kepler's system of conics was first described by Taylor (1900),4 then by Hofmann
 (1971), Kline (1972), and by Davis (1975). Taylor reproduced the complete Latin text

 of De coni sectionibus, but only briefly commented on it, accepting without question

 Kepler's statements. Hofmann wrote an equation (depending on the eccentricity) which

 actually does not represent the conics in Kepler's system.5 Kline (p. 299) stressed that

 Kepler was the first who seemed to grasp that all conic sections, even the degenerate, i.e.

 those consisting of a pair of lines, are continuously derivable from each other. Davis,

 2 See for instance the detailed (Buchdhal 1972), and the more recent (Knobloch 2000).

 3 A similar figure also appeared in Supplementum ad Archimedem, de sectonibus coni, a section of Kepler's

 Nova stereometria (Kepler 1615), where he stated again that the centre and the second focus of the parabola

 are at infinity.

 5 See footnote n. 16 in Sect. 3.

 4 See also the notes on this topic that Taylor inserted in his (1881) and (1883).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 569

 Fig. 1 Reproduction of figure at p. 94 in (Kepler 1604), with the same lettering

 who based her deeper analysis of Kepler's system on the concept of eccentricity,
 recognized some error in his deductions. More recently, Kepler's system has been
 described and commented on in Field (1986, 1997) and Field and Gray (1987), which
 rely on Davis's analysis. Nevertheless, in none of these works is it explained how
 Kepler may have conceived his plane system of conics.

 Here are presented two constructions of Kepler's system, for which we pro

 vide mathematical support. The first is based on the orthogonal projection of an

 Apollonius'-like cone-based system, as illustrated in Dürer's treatise Underweyssung
 der Messung mit Zirckel und Richtsheyt [Instruction in measurement with compass
 and ruler] (1525), which probably was a source of inspiration for Kepler. The second
 is found on the theory of shadows, and it may have been suggested to Kepler by his
 optical experiments.

 This paper is divided into four sections, the first of which is devoted to elucidate
 the content of De coni sectionibus. In the second section, we describe the methods

 by which Kepler may reasonably have conceived his system of conics. In the third
 we give mathematical foundation to these constructions, and we provide a detailed
 analysis of the behaviour of conics in Kepler's system. Finally, in section four, we
 draw some conclusions.

 2 The "De coni sectionibus"

 The interpretation of Kepler's system of conics, represented in Fig. 1, cannot be
 attempted without analysing the content of the De coni sectionibus.

 Astronomiae pars optica is essentially a work on optics, and Kepler's interest in
 conics seems to originate from burning mirrors. In fact, he introduced the subject by

 saying that rays from the centre of a sphere do not became parallels after reflection

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 570

 A. Del Centina

 from its inner surface, but converge to the centre, and so, as he observed, other surfaces

 had to be sought which would reflect all ray from some point into parallels. He recalled

 that Witelo (1535, book 9 propositions 39-44),'6 had shown that the paraboloid (of

 revolution) was the required form. Witelo had proved—thus in part completing what

 was lacking in Apollonius—that the tangent at any point of the parabola makes equal

 angles with the parallel to the axis and the line joining that point to a suitable point of

 the axis (1604, p. 92, lines 1-19).

 Kepler ended this introduction by writing:

 Atque id est, quod quaerebamus. Caeterüm quia difficilis est consideratio sec

 tionum, proptera quo parum teritur, libet aliqua mecanice analogice et populariter

 de iis differere: date veniam Geometriae [And that is what we were seeking.

 However, because the subject consideration of [conic] sections is difficult, hav

 ing been too little pursued, it is permitted to treat them somewhat mechanically,

 analogically and popularly. Geometers, be indulgent].

 The meaning of these latter terms will be made clear in the course of this section.

 At the beginning of his study Kepler wrote (p. 92, lines 21-26):

 Coni varii sunt, rectanguli, acutanguli, obtusanguli: item coni recti seu reguläres,

 et scaleni seu irregulars aut compressi: de quibus vide Apollonium et Eutocium in

 commentariis. Omnium promiscue sectiones in quinque cadunt species. Etenim

 lines in superficie coni per sectione constituta aut est recta, aut circulus, aut
 Parabole aut Hyperbole aut Ellipsis [There are various kinds of cones, right

 angled, acute-angled, obtuse-angled: the right cones are regular, and the scalene

 are irregular or compressed: for which see Apollonius and the commentaries

 by Eutocius. The [conic] sections of all these, regardless of kind, fall into five

 species. The line [curve] on the surface of the cone determined by a section is

 either a straight line, or a circle, or a Parabola, or a Hyperbola, or an ellipse].

 So Kepler referred to Apollonius' work on conics with the commentaries by Euto

 cius, surely it was Commandino's translation (1566).7

 Kepler continued by writing (p. 92, lines 26-30):

 Inter has lineas his est ordo causa proprietatis suae: et analogice magis quam

 Geometrice loquendo: quod ä linea recta per hyperbolas infinitas in Parabolem,

 inde per ellipses infinitas in circulum est transitus [Among these lines [curves]

 there exists an order due to their properties: and speaking analogically rather than

 geometrically: from the straight line one passes through an infinity of hyperbolas

 to the parabola, and thence through an infinity of ellipses to the circle].

 This suggests that, given a cone Γ (for instance a right one), of vertex V and base

 the circle C (see Fig. 2), Kepler looked at (part of) the system of conic sections Λ

 which is cut on the cone by the planes passing through a line L, lying in a plane (not

 through V) parallel to the plane of C, touching the cone at the point P. He considered

 6 Also (Risner 1572, pp. 398-402).

 7 Kepler in Astronomia nova (1609, p. 189) attested to have read this work.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) (b)
 (a)
 (b)

 Fig. 2 a The cone Γ and its section e by a plane through the line L. b Represents the section of the cone
 Γ by a plane σ through its axis and orthogonal to the line L. Sections of the cone by the planes through L
 are identified by the traces of these planes on the plane σ labeled I, h' (vertical plane), h, p, e and c, which,
 respectively, correspond to the line (or double-line), hyperbola, hyperbola, parabola, ellipse and circle

 Λ as a "continuous" system, in which each conic in it can be transformed into any
 other under the continuous rotation of a plane through L. It seems that Kepler was
 considering what in modern language is the pencil of conics cut on the cone by the
 planes through L.

 Thus "analogy", a sort of "geometrical continuity", is the principle by which two

 figures, apparently dissimilar, are connected in "continuous" manner by innumerable
 similar intermediate forms.

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 571

 Kepler went on by observing (p. 92, lines 30-32):

 Etenim omnium Hyperbolarum obtusissima est linea recta, acutissima Parabole:
 sic omnium Ellipsium acutissima est parabole, obtusissima Circulus [Of all
 hyperbolas the most obtuse is the straight line, the most acute is the parabola:
 likewise the most acute of all ellipses is the parabola the most obtuse is the
 circle],

 but without saying what he meant by the terms "obtuse" and "acute" referred to the
 various conics.

 Then, adopting a very popular style, he made some observation on "the nature" of

 the parabola, and of the hyperbola, that we may summarize as follows. The parabola

 is partly of the infinite sections and partly of the finite, being the intermediate among
 them, and its arms do not spread out, like that of the hyperbola, but brought near
 parallelism, whilst the hyperbola tends more and more to its asymptotes.

 At this point Kepler went on to speak of certain noticeable points (p. 93, lines

 21-29)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 572

 A. Del Centina

 ...quae definitionem certam habent, nomen nullum, nisi pro nominee defini

 tionem aut proprietatem aliquam usurpes. Ab iis enim punctis rectae educatae

 ad contingentes sectionem, punctaque contactuum, constituunt aequales angu

 los iis, qui fiunt; si puncta opposita cum iisdem punctis contactuum connectatur

 [which have a precise definition, but no name, unless one takes for a name their

 definition or some property. For the straight lines drawn from these points to

 lines touching the section, to their points of tangency, make angles equal to those

 which occur if the opposite points are joined to the same points of tangency].

 He called each of such "unnamed points" focus.8

 Discussing the foci, Kepler introduced—without explanation—the plane system of

 conics he illustrated by the figure at p. 94 (see Fig. 1).

 Kepler pointed out that the circle has only one focus, which coincides with its centre

 a; the ellipse has two b and c, equidistant from its centre, and that the more distant

 they are the more acute is the ellipse. He observed that in the parabola one focus d

 is within it, whilst the other, that he called caeco foco (blind focus), is imagined at

 infinity, and may be regarded as either without or within the parabola: "alter vel extra

 vel intra sectionem in axe fingendus est infinito intervallo a priore remotus" (it is to
 be drawn either outside or inside the section removed an infinite distance from the

 previous [focus]). Moreover, he noticed that:"adeö ut educta hg vel ig ex illo caeco

 foco in quodcunque punctum sectionis g fit axi dk parallelos", i.e. a line hg or ig from

 the blind focus to any point g of the parabola is parallel to the axis dk (p. 93, lines

 33-35). This clearly suggests that the blind focus is located at infinite distance at both
 the extremities of the axis.

 About the two foci of the hyperbola Kepler wrote (p. 94, lines 1-3):

 In hyperbola focus externus / interno e tantö est propior quantö est Hyperbole

 obtusion Et qui externus est alteri sectionum oppositarum, is alteri est internus

 et contra [In the hyperbola the external focus / is nearer to the internal e as

 the hyperbola is more obtuse. The one which is external to one of the opposite
 sections, is internal to the other and vice versa].

 The meaning of the adjectives "acute" and "obtuse", attached to the various types

 of conic sections, seems now clear: of all ellipsis the most obtuse is the circle, being

 the foci coincident with the centre, whereas the most acute is the parabola, being the

 foci at infinite distance apart, and the hyperbola is more obtuse as its foci are closer

 each other. So, since the line is the most obtuse of hyperbolas, in the limiting position

 the distance between the foci should be the "minimum possible" The circle and the

 line are seen as the two extremities of the system of conics, whilst the parabola is the

 middle (p. 93, lines 16-17). It is also clear that the line to which Kepler refers here

 is no longer the line corresponding to the section / in Fig. 2b, as one has been led to

 think at the beginning, but the horizontal line in Fig. 1.

 Summing up, it seems that Kepler conceived a plane system of conics having, in

 Fig. 1, a common vertex in the point k = I = s, a common major axis in the line fr, a

 8 This term, which means "hearth", "fire-place" and "burning-point", certainly arise from investigations

 on burning-mirrors. In the later Astmnomia nova, Kepler called each of such points puncto eccentrico.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 573

 fixed focus in the point a — c = d = e, and the other free to move along fr. From the

 circle, when b = a, moving b down along the axis one first obtains infinite ellipses,

 which are more and more acute as b goes farher from a, until b has gone to infinity

 and the conic has become a parabola; then pushing further, b reappears, now denoted

 /, up on the axis fr, and moving it down one passes from the parabola into hyperbolas
 which are more and more obtuse as / approaches a.

 Thus Kepler imagined his system as generated by the continuous movement of b

 along fr, which clearly reflects that of the planes around L and vice versa.

 According to Taylor (1881, p. lix (3), (4)),9 it is here that Kepler formulated the

 two concepts that later became the underlying principles of projective geometry:

 (1) the two opposite points at extremities of a straight line can be regarded as only

 one point;

 (2) parallel lines meet in a point at infinity.

 We have to say that Kepler did not state these two concepts so explicitly. Of course, they

 could be logically deduced (by us) from Kepler's claims, but, to which extent was he

 aware of this? When Kepler said (see above), "The one (of the foci) which is external to

 one of the opposite sections, is internal to the other opposite, and vice versa", it seems

 that he thought the hyperbola as "not connected", although, according the uniqueness

 of the point at infinity of a straight line, the two branches of the hyperbola should meet

 at the points at infinity of its asymptotes.

 tion obtained by analogy (p. 94 lines 4-6):

 Kepler continued his presentation of conics by formulating the second of his deduc

 Sequitur ergö per analogiam, ut in recta linea uterque focus (ita loquimur de

 recta, sine usu, tantum ad analogiam compledam) coincidat in ipsam rectam:

 sitque unus ut in circulo. [It follows by analogy, that for the straight line both

 foci (as we will use the term, in relation to the straight line, without precedent,

 only to complete the analogy) coincide on the straight line itself, and become

 one point as in the circle, and thus there is only one focus as in the circle]

 Whilst Kepler was right in saying that when the focus / approaches the focus a,

 the hyperbola opens its arms until it flattens on the horizontal line (Fig. 1), he was

 wrong, as we will see in Sect. 3, in saying that at the limit / falls on the line and the
 two foci coincide.

 Kepler, pushing forward the analogy (p. 94, lines 6-13, and p. 95, lines 1-2), pointed

 out:

 In circolo igitur focus in ipso centre est, longissim^ recedens ä circumferentia

 proxima, in Ellipsi iam minus recedit, et in parabola multö minus, tandem in recta

 focus minimum ab ipsa recedit, hoc est, in ipsam incidit. Sic itaque in terminis,

 Circulo et recta, coeunt foci, illic longissimfc distat, hie plane incidit focus in

 lineam. In media Parabole infinito intervallo distant, in Ellipsi et in Hyperbole

 lateralibus bini actu foci, spatio dimenso distant; in Ellipsi alter etiam intra est,

 in Hyperbole alter extra. Undique sunt rationes oppositae [In the circle the focus

 is right at the centre, receding the farthest from the closest circumference, in the

 9 See also (Davis 1975, p. 679).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 574

 A. Del Centina

 ellipse it recedes less, and in the parabola much less, finally in the straight line
 the focus recedes the least distance, that is, it falls on it. Thus, in the limiting

 cases of the circle and the straight line, the foci come together in a point, which

 [in the first case] is the farthest from the circumference, whilst [in the second

 case] the focus is on the line. In the middle, the parabola, the foci are an infinite

 distance apart, in the ellipse and hyperbola, which are at the sides, the two foci

 are separated by a measured interval; in the ellipse the second focus is also inside,

 in the hyperbola outside. In every case the relations are opposite.].

 Continuing his discussion on conics, Kepler called chord the segment cut by the

 conic on the line mn passing through the focus a = c = d — e and orthogonal to the

 axis fr, i.e. that segment classically known as "latus rectum", and called the sagitta the

 segment between the focus a = c = d = e and the closer vertex, i.e. anyone of the

 segments dk, es, and brwhere b is the second focus of the ellipse, Then he compared

 the lengths of the sagitta and of the chord for the five kind of sections.

 In the circle the sagitta equals the half of the chord; in the ellipse half of the chord

 is longer than the sagitta, but the sagitta is longer than the fourth part of the chord; in

 the parabola "as Witelo had demonstrated"—recalled Kepler—the sagitta equals the

 fourth part of the chord. Then he added (p. 95, lines 11-22):

 In hyperbole eq plus est, quäm dupla ipsius es. fc. minor est sagitta es quam

 quarta chorda eq et semper minor, atque minor per omnes proportiones, donee
 evanescat in recta, ubi foco in ipsam lineam incumbente, altitudo foci seu sagitta

 evanescit, et simul chorda infinita efficit, coincidens fc. cum arcu suo, abusive sic

 dico, cum recta linea fit. Oportet enim nobis servire Voces Geometricas analo

 giae: plurimum namque amo analogias, fidelissimos meos magiistros, omnium
 naturae arcanorum conscios: in Geometriapraecipue suspiciendos, dum infinites

 casus interiectos intra sua extrema, mediumque, quantumvis absurdis locution

 ibus concludunt, totamque rei alicuius essentiam luculenter ponunt ob oculos

 [In the hyperbola eq is more than twice es, that is, the sagitta es is less than one

 fourth of the chord eq, and is ever less and less, for all ratios, until it vanishes in

 the straight line, where the focus falling in the line itself, the height of the focus,

 or the sagitta, vanishes, and at the same time the chord, which becomes infinite,
 coincides with its own arc, so to speak loosely, since it becomes a straight line.

 For it is proper for us that geometrical terms be of use for analogy, for I am

 very devoted to analogies, my most trustworthy teachers, aware of all the hidden

 secrets of nature: particularly admirable in Geometry, since they limit the infi

 nite cases interposed between their extremes and mean, by however inconsistent

 ways of speaking, and set out the entire essence of anything clearly before the

 eyes].

 Since the sagitta is supposed to be constant, equal to ak, it seems to be understood

 that it is the ratio sagitta/chord that goes to zero, when the hyperbola becomes more
 and more obtuse, until it is flattened on the line (the horizontal line in Fig. 1). But

 this may be in contrast with the subsequent claim "the focus falls... and the sagitta
 vanishes, and at the same time the chord becomes infinite".

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 575

 Fig. 3 a Construction of the ellipse: AC + BC = AP + BP. b Construction of the parabola: EC + AC =
 AP + HP

 Kepler repeated the mistake about the limiting position of the focus /, and erro

 neously affirmed that, at the limit, "the chord coincides with its own arc". We also

 observe that by considering the ratio sagitta/chord, Kepler, although not directly, used
 the eccentricity of the conic, see formula (**) in section three where these facts will
 be thoroughly discussed.

 From the last paragraph transcribed above it is clear that, in Kepler thought, "anal

 ogy" is the principle that leads to comprise in one definition extreme limiting forms,

 passing from one to another by continuous variation through an infinity of intermediate
 cases, and, as such, it is a tool for making new discoveries.

 At the end of his discussion on conics, Kepler set out the strings-pins-pen con
 struction of the ellipse and (a branch of) the hyperbola, as developed in Apollonius'
 Conicorum, book III, 51, 52 (Commandino 1566), and based on their definitions as

 those curves whose points Ρ satisfy, respectively, the condition

 AP + BP = AC + BC,

 AP - BP = AC - BC,

 where A and Β are the foci and C is a vertex. We illustrate only the construc
 tion of the ellipse, from which, applying analogy, Kepler deduced that of the
 parabola.

 The ends of a string, of length AC + BC,10 are fixed at the foci Α, Β, and a pen is
 placed in C (see Fig. 3a). If the pen keeps the string stretched whilst it moves around

 the foci, it draws an ellipse.

 10 Here Kepler wrote of length "AC duplicate" (p. 96, line 1), i.e. 2AC, which is inaccurate. This was
 already pointed out by Taylor (1900, p. 202).

 ® Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 576

 A. Del Centina

 For the parabola he proceeded as follows applying analogy (see p. 96, lines 8-10).
 He fixed a point Ε on the axis AC, took a string of length EC + CA which pinned

 in A, and put the pen in A. Moving the end Ε of the string along the perpendicular at
 EK to the axis, and the pen in such a way that the floating end of the string remains

 parallel to the axis, then the pen draws a parabola (see Fig. 3b).

 Let us remark that these constructions may give the sense to the adjective "mechan

 ical" that Kepler used introducing his study on conics.

 3 Construction of Kepler's system

 It is reasonable that in order to represent the various conic sections, as they appear in

 Fig. 2, in a same plane, Kepler thought of an orthogonal projection into the base-plane
 of the cone. This hypothesis is suggested by certain figures in (Dürer 1525). In the
 first chapter of this book, in the course of the representation of skew curves, Dürer
 presented a method to draw plan and elevation of conic sections, which he illustrated
 by the figures 34-37 (see Figs. 4, 5).

 It is clear that Dürer carried out the orthogonal projection, into the ground-plane of

 each type of conic section. If one projects orthogonally into the plane of C all conic
 sections corresponding to the letters c, e, p, h, h' and I in Fig. 2b, one gets a figure
 similar to the following Fig. 6, which, after a counter-clockwise rotation of 90°, is

 essentially the same Fig. 1 representing Kepler's system.

 We do not claim for sure that Kepler was directly inspired by these figures in
 realizing his own system, but Dürer's treatise, which was widely spread among

 %k fW i$j

 mm *
 pi§ipp<

 w a £B,

 Fig. 4 From Dürer's (1525). a An elliptic section of a cone together with its orthogonal projection into the
 ground plane (der Grund zum Kegel), b The section of the cone by a plane parallel to a generator, so that
 the resulting conic section is a parabola. Also drawn is its orthogonal projection into the ground plane

 4} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) (b)

 Fig. 5 From Dürers (1525). a The section of the cone by a plane parallel to the axis of the cone, so that
 Fig. 5 From Dürer's (1525). a The section of the cone by a plane parallel to the axis of the cone, so that
 the resulting conic is a hyperbola. Also drawn is its orthogonal projection into the ground plane, in this case
 the resulting conic is a hyperbola. Also drawn is its orthogonal projection into the ground plane, in this case
 the line gh. b Illustration of the parabola as burning mirror (Brennspiegel)
 the line gh. b Illustration of the parabola as burning mirror (Brennspiegel)

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 577

 Fig. 6 This figure is obtained
 Fig. 6 This figure is obtained
 by superimposing figures 34-37
 by superimposing figures 34-37
 in Dürer (1525), as sections of a
 in Dürer (1525), as sections of a

 single cone as in Fig. 2b. The
 single cone as in Fig. 2b. The
 horizontal line (common axis of
 horizontal line (common axis of

 all conics) is the projection of
 all conics) is the projection of
 the line I in Fig. 2b, generatrix
 the line I in Fig. 2b, generatrix
 of the cone. The vertical line is
 of the cone. The vertical line is

 the projection of the hyperbola
 the projection of the hyperbola
 corresponding to h'
 corresponding to h'

 German-speaking people, was certainly read by Kepler as he attested in Harmonices
 mundi (Kepler 1619).11

 11 The Harmonices mundi was planned since 1599, but not completed and published until 1619. Atp. 39 of

 this work, Kepler explicitly referred to the wrong construction of the heptagon offered by Dürer in (1525,
 fig. 9), and so that he had read his treatise. We thank Aldo Brigaglia for having brought this to our attention.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 578

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 7 Illustration for the proof of the focus-directrix property of the projected conic section

 In this construction all the projected conic sections have the same horizontal axis,
 which also coincides with the projection of the conic section labelled / in Fig. 2b, all
 are tangent to the vertical line, which coincides with the projection of the hyperbola
 labelled h' in Fig. 2b, and, as will be shown below, all have a common focus in the

 point corresponding to the projection of the centre of the circle c (Fig. 2b).

 If this was the route followed by Kepler to invent his plane system of conics, the
 question of how he realized that the projected conics all have a common focus in a, is

 a matter we can not answer with certainty. Kepler may have done accurate drawings,
 like those in Fig. 6, and taken into account two properties of the foci well known
 to him: (1) the tangent at any point of a conic make equal angles with the two lines
 through that point and each of the foci (a property that had extended to the parabola);
 (2) for the ellipse and the hyperbola the two foci have the same distance from the
 nearest vertex. Nevertheless the previous procedure can be slight modified in order to

 get a direct proof of the fact that all these conics share a common focus.

 Suppose the cone Γ, defined in Sect. 1, is right-angled with C lying on the plane π.

 Let α be a plane cutting Γ along the conic γ, see Fig. 7. Then the orthogonal projection

 of γ into π is a conic having a focus in the projection V' of V into π. The proof rests
 on the focus-directrix property of conics: any conic is the locus of points Ρ in the
 plane, such that the ratio between the distances from a fixed point (the focus) and a
 fixed line (the directrix) is constant e.n

 Let Q be the orthogonal projection into the plane πο, parallel to π and passing

 through V, of a point Ρ on γ, and Κ its orthogonal projection on the line d intersection
 of a and πο· For a point A in πο, we denote, respectively, with Ε and F its orthogonal

 projections on a and on the line d.

 12 Kepler studied Euclid's Elements and the works of Archimedes, Apollonius and Pappus translated into
 Latin by Federico Commandino (Commandino 1558, 1566, 1588). Kepler quoted Commandino's works
 in Astronomia nova, p. 286, see also (Cronwell 1997, p. 140). In particular he knew the definition of conics
 through the focus-directrix property, as in Pappus' Collectiones, book 7, prop. 138. The constant e is the
 eccentricity of the conic.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 579

 We observe that the value e of the ratio AE/AF is constant for any choice of the

 point A on πο· Since PQ = VQ, being LQVP = LVPQ — π/4, it follows that

 PQ^QV
 6~ KQ~ KQ

 Therefore, V is a focus of the conic η orthogonal projection of γ into 7Το· As a

 consequence we have that V' is a focus of the conic η', orthogonal projection of γ
 into jr.

 This proof certainly did not exceed Kepler's mathematical ability, perhaps only his

 current interest.

 We observe that the plane system of conics Ψ, which is obtained by projecting

 into tcq the sections of the cone Γ with the planes through a line L, parallel to π and

 touching the cone in a point (see Fig. 7), is the same as Kepler's system.

 Kepler may also have been induced to conceive his system of conics in another

 way. He devoted the first three chapters of Ad Vitellionem paralopomena to the study

 of light, of the functioning of the human eye, of the camera obscura, and of lunar

 and solar eclipses. Certainly he was involved in several optical experiments, and he

 may have considered the shadows cast on a plane by a sphere, under various lighting

 conditions. The determination of the shape of shadows was also a problem of interest

 in perspective, see for example (Del Monte 1600, pp. 273-275).13

 Let S be a sphere of radius r on a horizontal plane a, touching it at the point F,

 and tangent at the point Γ to a line a orthogonal to a (see Fig. 8). Denote b the line

 intersection of a with the tangent plane to S at Τ. Suppose a point source of light L

 is put on the line α at a certain height h over a. The outline contour of the shadow

 produced by the sphere on the plane a, is determined by the intersection of the plane a

 with the (oblique) cone Δ with vertex in L and everywhere tangent to S. The cone Δ is

 tangent to S along the circle which is cut on S by the plane through Τ and orthogonal

 to the axis of Δ. Varying Athe contour changes, as illustrated in Fig. 8. In particular: if

 the source of light is put at infinity, so that Δ is a cylinder, its intersection with a is the

 circle of centre F and radius r; if h is finite, but greater than 2r, the intersection of Δ

 with α is an ellipse; if A = 2r, the intersection is a parabola; if h < 2r, but greater than

 r, the intersection is a (branch of a) hyperbola; finally, if h = r the cone Δ degenerates

 in the tangent plane to S at Τ, and the limiting (branch of) hyperbola flattened on the
 line b.

 If one consider Δ as a complete cone, i.e. with two slopes, one gets in the plane a

 a system of conics Θ, that, up to a rotation of 90° on the right, is similar to that Kepler

 introduced with Fig. 1.

 13 Francesco Maurolico in Photismi de lumine et umbra, completed in 1521, proved that any conic is the

 perspective image of a circle (1611, theorems XII, ΧΠΙ). In this work Maurolico also studied problems

 concerning the camera obscura. It seems that Blaise Pascal, in the lost Traite des coniques, affirmed that all

 conics are the perspective image of a circle, see (Taton 1962, p. 237). We also observe that Isaac Newton,

 in section 29 "Genesis curvarum per umbra" of his short treatise Enumeratio linearum tertii ordinis, see

 (1704, p.157), wrote that all conics can be seen as shadows of a circle. It is interesting to notice that Taylor

 (1900, p. 217), wrote that such genesis may have been suggested to Newton by some of Kepler's problemata
 observatoria (Kepler 1604, pp. 201,203).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 580

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 8 In this figure the conics, intersection of various cones Δ with the plane a, are drawn in perspective.
 If the light source L is positioned at infinity on the line a, the sphere S produces a shadow whose contour
 is the circle of centre F and radius r, if it is positioned in Ε the contour of the shadow is an ellipse, in Ρ is
 a parabola, and in Η is a hyperbola

 To confirm this, it is enough to show that all conics in Θ have F as a focus.
 Before we do it, we like to observe that this system is no longer obtained by

 sectioning a single cone, but rather by sectioning different cones, whose angle at the
 vertex varies from 0 to π: hence we are operating more in the spirit of Archimedes
 than Apollonius. Moreover, it is clear that one passes (in a continuous way) from one
 conic to another by moving L along the line a. Allowing h to assume negative values,

 we get a system of conics that we still denote by Θ.

 Let β be the plane of the circle along which Δ is tangent to the sphere, and denote

 d the intersection of β and a (see Fig. 9). To prove that F is a focus for the conic γ,

 it is enough to show that for any point Ρ on γ the ratio between PF and the distance
 of Ρ from d is constant.

 Let be P' the intersection of the line LP with the circle of tangency, Η the intersec

 tion of d with the perpendicular through P, and Κ the intersection with the line OF of
 the perpendicular through P. Moreover we denote A A' the diameter of the circle (so
 A = Τ of Fig. 8), and Β the intersection of the line A A' with d. We have PH = KB
 and, since both the segments PF and PP' are tangent to the sphere S, also PP' — PF.
 Therefore

 PF _ PP'
 PH ~ ~KB'

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 581

 Fig. 9 Focus-directrix property for the outline contour of the shadow of a sphere

 The plane passing through Ρ and parallel to β cuts on the cone Δ a circle of diameter

 QQ'. We have PP' — QA, so by applying Thales' intercept theorem to the parallel
 lines BA and QQ' cut by the two orthogonal lines LQ and BK, we obtain

 and then

 AQ _ OA
 KB~OB'

 PF PP' OA
 ~ph ~ Tb ~ ob'

 Hence, since A, Β and Ο do not depend on Ρ, the ratio PF/PH is constant. This holds

 true for any position of L.

 Also this proof did not exceed Kepler's mathematical ability.

 4 Mathematical construction and analysis of Kepler's system

 In order to explain how Kepler's system of conics really works, and to comment on

 the conclusions that Kepler came to concerning the limiting position of the free focus,

 and of the limiting value of the ratio sagitta/chord, it is convenient to use coordinate
 geometry.

 Without loss of generality, we may consider the cone Γ with equation

 having vertex V = (0, 0,4) and as base the circle C of equation x2 + y2 = 4 in the
 plane ζ = 0, and the pencil of planes

 4x2 + 4y2 - (z - 4)2 = 0,

 S : ζ - 2 + λ(2χ + ζ - 4) = 0,

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 582

 A. Del Centina

 with axis the line L, defined byz-2 = 2x + z- 4 = 0, tangent to Γ at the point
 Ρ = (1,0, 2).

 Let Λ be the pencil of conics cut on Γ by the planes in This pencil, under
 orthogonal projection into the plane of C, i.e. (z = 0), determines an irreducible plane
 system of conics, whose equation is obtained by eliminating the variable ζ between
 the equation of Γ and that of £:

 Φ : (1 + λ)2(χ2 + y2) - (λ* + l)2 = 0.

 The system Φ is obviously a quadratic system being the two-to-one projection map

 from Γ onto the plane. In particular this means that for a general point in the plane

 there pass (exactly) two conics of the system Φ. It is not hard to see that this is true

 for all point in the plane except the point with coordinate (1,0), through which all the

 conics of Φ pass, and the points with coordinates (1, y), with y φ 0, through each of
 which only one passes.

 All the conics in the system Φ have a vertex in the point (1,0). The other vertex is

 located in the point (-1/(1 + 2λ), 0) if λ φ -1/2, whilst if λ = -1/2 the conic is a

 parabola. Moreover all the conics have a focus at the origin a = (0, 0), and the other

 at b, which, as can be easily seen by some computation, in the point

 if λ Φ -1/2, whilst if λ = -1/2 the second focus, the conic being a parabola, is at

 infinity.

 The determinant of the general conic in Φ is equal to - (λ + l)4, so there are only

 two (distinct) singular conics in the complete system Φ:14 the one corresponding to
 λ = —1, i.e. the double line (χ — l)2 = 0, which has multiplicity 4, and the one

 corresponding to λ = oo, i.e. the double line y2 = 0, which has multiplicity 2. By

 looking for conics that are tangent to the line at infinity, we also see that in the system

 Φ there are four parabolas (not necessarily distinct): for λ = -1 /2, the one given by
 y2 + 4x - 4 = 0 and which we denote p; for λ = oo, the degenerate conic given

 by y2 = 0; and for λ = — 1, the degenerate conic given by (χ — l)2 = 0, which we

 denote dh and has multiplicity 2.

 put in the standard form:

 For any λ φ -1/2, or —1, the equation of a central conic in the system Φ can be

 (-)2 '

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 14 This is the system obtained when one allows λ to assume the value oo, or, which is the same, Φ is put
 in the projective form μ(ζ - 2) + λ(2* + ζ - 0) = 0.

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 583

 where the sign ± has to be chosen according as λ > -1/2 (ellipses), or λ < -1/2
 (hyperbolas).

 Let us give the equation of some other particular conic in the system Φ.
 For λ = 0 we have the circle c defined by χ2 + y2 = 1, with centre in (0, 0); for

 λ = —1/4 we have the ellipse e defined by 8x2 + 9y2 + 8* — 16 = 0, and in standard
 form

 which has the second focus in (—1,0); for λ = —2/3 we have the hyperbola h defined

 by -3x2 + y2 + 12x -9 = 0, which in standard form is

 (χ + 1/2)2 y2

 (3/2)2 (V2)2 '

 ? y^
 (χ-2)2-γ = 1,

 and has its second focus in (4,0).

 The conics c,e, p,h,dh defined above are represented in Fig. 10, related to Fig. 2b,

 as are e\, ei, h\,hz, hj corresponding to different values of λ, with their respective

 second foci, which, for simplicity, we have denoted by the same letter.

 We note that, up to a rotation on the left of 90°, the bold part of Fig. 10 is essentially

 Fig. 1.

 We remark that when Kepler wrote "quod ä linea recta per hyperbolas infinitas in

 Parabolem, inde per ellipses infinitas in circulum est transitus [we pass from the line

 through infinite hyperbolas to the parabola, and then from the parabola through infinite

 ellipsis to the circle" (p. 92, lines 26-30), he seemed to consider not the whole system

 Φ, but only part of it. Moreover it is not clear to which "line" Kepler is referring. If

 he considered only the conics corresponding to the values of λ e [-1, 0], the line in

 question is the horizontal line in Fig. 1, corresponding to the degenerate hyperbola

 dh,15 and the projection of the hyperbola h' in Fig. 2b. In fact, for λ -> -1, the two

 branches of the hyperbola become closer and closer until they flattened onto the line

 χ = 1. Whilst, if Kepler considered the conics corresponding to λ 6 (-oo, 0], as it

 seems at the beginning of his study on conics when he referred to the actual sections

 of the cone, the line in question may be either the projection of the hyperbola h', i.e.

 dh, or the projection of the (double) line I of Fig. 2, i.e y2 = 0.

 This ambiguity may have caused Kepler's erroneous determination of the limiting

 position of the free focus on the degenerate hyperbola dh, as already noticed Davis

 (1975, p. 680). In fact for the limiting position of the free focus b we have that: λ -+ oo

 implies b -> (1,0), and λ -*■ -1 implies b -*■ (2,0). So the free focus does not fall

 on the line χ - 1 = 0 as Kepler claimed.

 As is well known the type (and the shape) of a conic depends on its eccentricity.

 For a central conic, i.e. for an ellipse or a hyperbola, the eccentricity was classically
 defined as the value of the ratio

 15 In fact for λ — 1, the two arms (or branches) of the hyperbola become closer and closer, until they
 flatten onto the line χ = 1.

 <Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 584

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 10 In this figure conics from the system Φ are represented, those in bold are relative to values of
 λ e [—1,0], the others are relative to values λ e (0, +oo) (ellipses) and λ e (—oo, —1) (hyperbolas). The
 two letters "c" denote the circle and its centre. Similarly the other pairs of equal letters denote a conic and
 its focus Φ c

 where C is the centre of the conic, F one of its foci, and V the nearest vertex to F.

 Clearly we have e — 0 for the circle, 0 < e < 1 for the ellipse, and 1 < e < +oo for
 the hyperbola.16

 When the conic is defined by the focus-directrix property, i.e. as the locus of points
 Ρ whose distances from a fixed point (focus) and a fixed line (directrix) is constant,

 this constant is the eccentricity, that is, denoting by Η the foot of Ρ on the directrix,
 we have

 - —

 e ~ cv'

 PF

 16 We note in passing that Hofmann, see p. 336 of the reprint of his work, wrote the following equation
 y2 = 2px — (1 — e2)x~, where ρ is a fixed number and e the eccentricity. This equation does not represent
 a system of semi-confocal conics. For instance, for ρ = 1 the coordinates of the foci are (1/(1 + e), 0) and

 (1/(1 — c), 0), and clearly both depend on the eccentricity. Let us remark that when e —► +oo, the limiting
 position of the foci is the point (0,0); so in this system both foci coincide for the degenerate hyperbola and
 fall on it.

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 585

 Since for the parabola we have PF = PH, it follows that e = 1.

 When a non-degenerate conic is defined by the equation

 (*) Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0,

 and B2 - 4AC φ 0, i.e. it is not a parabola, the eccentricity can be expressed by the
 formula

 2s/{A - C)2 + B2

 y\ ±(A + C) + J(A-C)2 + B2,

 where the sign ± has to be chosen opposite to that of the determinant of the quadratic

 form associated to the equation (*).17 Therefore, since the quadratic form associated
 to Φ has determinant -(1 + λ)4, for a conic in Φ, when λ φ -1/2 and -1 the

 eccentricity is

 λ)2

 It is readily seen that: e = 0 for λ = 0; e — 1 for λ = —1/2; e = +oo for λ = —1

 (the degenerate hyperbola dh); if λ —► +oo, then e -* 1; if λ —> -oo, then e -*■ 1.
 The last two cases correspond to the degenerate parabola y2 = 0.

 In his study Kepler did not consider the eccentricity directly, but through the ratio

 sagitta/chord. In fact a simple computation shows that the sagitta is equal to a(l - e),

 and the chord is equal to a(l - e2), where a is the half of the distance between the
 two vertices, so that

 (**) sagitta/chord =

 6 2(1 + e)

 For the behaviour of the sagitta and of the chord (maintaining these name for the

 respective lengths), we observe that:

 (1) the sagitta is constantly equal to 1, and the chord steadily increases from 1 to

 infinity, when λ goes from 0 to -1;

 (2) the sagitta steadily decreases together with the chord from 1 to 0, when λ goes

 from 0 to +oo;

 (3) the sagitta steadily decreases from 1 to 0 and the chord steadily decreases from

 +00 to 0, when λ goes from -1 to -oo.

 17 See for instance (Ayoub 2003).

 Ώ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Therefore the sagitta is not constant for all conics in the system Φ, but only for

 those corresponding to λ varying in the interval [-1,0], i.e. those that actually Kepler
 considered.

 586

 A. Del Centina

 So, in the first case the ratio sagitta/chord goes to 0 when λ -» — 1, and in the

 second and third case the limiting value of the ratio sagitta/chord is 1/4.

 The point (1,0), which corresponds to the limiting position of the free focus when λ

 goes to infinity, lies on the degenerate parabola y2 = 0, and, applying Kepler's analogy,

 we could say that both foci (0, 0) and (1,0) lie on it, whilst the ratio sagitta/chord of

 1/4 holds for every non-singular parabola.

 Now we verify that both systems Ψ and Θ, introduced in the previous paragraph,

 are essentially the same as that of Kepler.

 For the first we may suppose, without loss of generality, that the right-angled cone

 Γ is given by the equation

 and consider the pencil of planes through the line ζ - 1 = 0, jc-z = 0, given by

 X2 + y2 -z2 = 0,

 Ζ - 1 + λ(χ - ζ) — 0.

 By eliminating the variable ζ between the two equations we get

 (1 + 2λ)χ2 + (1 + X)2y2 - 2λχ - 1 = 0,

 that represents the system Ψ, which is clearly the same as Φ.

 For the system Θ, we may consider the sphere S with equation

 x2+ y2+ {z-\)2-\= 0,

 which is tangent to the plane ζ = 0 at the point (0,0), and, changing our point of view

 with respect to Fig. 8, consider the plane χ = 1 tangent to the sphere at the point

 Τ = (1,0,1). The cone A, circumscribing S, has now its vertex at L = (1,0, h), and

 it has equation

 (2h - h2)(x - l)2 - (Λ — 1 )2y2 + 2(1 - h)(x - l)(z - h) = 0.

 Intersecting A with the plane ζ — 0, we get that the system of conics Θ is given by

 (2h - h2)(x - l)2 - (h - 1)V - 2h{h - l)(x - 1) = 0.

 In this system the circle x2 + y2 = 1 corresponds to h = oo. It is readily seen that by

 putting h = -1/λ, λ φ 0, in the equation above this is transformed to that of Φ.

 In 1603 Kepler initiated the study of conics, to which, at least apparently, he was

 directed by his interests in burning mirrors, but the remark that the light-rays emitted

 from a light source in the focus of a parabolic mirror are reflected in the direction

 5 Conclusions

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica

 587

 of the axis, is marginal compared to the other ideas that Kepler expounded in the De

 coni sectionibus. So, it seem to us that Kepler was more interested in the geometry of

 conics for its own sake, rather than for making use of burning mirrors.

 To perform the continuous change from one conic to another in his system, Kepler

 imagined keeping one focus a fixed and moving the other focus b along the common

 axis fr to form all conics in the system (Fig. 1). When b approaches the fixed focus

 a, the ellipse becomes a circle, letting b go off to the infinity, the ellipse becomes a

 parabola, then, pushing it further, it reappears on the other side of the axis, as /, and

 the parabola becomes a hyperbola, and when the two foci of the hyperbola approach

 each other the hyperbola degenerates into a pair of (coincident) lines.

 Therefore, beyond the fundamental idea of "point at infinity" that he implicitly

 defined as meeting point of a set of parallel lines, by introducing the concept of the
 blind focus of the parabola, and of the straight line as "a closed line", like a circle,

 by means of its point at infinity, he showed a completely new way to look at conics

 by putting them in a continuous system, in which all conics of the system share some

 common properties.

 Kepler used analogy in almost all fields of his researches, but it seems that in

 it he trusted the most when applied to mathematics: reliable enough to justify the

 introduction of fanciful notions like the "foci of a (double) line" or "point at infinity"

 (Field and Gray 1987). He made analogy a tool for discovering new results.

 Kepler's work could not escape the attention of the mathematicians of his time.

 In 1625, Henry Briggs wrote a letter to Kepler in which he stated a theorem that

 clearly shows he had comprehended and accepted Kepler's way of treating at parallels

 as lines to, or from, a point at infinity in one direction or its opposite, see (Taylor 1900,
 pp. 203-204). Certainly many others, who have left no record, learned the new ideas
 set out in the De coni sectionibus in its author's lifetime.

 In 1636,6 years after Kepler's death, Marin Mersenne, in his Harmonie universelle,

 after describing the optical and acoustical properties of conics, wrote: "L'adiouste

 seulement icy une figure pour expliquer de certaines analogies qui se rencontrent

 dans toutes les sections dont nous avons parle"[I only add here a figure for explaining

 certain analogies that one encounter in every sections we have treated], and reproduced

 Kepler's Fig. 1, but without quoting him (Mersenne 1636, p. 62). Girad Desargues
 —who was acquainted with Mersenne—certainly had Mersenne's work in his hands,

 and the likely also had Kepler's work.18 As already noted in (Field 1997), we can

 not exclude that Desargues may have been influenced by Kepler in his geometrical
 studies.

 One century and a half after the publication of Ad Vitellionem paralipomena, Roger

 J. Boscovich gave an extended discussion of the principle of analogy (continuitatis
 lege) in Sectionum conicarum elementa nova, in the third volume of his Elementorum

 universae matheseos (1757), see (Taylor 1881, pp. lxxiii-lxxvii).

 It seems to us that for these reasons Kepler's way of considering conics assumes

 a particular importance for the history of Geometry. His ideas were much more rel

 18 Desargues in the Bmuillon project (1639) adopted the term "foyer", used for the first time by Kepler.
 Taylor (1900, p. 205) wrote: "Desargues must have learned directly or indirectly from the work in which

 Kepler propounded his new theory of these points, first called by him Foci (foyers)".

 Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 588

 A. Del Centina

 evant than commonly known, with them he anticipated the concepts of "point at

 infinity", "transformation of curves" and "continuous family of curves", concepts that

 have a fundamental role in the development of geometry in the nineteenth century.

 Unfortunately his fruitful ideas were soon forgotten, perhaps obscured by his great

 achievements in astronomy, and it was not until Poncelet that they resurfaced and were

 completely developed in his treatise on the projective properties of the figures (1822).

 References

 Ayoub, A.B. 2003. The eccentricity of a conic section. The College Mathematics Journal 34(2): 116-121.
 Boscovich, R.J. 1757. Elementorum universae matheseos, vol. III. Venetiis, apud A. Perlini.

 Buchdhal, G. 1972. Methodological aspects of Kepler's theory of refraction. Studies in History and Philos

 ophy of Science 3: 265-298.

 Commandino, F. 1558. Archimedes opera non nulla a Federico Commandino urbinate nuper in latinum

 conversae et commentaries illustrata. Venetiis: apud P. Manuntium.

 Commandino, F. 1566. Apolloniipergaei conicorum libri quattruor, una cum Pappi alexandrini lemmatibus

 et commentaries Eutocii ascalonitae,... Bononiae, A. Bennatii.

 Commandino, F. 1588. Pappi alexandrini mathematicae collectiones a Federico Commandino urbinate in

 latinum conversae et commentariis illustratae. Pisauri, apud H. Concordiam.

 Cronwell, P.R. 1997. Polyedra. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Davis, A.E.L. 1975. Systems of conics in Kepler's work. Vistas in Astronomy 18: 673-685.
 Del Monte, G. 1600. Perspectiva libri sex. Pisauri: apud H. Concordiam.
 Desargues, G. 1639. Brouillon protect d'une atteinte aux evenemens des rencontres du Cone avec un Plane,

 Paris, also in L'Oeuvre mathematique de G. Desargues, ed. R. Taton. 1951. Paris: Presses Universitaires
 de France.

 Dürer, A. 1525. Underweyssung der Messung mit Zirckel und Richtsheyt. Norimbergae: J. Petreius.

 Field, J.V. 1986. Two mathematical inventions in Kepler's Ad Vitellionem paralipomea. Studies in History

 and Philosophy of Science Part A 17: 449-468.

 Field, J.V., and J.J. Gray. 1987. The geometrical work ofGirard Desargues. New York: Springer.
 Field, J.V. 1997. The invention of infinity: Mathematics and art in the Renaissance. Oxford: Oxford Uni

 Hofmann, J.E. 1971. Über einige fachliche Beiträge Keplers zur Mathematik, in Internationales Kepler

 symposium Weil der Stadt 1971, eds. F. Kraff Meyer and B. Sticker (1973), 1—84; we quote reprint
 in J.E. Hofmann (1990) Ausgewählte Schriften, ed. C.J. Scriba, vol. 2, 327-350. Hildesheim: Olms

 versity Press.

 Verlag.

 Kepler, J. 1604. Ad Vitellionem paralipomea quibus astronomiae pars optica traditur eds. C. Marnium

 Francofurti and H.I. Aubrii; also in Gesammelte Werke II, ed. M. Caspar. Munich 1937.

 Kepler, J. 1609. Astronomia nova.. .seu physica coelestium, tradita commentariis de motus stellae martis.

 Prague; also in Gesammelte Werke, vol. III, ed. M. Caspar. Munich 1937.

 Kepler, J. 1615. Nova stereometria dolorium vinariorum. Lincii: J. Plancus; also in Gesammelte Werke, vol.

 IX, ed. Franz Hammer. Munich 1955.

 Kepler, J. 1619. Harmonices mundi libri V. Lincii: Tampachii.

 Kepler, J. 2000. Optics: Paralipomena to Witelo, & Optical Part of Astronomy, Complete English translation,

 by W. H. Donahue, of Kepler's Ad Vitellionem paralipomea quibus astronomiae pars optica traditur,
 Frankfurt, 1604. Santa Fe: Green Lion Press.

 Kline, M. 1972. Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Knobloch, E. 2000. Analogy and the growth of the mathematical knowledge. In The growth of mathematical

 knowledge, ed. E. Grosholz, and H. Breger, 295-314. New York: Springer.

 Maurolico, F. 1611. Photismi de lumine et umbra ad perspectivam, et radiorum incidentiam facientes.

 Mersenne, M. 1636. Harmonie universelle contenant la theorie et la pratique de la musique. Paris: S.

 Newton, 1.1704. Opticks. London: Smith and Walford.
 Poncelet, J.-V. 1822. Traite de proprietes projectives des figures. Paris: Bachelier.

 Neapolis: T. Longi.

 Cramoisy.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On Kepler's system of conics in Astronomiae pars optica 589

 Risner, F. 1572. Opticae thesaurus: Alhazeni Arabis libri Septem, nunc primüm editi. Eiusdem liber De

 Crepusculs et Nubium Ascensionibus. Item Vitettionis Thuringopoloni libri X. Basileae: Episcopius.
 Taton, R. 1962. L'ceuvre de Pascal en göom&rie projective. Revue d'Histoire des Sciences et de leur app

 Taylor, C. 1881. An introduction to ancient and modem geometry ofconics. Cambridge: Deighton Bell and

 Taylor, C. 1883. On the history of geometrical continuity. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical

 Taylor, C. 1900. The geometry of Kepler and Newton. Transaction of the Cambridge Philosophical Society

 15: 197-262.

 Co.

 Society IV: 14-17.

 VIII: 197-219.

 Witelo, E.C. 1535. Perspectivam. Norimbergae: J. Petreius.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:56:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

