 

 

 

 

On the history of the Euclidean Steiner tree problem
Author(s): Marcus Brazil, Ronald L. Graham, Doreen A. Thomas and  Martin Zachariasen
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 3 (May 2014), pp. 327-354
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569605
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:59 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:327-354
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0127-z

 On the history of the Euclidean Steiner tree problem

 Marcus Brazil • Ronald L. Graham •

 Doreen A. Thomas • Martin Zachariasen

 Received: I July 2013 / Published online: 27 August 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract The history of the Euclidean Steiner tree problem, which is the problem of

 constructing a shortest possible network interconnecting a set of given points in the

 Euclidean plane, goes back to Gergonne in the early nineteenth century. We present a

 detailed account of the mathematical contributions of some of the earliest papers on

 the Euclidean Steiner tree problem. Furthermore, we link these initial contributions

 with results from the recent literature on the problem.

 1 Introduction

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem asks for a shortest possible network intercon

 necting n points in the plane. This is a classic example of a problem that is easy
 to state and understand, but difficult to solve. Since the 1960s, an increasingly

 Communicated by: Jesper Lützen.

 M. Brazil (H)

 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Melbourne,
 Melbourne. VIC 3010, Australia

 e-mail: brazil@unimelb.edu.au

 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego,
 La Jolla, CA 92093-0404, USA

 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Melbourne,
 Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia

 R. L. Graham

 D. A. Thomas

 M. Zachariasen

 Department of Computer Science. University of Copenhagen,
 2100 Copenhagen 0. Denmark

 ■ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 328 M. Brazil et al.

 sophisticated mathematical theory of minimal networks has developed around this

 problem building on a combination of techniques from combinatorics, geometry and

 analysis. The interest in the Steiner tree problem stems not only from the challenge

 it represents mathematically, but also from its range of potential applications in areas

 such as communications, infrastructure networks and physical chip design.

 The history of the Euclidean Steiner tree problem, however, is generally not well

 understood—particularly the history from before 1941 when the problem was exposed

 to a large audience through the book What is Mathematics? (Courant and Robbins

 1941). This is, perhaps, not surprising given the highly nonlinear way the study of

 Steiner trees has developed since the early 1800s. The mathematical history of this

 problem is full of twists and turns and dead ends; on at least three occasions, the

 problem has been completely forgotten, and then "rediscovered" many years later.

 Furthermore, the modern attribution of the problem to Jakob Steiner (1796-1863) is

 misleading, if not to say erroneous.

 In a letter to Schumacher from 1836, Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855) briefly

 discussed the problem that is now called the Euclidean Steiner tree problem. For some

 time, this letter was believed to be the earliest source of the problem (Schreiber 1986).

 Today we know that the Euclidean Steiner tree problem was posed and analysed even

 earlier, in 1811, by Joseph Diaz Gergonne (1771-1859); this fact is mentioned briefly

 in a mathematics history book by Scriba and Schreiber (2010).

 What is still missing in the literature is a detailed account of the mathematical

 contributions of the early papers on the Euclidean Steiner tree problem and an account

 of the historical trajectory from these early papers to the modern literature in the

 area. In this paper, we give such an overview, including a study of the numerous

 rediscoveries of the problem and the origins of the current misleading nomenclature.

 Our paper includes a number of direct quotations and figures from the earliest literature

 in the area; all passages quoted in this paper have been translated in a manner that

 attempts to be faithful to the meaning and intentions of the original text while also

 being comprehensible to a modern reader.

 The paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we give some background on the

 Euclidean Steiner tree problem (including a formal definition and important theory

 and algorithms), and in Sect. 3, we introduce the related Fermat-Torricelli problem

 and its history. In Sect. 4, Gergonne's contributions from 1811 are presented. In Sect. 5,
 Gauss' letter to Schumacher from 1836 and related German contributions from the

 late nineteenth century are discussed. In Sect. 6, we survey the first modern treatment

 of the problem, from 1936, by Jarnfk and Kössler, and in Sect. 7, we discuss the recent

 history of the problem—in particular the influential book by Courant and Robbins

 (1941) and the seminal modern study of the problem by Gilbert and Pollak (1968).

 2 Background on the Euclidean Steiner tree problem

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem asks for a network of minimum total length inter

 connecting a given finite set N of n points in the Euclidean plane. We present two

 mathematical definitions; the first definition is often used in earlier papers, while the

 latter is a more contemporary definition:

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 329

 Fig. 1 A minimum Steiner tree (left) and a solution to the Fermat-Torricelli problem (rif-ht) for a set of 4

 points N = (u. b. c. d) on a unit square. The minimum Steiner tree has two Steiner points, si and sj, and

 has length 1 + \/3 58 2.732. The network resulting from the solution to the Fermat-Torricelli problem has

 length 2y/l «s 2.828

 1. Find a system of line segments such that the union of the line segments forms a

 connected set containing N, and such that the total Euclidean length of the line

 segments is minimised.

 2. Find a geometric network T = (V, E) (i.e. a connected graph embedded in the

 plane, with vertex set V and edge set E) such that N ç V and S = V\N is a
 (possibly empty) set of points known as Steiner points, and such that Ie! 's
 minimised (where \e\ denotes the Euclidean length of edge e e E).

 A solution to the Steiner tree problem can be assumed to be a tree T (otherwise, it

 would not minimise length), and it can be assumed that any Steiner points in T have

 at least three incident edges. Such a tree is referred to as a minimum Steiner tree. The

 given points N are often denoted terminals.

 The (generalised and unweighted) Fermat-Torricelli problem also has a finite set

 N of n points as input, but the problem is to compute a single points, such that the sum

 of Euclidean distances from 5 to each point in N is minimised. For n < 3, a solution

 to the Fermat-Torricelli problem also gives a solution to the Steiner tree problem.

 However, for n > 4, a solution to the Fermat-Torricelli problem does not (generally)

 lead to a solution to the Steiner tree problem (Fig. 1).

 A minimum Steiner tree has a number of properties that we briefly summarise here

 (see, e.g. Gilbert and Pollak 1968):

 Degree and angle properties A minimum Steiner tree with n = |/V| terminals

 has at most n — 2 Steiner points. Edges meeting at common vertices form angles

 that are at least 120°; this implies that Steiner points have exactly three incident

 edges meeting at 120° angles (Fig. 1, left).

 Full components A minimum Steiner tree can be decomposed into components in

 which every terminal is a leaf, known as full components or full minimum Steiner

 trees. This decomposition is unique for a given minimum Steiner tree, but is not

 unique for a given terminal set.

 Full topologies A description of the interconnection pattern of a tree is called the

 topology of the tree. A full topology is the description of the tree topology for a full

 component, where terminals are leaves and Steiner points of degree 3 are interior

 (Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 330 M. Brazil et al.

 nodes. Full topologies can be described using a parenthesis structure. For example,

 for the set of terminals N = {a, b, c, d], the representation (ab)(cd) means that

 terminals a and b are both connected to some Steiner point si and similarly, that

 terminals c and d are both connected to some other Steiner point 52; finally, si

 and S2 are connected in the corresponding topology. Terminal pairs ab and cd are

 called cherries in the topology (Fig. 1, left).

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem is known to be NP-hard (Garey et al. 1977), even

 when the terminals are restricted to lie on two parallel lines (Rubinstein et al. 1997). The

 Melzak construction (Melzak 1961) forms the building block of the most successful

 algorithm for the problem—the GeoSteiner algorithm (Warme 1998; Warme et al.

 1999, 2001; Winter and Zachariasen 1997). Using the GeoSteiner algorithm, optimal

 solutions to the Euclidean Steiner tree problem for thousands of terminals can be

 computed in reasonable time. Approximate solutions can be computed efficiently in

 theory and practice; the so-called polynomial time approximation scheme of Arora

 (1998) provides solutions that are a factor of 1 + e away from optimum in polynomial

 time for any fixed e > 0.

 3 The Fermat-Torricelli Problem [1638-1834]

 The origins of the Euclidean Steiner problem can be traced back to the closely related

 Fermat-Torricelli problem, which can be thought of as the simplest non-trivial case of

 the Steiner problem on n terminals for the case where n = 3. The history of the Fermat

 Torricelli problem has already been researched in great depth elsewhere, so here we

 simply give a brief overview of the early historical development of this problem and

 refer the reader to the comprehensive historical study of Kupitz and Martini (1997)
 for more details and further references.

 Pierre de Fermât (1661-1665) described the problem in about 1643 in his work:

 "Method for Determining Maxima and Minima and Tangents to Curved Lines" (de

 Fermât 1891, p. 135). In the original Latin, the statement of the problem reads: "datis

 tribus punctis, quartum reperire, a quo si ducantur très rectae ad data puncta, summa

 trium harum rectarum sit minima quantitatis" or "given three given points, a fourth is

 to be found, from which if three straight lines are drawn to the given points, the sum

 of the three lengths is minimum". The problem appears to have been inspired by a

 question posed by René Descartes in 1638 (see Descartes 1896, p. 324), who invited

 Fermât to investigate curves of the form:

 ^\\Pi -x\\ =C
 1=1

 for given points p\,..., P4 in the plane, and a constant c. These can be thought of
 as level curves for the function measuring the sum of distances of a point x from the

 Fermat's problem for three points p\, P2, P3 can usefully be divided into two cases:

 the first where every angle of the triangle Ap\p2P3is strictly less than 120° ; the second

 given points p,.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 331

 Kig. 2 Torricelli's construction

 of the Torricelli point F for three
 points A. Il and C.
 from (Torricelli 1919). The
 construction shows that F is

 both the intersection of two

 circumcircles and the

 intersection of the two line

 segments A I. and CD

 c

 IFip. 38|.

 where the Ap\ p2P~s contains an angle of 120° or greater. The earliest known solution
 to Fermat's problem (at least for the first case) was a geometric construction due to
 the Italian physicist and mathematician Evangelista Torricelli (1608-1647) (Torricelli
 1919), shown in Fig. 2. The method is to construct equilateral triangles on the sides of

 the triangle Ap\ pop?, and outside this given triangle. Then, circumcircles are found for
 the three equilateral triangles and their intersection gives the solution to the Fermat

 Torricelli problem, which we will refer to as the Torricelli point.

 The construction by Torricelli in Fig. 2 also shows that any pair of the lines found
 by joining the furthest vertex of one of the equilateral triangles, in the construction,

 to the given point opposite the equilateral triangle, intersect in the Torricelli point.
 This alternative method of solving the Fermat-Torricelli problem was rediscovered
 more than a century later (in Simpson 1750) by Thomas Simpson ( 1710-1761 ), from
 whom we get the name "Simpson line" for each of these constructed line segments.
 Flowever, it was not until 1834 that Heinen (1834) proved that in the first case of
 Fermat's problem, the three Simpson lines each have the same length as the sum of
 the distances to the Torricelli point.

 In his book "Exercitationes Geometricae Sex" (Cavalieri 1647), Bonaventura Cava

 lieri, an Italian mathematician and Jesuate (1598-1647), characterised the three angles

 at the Torricelli point subtended by the sides of the given triangle Ap\ P2P2> as all being
 equal to 120°, and thus the isogonal point—a fact also known by Torricelli. Cavalieri

 also explicitly solved the second case of Fermat's problem, stating that in this case the

 minimising point is simply the vertex of Ap\ P2P2 with an obtuse angle.

 In France, by the early 1800s, knowledge of the Fermat-Torricelli problem seems to

 have vanished, but was revived in 1810 when the problem and several generalisations

 were posed again by Joseph Gergonne. One of these generalisations was the Euclidean
 Steiner tree problem. Gergonne's contributions are the subject of the next section.

 4 The first studies of the Steiner tree problem [ 1810-1819]

 The earliest known statement and analysis of the Euclidean Steiner tree problem was

 by the French mathematician and logician Joseph Diaz Gergonne (1771-1859) in 1811
 (Fig. 3). After a brief career in the French military, Gergonne had been appointed to

 4ü Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 332 M. Brazil et al.

 Fig. 3 Portrait of Joseph Diaz
 Gergonne (1771-1859), the
 originator of the Steiner tree
 problem

 ■

 the chair of transcendental mathematics at the École Centrale in Nîmes in about 1795.

 He was particularly interested in geometry, but found it difficult to get his mathematics

 papers published. Gergonne attributed this to the lack of any independent specialist
 mathematics journals at the time. In 1810, Gergonne established his own mathematics

 journal entitled the Annales de mathématiques pures et appliquées but more generally
 known as the. Annales de Gergonne. The journal, which was published monthly for 22

 years, had a strong emphasis on projective, synthetic, and algebraic geometry. Much
 of the content was by Gergonne himself, but many other prominent mathematicians

 also published there, including Heinrich Christian Schumacher, Jakob Steiner, Gabriel
 Lamé and Évariste Galois.

 In the "Prospectus" (preface) for the first issue of the journal, it was made clear
 that the journal would have a particular emphasis on problem solving. This editorial,
 almost certainly by Gergonne, states: "Each issue of the Annals will offer one or more
 theorems to prove, one or more problems to solve. The Editors, in the choice of these

 theorems and problems, give preference to statements that can be identified by their
 correspondents, and they will record proofs and solutions that are received in their
 compilation".

 Amongst the problems featured in the first volume of the Annales de Gergonne was
 the Fermat-Torricelli problem, and several generalisations of the Fermat-Torricelli
 problem, including a version of what is now known as the Steiner tree problem.

 4.1 Problems from the Annales de Gergonne

 We now examine the relevant problems posed in volume 1 of the Annales de Gergonne.
 The statement of the first problem appears on page 196:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 333

 PROPOSED QUESTIONS.
 Problems of Geometry
 I.

 An engineer wishes to establish a communication between three cities, not

 located in a straight line, by means of a network composed of three branches,

 leading at one end to the three cities, and meeting at the other end at a single

 point between these three cities. The question is, how can one locate the point

 of intersection of the three branches of the network, so that their total length is
 as small as possible? (*)

 This is the Fermat-Torricelli problem, discussed in Sect. 3, in an engineering guise. Its

 publication predates electrical telegraphy which was not in use until the 1830s, so the

 "communication" network may simply refer to roads, or possibly optical telegraphy,

 based on a semaphore system, which operated in France from 1792 to 1846.

 The footnote to the problem is as follows:

 (*) One can generalise this problem by asking how to determine, on a plane,

 a point whose sum of distances to a number of arbitrary points located in this

 plane is minimal. One can even extend to points located in any manner in space.

 In other words, the footnote extends the Fermat-Torricelli problem to more than three

 given points (but only one intersection point) and higher dimensions. As mentioned in

 the previous section, this was solved in a later number of the journal by Tédenat (1810).

 The next related problem appears on page 232:

 PROPOSED QUESTIONS.
 Problem of Geometry
 Two straight-line canals intersect at a determined angle, and a city is situated, in

 a known manner, in one of the four regions formed by the intersection.

 One wants to build two bridges over the canals, and build a communication

 network from these two bridges to the city for whose use they are intended.

 The problem is to determine the locations in which both bridges must be

 built, and how one should position the branches of the network, so that the total

 length thereof is as small as possible? (*)

 (*) One can generalise this problem, assuming the two canals to be of any

 form whatsoever.

 This question asks for the minimum length network interconnecting a given point and

 two given straight lines. Although not made explicit, there is an assumption that the

 network can contain vertices other than those corresponding to the position of the city

 and the two bridges; otherwise, the problem would be equivalent to asking for the

 distance of a point from a straight line. The solution to the problem later in the volume

 includes a degree-three junction in the communication network, making it clear that
 the use of extra vertices is allowed.

 A final pair of related problems appear on page 292:

 PROPOSED QUESTIONS
 Problems of Geometry
 I.

 Two cities are located, in a known manner, on the same side of a straight-line
 canal (*).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 334 M. Brazil et al.

 One wants to build a bridge over the canal and build a communication

 network from that bridge to the two cities for whose use it is intended.

 The question is to determine at what location one should build this bridge

 and how one should position the branches of the network, so that the total length

 thereof is as small as possible?
 II.

 A number of cities are located at known locations on a plane; the problem

 is to link them together by a system of canals whose total length is as small as
 possible? (**)

 (*) More generally, one can assume that the canal is curved.

 (**) One should not confuse this question with the one on page 285. Indeed,

 in the former problem the number of branches of the network must equal the

 number of cities to which they lead on the one hand, and it is required, on the

 other hand, that these branches meet in the network at a single point; here, on

 the contrary, this condition is not required, and one should not enforce it if it
 does not result in a minimum.

 Question I asks for the shortest network interconnecting two given points and a given

 straight line; question II is the first known statement of the Steiner tree problem, asking

 for the shortest length network interconnecting a set of known points in the plane. The

 footnote to the second question makes it clear that this is a different problem from

 the Fermat-Torricelli problem for multiple points—the network is not restricted to

 having only one extra vertex. The reference to page 285 is to a solution to the general

 Fermat-Torricelli problem in the plane, given by M. Tédenat, Rector of the Academy
 of Nîmes (Tédenat 1810).

 4.2 Gergonne's solution of the Steiner tree problem

 On page 375 of volume 1 of the Annales de Gergonne is a ten page article titled
 "Résolues" (Resolved) addressing all the problems listed in the previous subsection.

 The article is subtitled:

 Purely geometric solutions to the problems of minimums proposed on

 pages 196,232 and 292 of this volume, and various other analogous problems;
 By a SUBSCRIBER.

 The "subscriber" is definitely Gergonne. This is confirmed by the NUMDAM current

 director, Professor C. Gérini, a recognised expert on the Annales de Gergonne, who

 states that: "All papers signed 'Par un abonné' [i.e. "By a subscriber"] come from

 Gergonne, as well as the notes signed 'JDG'".1 The figures for this article are signed

 "JDG". Furthermore, in the digitised copy available online through the NUMDAM

 program, the name "GERGONNE" has been handwritten (apparently by Gergonne
 himself) next to "ABONNÉ" (subscriber). The identification of the "subscriber" as

 Gergonne is further confirmed in Guggenbuhl (1959) and Stigler (1976).

 ' Quoted in an unpublished paper by P. J. H. Pineyro: "Gergonne; the isoperimetric problem and the Steiners

 symmetrization", January 2012.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 335

 Fig. 4 Gergonne's Figure 17

 «

 The article addresses eleven problems connected with the Fermat-Torricelli prob
 lem. The first ten of these problems consider how to construct a minimum length net

 work interconnecting three given geometric objects, each of which is either a point, a
 circle, or a straight line; the ten problems correspond to the ten possible combinations
 of these objects.

 The eleventh problem is the Steiner tree problem, and we present a translation and

 discussion of Gergonne's solution here.

 PROBLEM XL Connect any number of given points by a system of lines whose
 total length is as small as possible.

 The problem is stated here for the first time in abstract terms, rather than in terms of

 cities and canals. Earlier in the article Gergonne notes that: "...all points, lines and
 circles which will be discussed are always supposed to belong to the same plane";
 hence, although planarity is not explicitly mentioned in the problem statement, it is
 nevertheless understood.

 The solution is divided into an "Analysis" section and a "Construction" section. We

 will examine each in turn.

 Analysis. I. One should not assume that each of the given points are reached by

 several of the sought lines; indeed assume that A is one of these points (Fig. 17)
 [Fig. 4] and two of the candidate lines, MA and NA, finish at that point—one

 could, in general (5), replace the system consisting of these two lines by a system
 of three lines PA. PM. PN, with a total length less, so that MA and NA does not

 fulfil the conditions of problem. In fact, it may well happen, in particular cases

 that PA should be zero, but it is during the construction of the problem that this
 circumstance should be indicated.

 The analysis begins by observing that the minimum network is not necessarily a
 subnetwork of the complete network on the given points. The reference "(5)" refers

 to a set of inequalities derived in the solution to Problem I, which is that of finding the

 minimum length network interconnecting three points.

 2. It may be noted, secondly, that if there are points of intersection of the lines

 sought other than the given points (and there cannot fail to be such, according to

 the above) the number of lines meeting there cannot be fewer than three. For if,

 in fact, a point M (Fig. 18) (Fig. 5, left] other than the given points, was reached

 by only two of the lines sought, MN and MP, then instead of linking points N and

 P by these two straight lines, one could link them by the single and shorter line

 /VP; hence the lines MN and MP would not meet the conditions of the problem.

 •Ö Spri inger

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 5 Gergonne's Figures 18 to 20

 Here, Gergonne observes that any additional vertices in a minimum network can be

 assumed to have degree at least three. The argument is correct apart from ignoring the
 trivial case where N, M and P are collinear.

 3. One must not assume either that those sought lines that meet in a common

 point other than one of the given points, meet there in a number more than three;

 for, if one assumes just four of these lines MN, MP, MQ, MR (Fig. 19) [Fig. 5,
 middle] meet at the same point M, it would be possible (5), at least in general,
 to replace the system of two of these lines, MQ and MR for example, by the
 three lines SM, SQ, SR, with smaller total length, so that MQ and MR do not
 fulfil the conditions of the problem. In truth the relative positions of points M,

 Q, R, may well, as previously, in special cases, make SM zero, so that the point
 5 coincides with the point M, but it is during the construction of the problem
 that this circumstance should be indicated.

 336 M. Brazil et al.

 Gergonne argues that the degree of an extra vertex in a minimum network can never

 be more than three. The argument, using proof by contradiction, is essentially correct,

 but is incomplete. The idea is to replace a pair of edges meeting at the extra point M by

 a shorter subnetwork including another extra vertex S (Fig. 5, middle). The problem,

 as acknowledged in the last sentence of the quoted passage, is that the edge SM may
 be degenerate, resulting in no change in the original network. Because no conditions
 are given as to when this degeneration occurs, there is no guarantee that it will not

 apply for every pair of edges incident with M. The missing condition for a suitable S
 to exist is that the pair of edges incident with M meet at an angle of less than 120°,

 which is clearly true for at least one pair of incident edges.

 4. Finally, it is easy to see that the lines sought, meeting in threes at the one
 point, must form around this point equal angles between them, each 4/3 of a
 right angle; for if M (Fig. 20) [Fig. 5, right] is the point of intersection of the

 three lines MN, MP, MQ, and if the angles between these lines, around this point,

 were not equal, then replacing the point M (5) by a point M' which satisfies this

 requirement means one replaces the three lines MN, MP, MQ by the three lines
 M'N, M'P, M'Q, with a smaller total length, so that the former do not fulfil the

 conditions of the problem.

 This shows that A, B,C, D,... being the given points, the lines sought for
 can only form a kind of tree of the same nature as those shown in Figs. 21, 22,

 23, 24, 25 [Fig. 6], so that the points M, N, P, Q,... where three lines meet,
 are, in general, two less in number than the number of given points, and that the

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 337

 Fig. 6 Gergonne's Figures 21 to 26

 angles enclosed by these lines at each point in turn are all equal to each other
 and are 4/3 of a right angle. The only remaining question now is to learn how

 to construct [a solution to] the problem.

 The first paragraph correctly observes that in a minimum network the angles between

 incident edges at any extra vertex are 120°. The argument here refers again to the proof
 of the Fermat-Torricelli problem on three points, which is Problem I in the article.

 In the second paragraph, and in Figs. 21-25, Gergonne shows the different possible
 "forms" for full minimum Steiner trees with four, five or six terminals. Here, the term

 "forms" approximately corresponds to "unlabelled topologies" (or underlying graph
 structure), though not exactly, since Figs. 2.3 and 24 both have the same unlabelled

 topology; more precisely, we should think of the "forms" as being "unlabelled combi
 natorial embeddings" (in modern nomenclature). The problem of determining when a
 full topology does or does not exist is not addressed here; however, this is consistent
 with his statement at the beginning of the article that: "My purpose here is not to
 discuss the various circumstances which may affect the solution of problems which 1

 intend to teach how to construct, and even make them impossible; I always assume in
 everything that follows, that the data is chosen so that these problems can be solved,

 and can supply all the solutions that their nature includes".

 The article next addresses the problem of constructing full minimum Steiner trees.

 Construction. One already knows the solution for two given points, because

 then there is no line to construct other than that between the two points; one also
 knows how to solve the same for three given points (5), so if one succeeds in
 reducing its solution, in the case where the given points are n in number, to the

 correct one if these points are only n — 1 in number, one knows how to solve it
 in its generality; and this is what can be achieved very simply by proceeding as
 follows:

 Arbitrarily take (Fig. 26) ]Fig. 6, bottom-right] two points A. B, out of

 the given n points, such that joining them by an infinite straight line leaves the

 remaining n — 2 points on one side. The line AB can be thought of as a chord

 (lying on the other side to the remaining given points) of an arc AMB, inducing

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 338 M. Brazil et al.

 Fig. 7 An example of a full minimum Steiner tree where neither of the two cherries lies on the boundary

 of the convex hull. The minimality of this tree has been validated using GeoSteiner

 an angle of 120°. Let D be the middle of the rest of the circumference; this

 D is substituted for the two points A, B\ we no longer have more than n — 1

 points. Once we have resolved the problem on these n - 1 points, then the

 straight line KMD is sought for that ends at the point D; by constructing MA,

 MB, and substituting these two chords for the MD part of KMD intercepted by

 the circle, the problem of finding the solution for the n given points is solved.

 It may be noted, moreover, that the lines of the system can only have three

 distinct directions; it follows that, three of them being determined, all others are

 determined by constructing lines parallel to these three.

 Note that the construction here is an iterative construction, very much along the lines of

 the construction given by Melzak (1961) almost exactly 150 years later. The reduction

 step is to replace a pair of terminals belonging to a cherry (that is, a branch of the

 Steiner tree consisting of two terminals and a Steiner point adjacent to both) by an

 equilateral point, though the correctness of such a replacement is not proved here.

 The condition on A and B at the beginning of the second paragraph is equivalent to

 saying that both points lie on an edge of the convex hull of the set of given points and

 that the equilateral point D lies on the opposite side of AB to the rest of the convex

 hull. The implicit assumption (made slightly clearer by the Remark I, below) appears

 to be that one can repeat the construction for all such pairs A, B at each stage ensuring

 one will eventually generate a full minimum Steiner tree on the given points (if it

 exists). Unfortunately, while this strategy seems reasonable for full trees on up to six

 given points, it is not in general correct. There does not necessarily exist a cherry both

 of whose terminals lie on the boundary of the convex hull of the terminals; this is

 illustrated by Fig. 7.

 The error, however, can be easily remedied by attempting the reductive construction

 on every pair of available terminals A, B and for each pair trying both possibilities

 for the equilateral point D. This is guaranteed to find the full minimum tree when it

 exists, but at considerable expense to the computational efficiency of the procedure.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 339

 Gergonne concludes his study of this problem with two remarks.

 Remark I. This construction allows for arbitrary choices of the points to be used

 successively, such that, if more than three points are given, the problem will have

 several solutions, and such that when these points are more than five in number,

 it can be solved by essentially different systems of lines. These systems are three

 in number for six given points (Figs. 23, 24, 25) and there are four systems

 for seven points, eight points provide thirteen, and so on. As for the number of

 solutions, it will be, in general, one for three points, two for four, five for five,

 fourteen for six, forty-two for seven, one hundred and thirty-two for eight, and

 so on.

 Here, Gergonne makes it clear that there are many locally minimal solutions that need

 to be constructed in order to be certain of finding the global minimum. Gergonne

 distinguishes between the number of "systems" and the number of "solutions". The
 former is the number of unlabelled combinatorial embeddings (also known as planar

 embeddings), which are equivalence classes of embedded graphs that take into account

 not only the graph topology, but also the cyclic order of edges around each vertex in the

 embedding.2 The latter sequence is the number of non-self-intersecting full labelled

 topologies assuming that all terminals are on their convex hull; this gives the sequence

 of Catalan numbers, as was later shown by Cockayne ( 1967).

 Remark II. If, for any number of given points A, B, C, D,... , one assumes

 that the lines that solve the problem are segments, each three of them meeting
 at nodes M, N, P,Q and if, at points A, B, C, D,..., one applies equal
 forces directed along any segment that ends at these points, it is clear that these

 forces will form an equilibrium system.

 In this remark, Gergonne gives a physical, mechanical interpretation of some of the

 geometric properties of a minimum Steiner network. This was a theme that strongly

 interested Gergonne, who elsewhere in his writing foresaw the future possibility of

 quasi-mechanical methods being used to uncover new mathematical results (Dahan
 Dalmedico 1986).

 4.3 The solution of Gallicus

 The next known mention of the Steiner tree problem was by Gallicus in 1819, in The

 Mathematical Repository, a journal of mathematical problems and essays published

 in England, edited by Thomas Leybourn of the Royal Military College (now the Royal

 Military Academy, Sandhurst). In No. XV of that journal, Question 397 by Gallicus

 reads as follows: "Having given the position of any number of towns whatever, in the

 same plane, to connect them by a system of canals, of which, the total length shall be

 the least possible." This requires only a brief mention as the solution "by the proposer"

 given in No XVII (pp. 134-136) is simply a slightly condensed version of Gergonne's

 2 This appears to be the same sequence as the number of trivially fully gated graphs on 11 nodes (Colbourn

 and Huybrechts 2008); however, the equivalence between these two sequences is still to be established.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 340 M. Brazil et al.

 analysis, including figures that are identical to Gergonne's. Indeed, the pseudonym

 "Gallicus", from the Latin for "Gallic", suggests that the writer was French, or had a

 strong interest in French mathematics, and so would almost certainly have been famil

 iar with the Annales de Gergonne. In a private communication, Douglas Rogers has

 suggested that Gallicus may have been the Scottish mathematician William Wallace,

 who was a colleague of Leybourne's at the Royal Military Academy. Wallace had a

 particular interest in geometry and actively followed French mathematics, making him

 a likely candidate.

 As far as we know, this was the final discussion of this problem in the mathematical

 literature until it came to the attention of Gauss in 1836.3

 5 The four-point problem and its generalisations [1836-1890]

 In this section, we present the developments on the four-point Steiner tree problem

 in nineteenth-century Germany—beginning with Gauss' now famous letter to Schu

 macher from 1836, and concluding with two detailed treatments of the four-point

 problem, including generalisations to the n-point problem, by Karl Bopp and Eduard

 Hoffmann from 1879 and 1890, respectively.

 5.1 Gauss' letter to Schumacher [1836]

 The extensive epistolary correspondence between the great mathematician and scien
 tist, Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855), and the Danish-German astronomer, Heinrich

 Christian Schumacher (1780-1850), published in a series of volumes in the 1860s,
 has been a valuable source for historians and mathematicians. Gauss' connection to

 the Steiner tree problem was discussed by Schreiber (1986), and the story has been

 told in a number of other papers and books (Cheng et al. 2004; Cieslik 2004a,b; Du
 and Wu 2007; Gander et al. 2008; Scriba and Schreiber 2010).

 In a letter from 19 March 1836, Schumacher presented an apparent paradox related

 to the Fermat-Torricelli problem on four points. Schumacher knew that the Fermât

 point x for the vertices a,b,c and d of a convex quadrilateral appears at the intersection

 of the diagonals of the quadrilateral. Now, if we move d towards c, then in the limit x

 also converges to c. However, in the example provided by Schumacher, the limit of x

 (which is c) is not the Fermât point for the three points a, b and c. In his answer from

 21 March 1836, Gauss explains the apparent paradox—essentially that the solution to

 the four-point Fermat-Torricelli problem does not result in a minimum-length inter

 connection of the four points, as is the case for the solution to the Fermat-Torricelli

 problem for three points. Then, Gauss makes the following interesting remark:

 3 It was thought by a number of sources, such as (Kupitz and Martini 1997, p. 101), that the Steiner tree

 problem had been rediscovered and discussed by Lamé and Clapeyron in 1827 or 1829 in the paper (Lamé

 and Clapeyron 1829). It is clear, however, from the 1989 paper of Franksen and Grattan-Guiness (1989),

 which includes a complete translation of Lamé and Clapeyron ( 1829), that although Lamé and Clapeyron

 studied a number of generalisations of the Fermat-Torricelli problem, they did not work on any problem

 that was equivalent to the Steiner tree problem.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 341

 Mo. .ft f—f~> /j y| ^ ^ 1

 <f

 u

 Fig. 8 Drawings in Gauss' letter to Schumacher from 21 March 1836. ( Note that some of the reproductions
 of these drawings are inaccurate, see e.g. Gander et al. 2008)

 If in a quadrilateral one asks for, in contrast to the question above, the shortest

 connection system in the plane, then several individual cases have to be distin
 guished, and you obtain quite an interesting mathematical problem, which is
 not foreign to me; as a matter of fact, I have on occasion considered the rail
 road connection between Harburg, Bremen, Hannover and Braunschweig, and
 I myself have thought that this problem would be an excellent prize problem
 for our students. The following drawings [Fig. 8) illustrate the different cases

 sufficiently; where in the third drawing the connection must go directly from
 c to d (which actually is the case in the above example). But time is pressing,

 hence no more of this today.

 One may speculate as to why Gauss chose to illustrate the problem using a rail
 road connection example. In March 1836, only one railroad link existed in Germany

 (between Nürnberg and Fürth in Bavaria—opened in December 1835). In fact, the first

 railroad link to Gauss' home town Göttingen appeared almost 20 years later in 1854,

 and the opening of the link turned out to be Gauss' last public appearance (he died in
 February 1855). One explanation for Gauss' familiarity could be that his son. Joseph
 Gauss ( 1806-1873), had become involved in railroad construction in the 1830s as part
 of his service as military officer. In 1836, Joseph went to the USA to study the con
 struction of railroads, and he later became director of the railway system in Hanover.

 It is unlikely that Gauss was familiar with the first volumes of Annales de Gergonne,

 but Schumacher should already have been familiar with the Steiner tree problem as he
 had a paper published (Schumacher 1810) in the same volume of the Annales de Ger
 gonne where Gergonne's statement of the problem and solution appear. Neither Gauss

 nor Schumacher returned to the (general) Steiner tree problem in their correspondence.

 5.2 Karl Bopp's contributions on the four-point problem and its generalisation [1879]

 In 1879, Karl Bopp (1856-1905) published a dissertation entitled "On the shortest
 connection system for four points" at the Georg-Augustus-Universität Göttingen
 (Bopp 1879). Karl Bopp was born in Frankfurt am Main in Germany, and after fin
 ishing his dr. phil. studies in Göttingen in 1879, he returned to Frankfurt am Main,
 where he became teacher at the local Goethegymnasium (high school). He appears to

 Ô Spri  nger

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 342 M. Brazil et al.

 have worked at the high school until his death in 1905; we only know of one other

 publication from his hand—on the calculation of logarithms from 1897.4

 Bopp's dissertation from 1879 was directly motivated by the question that Gauss

 addressed in his letter to Schumacher. After quoting Gauss' question, Bopp states:

 The treatment of the proposed problem "What is the shortest connection system

 for four given points?" is the focus of the following study.

 In the first part of the dissertation, Bopp systematically enumerates the possible

 "complete connection systems" (or full topologies) for four given points a, b, c and

 d. This is done by considering the "curves" (or paths) between pairs of the given

 points. Bopp concludes that there exist three different full topologies for four points,

 each having two "help points" (or Steiner points) x\ and X2 that may overlap with the

 given points or with each other. Hence, he arrives at the following reformulation of

 the problem:

 When asked for the shortest connection system—excluding superfluous parts

 of course—the question becomes: What is the shortest complete connection

 system? or: firstly, under what conditions is
 ax\ + x\d + x\X2 + X2b + X2c a minimum,

 secondly, ax\ + x\c + x\X2 + xjb + X2d

 thirdly, ax\ + x\b + x\xi + X2c + X2d

 a minimum, and finally, which of these three relative minima is the smallest and
 therefore the absolute minimum?

 Bopp distinguishes between two cases of the problem: One where the four points
 a, b, c and d form the vertices of a convex quadrilateral, and one where they do not.

 Bopp considers the former, the convex quadrilateral case first; his contributions for

 this case are also the most interesting ones. The latter case involves detailed (careful)

 case analysis, but Bopp's analysis does not contain results of significant interest. In

 the following, we present Bopp's result for the convex quadrilateral case.

 Assuming that the points appear in order a, b, c and d on the convex quadrilateral,

 Bopp argues carefully that the full topology (ac)(bd)—where each pair a, c and b, d

 share a Steiner point as neighbour—need not be considered, since a relatively minimal

 tree for this topology will always be dominated by a relatively minimal tree having

 one of the two other full topologies. This leaves two full topologies instead of three—
 namely (ab)(cd) and (bc)(da).

 5.2.1 Construction of a full Steiner tree for four points

 Given a full topology, Bopp then addresses the problem of constructing a relatively

 minimal tree for the case where both Steiner points jcj and X2 exist—in modern terms,

 he considers the construction a full Steiner tree for each topology. He shows that if x\

 and X2 can be located in the plane such that each of their three incident edges make

 4 Personal record on Karl Bopp obtained from Research Libraryfar the History of Education at the German

 Institute for International Educational Research (http://bbf.dipf.de).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 343

 Fig. 9 Bopp's Figure 18

 / 8

 /f

 I -v
 V\

 \ /

 ■ \\ /

 x --JV4- • X

 angle 120° with each other, then the resulting tree is relatively minimal. The proof is
 mostly geometric and is an elegant application of Viviani's theorem (Viviani 1659),
 which states that the sum of distances from a point inside an equilateral triangle to
 each of the three sides of the triangle is a constant. (Interestingly, Bopp incorrectly
 attributes this theorem to Jakob Steiner!)

 Bopp then shows that a full Steiner tree for topology (ab)(cd) can be constructed

 via a construction (Fig. 9) similar to the approach developed by Gergonne (1810).
 Equilateral triangles are raised on edges ab and cd (and outside the convex hull), and

 a line is drawn between the third corners / and g of the two triangles. Steiner point
 .ri (respectively xi) is located at the intersection of the Simpson line fg with the
 circle through a, b and f (respectively c, d and g). Bopp proves that the length of the

 Simpson line is identical to the length of resulting tree; he even shows that alternative
 constructions exist, e.g. by constructing an equilateral triangle on the edge ag and
 connecting the third corner k of this triangle to b (Fig. 9).

 The existence of a full Steiner tree for a given set of four points is discussed next.

 First Bopp notes that a necessary condition for the existence is that the four given

 points form a convex quadrilateral (a fact that was proved again almost a century later

 by Pollak 1978). After a lengthy and careful analysis, Bopp arrives at the following
 conclusion:

 The necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a pair of points x\
 and xi, such that the edges axi, bx\ and x\xj, and the edges JC|X2, cxi and
 dx2 make angles 2tt/3 at x\ and xo is, firstly, that the inequalities on page
 20 are fulfilled—or equivalently that the line that connects the third corners
 of the outside equilateral triangles with sides ab and cd intersects ab and cd

 themselves, and not their extensions—and secondly, that the opposite angles
 made at ab respectively cd with the diagonals is not greater than 2^/3.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Essentially, the first condition ensures that neither Steiner point coincides with a ter

 minal, while the second condition prevents the two Steiner points from coinciding

 with each other. These necessary and sufficient conditions were rediscovered by Du
 et al. (1987a) in 1987.

 5.2.2 Identification of the best topology based on the relative position of the four

 344 M. Brazil et al.

 points

 Bopp's final major contribution on the four-point problem is to give a simple condition

 for identifying the full topology that results in the shortest relatively minimal tree. Bopp

 proves the following theorem:

 The following curious theorem holds: If abed is a convex quadrilateral whose

 diagonals ac and bd meet at angles Lazb and Laid, and we raise firstly at ab
 and cd, and secondly at be and ad equilateral triangles outside abed, then we
 have if

 Ldab < 7t, Lbac < it, Lbdc < it

 that the distance between the third corners of the two former equilateral triangles

 is smaller than, equal to or greater than the distance between the third corners

 of the two latter equilateral triangles if and only if [respectively]

 Lazb < Ldza, Lazb = Ldza, Lazb > Ldza

 or equivalently [respectively]

 Lazb < ?r/2, Lazb — it/2, Lazb > it/2.

 In short, we can use the meeting angle of the diagonals of the quadrilateral to decide

 which of the full Steiner trees is the shortest. The theorem does not guarantee the

 existence of the two full Steiner trees, but it gives the correct result when both trees

 exist—which has to be tested separately using, for example, the previous theorem. A

 similar result was proved by Pollak (1978); see also Du et al. (1987a).

 5.2.3 Generalisation to the n point problem

 In an appendix of the dissertation, Bopp considers the n point Steiner tree problem. In

 a simple and elegant way he proves that the number of complete connection systems
 (or full topologies) for n points is an = 1 • 3 • 5... (2n — 7) • (2n - 5). His main
 observation is the following:

 If we consider the connection system for the first n — 1 points, that is, if we

 remove the part of the connection system that connects the nth point to the rest

 of the connection system, then, on the one hand, a complete connection system

 for n - 1 points remains, and, on the other hand, a complete connection system

 for n points can be constructed by connecting the last point to some point on any

 line segment in the connection system for the first n - 1 points.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 345

 I

 i

 \ ^ & *
 \ \ 1 . 'c'Z\ \
 , KY / / \
 A,v „ „ ,
 ifc \ // -A

 19. < •- /\ \\ J • /

 ■i*

 1/

 Fig. 10 Bopp's Figure 38

 Bopp shows by induction that the number of edges in a complete connection system

 for n points is sn = 2n — 3; then using the fact that the number of complete connection
 systems for n points is a„ = a„-\s„-\. the final result follows.

 A finite-time algorithm is then sketched for the n point problem:

 For each of these an complete connection systems (for which many only have
 a minima under degeneracies), a relative minima must be determined, and from

 this finite set of relative minima the shortest must be picked out. Determining and

 constructing the relative minima can be achieved without the slightest difficulty;

 the construction can be carried out with a ruler and a fixed angle of rc/3.

 Bopp presents a detailed example of constructing a full Steiner tree for five points
 (Fig. 10). Although the main idea is correct, Bopp does not really address the side
 problem—namely that equilateral triangles can be constructed on both sides of the
 defining base. Also, the treatment of degeneracies (construction of non-full Steiner
 trees) is incomplete. Bopp appears to be aware of this issue and notes that the number

 of different cases is so large "that a general investigation is hardly conceivable".

 As a final remark in his dissertation, Bopp presents some observations concerning

 the three-dimensional Euclidean Steiner tree problem. Fie argues that edges also meet
 at angles that are at least 120° and that a Steiner point and its three neighbours must
 reside in the same plane in 3-space. This appears to be the first discussion of the
 three-dimensional Euclidean Steiner tree problem in the mathematical literature.

 5.3 Eduard Hoffmann's contributions on the four-point problem
 and its generalisation [1890]

 In 1890, Eduard Hoffmann ( 1858-1923) wrote a paper with the title "On the shortest
 connection system for four points in the plane" (Hoffmann 1890). The paper was
 included in the program for the yearly celebration at the gymnasium (high school) in

 '£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Wetzlar, Germany. Eduard Julius Hoffmann was born in Homburg (near Saarbrücken),

 and finished his dr. phil. studies in Marburg (near Frankfurt am Main) in 1884 with a

 dissertation on conic sections. He became a high-school teacher, first in Wiesbaden,

 and later at Oberrealschule Hanau (near Frankfurt am Main). It is unclear why he was

 invited to publish his Wetzlar paper, and we know of no other publications from his
 hand.5

 346 M. Brazil et al.

 As in the case of Karl Bopp, Hoffmann was also directly motivated by the question

 that Gauss addressed in his letter to Schumacher. Hoffmann also quotes Gauss' ques

 tion and notes that he became aware of Bopp's dissertation during the completion of

 his own paper. The selection of results and the methods employed do indeed indicate

 that Hoffmann wrote most of his paper without prior knowledge of Bopp's disser

 tation. Hoffmann's paper has neither the rigour nor the structural clarity of Bopp's
 dissertation.

 Like Bopp, Hoffmann devotes most of the paper to the case where the four points a,

 b, c and d form a convex quadrilateral. In contrast to Bopp, he uses differential calculus

 to show that edges at Steiner points (assuming that they exist) meet at 120° angles.

 He then proves that if a full Steiner tree with two Steiner points exists, then this tree

 will be shorter than any solution having one or zero Steiner points. Hoffmann gives

 a detailed account on how to construct such a full Steiner tree using a construction

 similar to that developed by Gergonne (1810), and he also shows that the length of

 the Simpson line is identical to the length of the constructed tree. Finally, he gives

 necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a full Steiner tree.

 Hoffmann presents a number of simple conditions on how to identify the full topol

 ogy that results in the shortest relatively minimal tree. In addition to the condition

 discovered by Bopp, Hoffmann gives the following nice (but not very useful) condi
 tion which was rediscovered by Ollerenshaw (1978).

 From this it follows that among the two [relative] shortest connection systems,

 the one with minimum length is the one for which the connection between the

 two additional points [Steiner points] has maximum length.

 Hoffmann concludes his paper with a discussion on the n point problem. He gives

 some informal arguments to show that a shortest connection system is a tree with at

 most n - 2 Steiner points, and argues using differential calculus that edges at Steiner

 points have the same angle properties as in the four-point case. Then, he presents

 constructions (similar to those of Gergonne and Bopp) for two six-point problems: the

 first having a "chain-like" topology with two cherries, and the second having a "wide"

 topology with three cherries. Even though he provides no detailed analysis, Hoffmann

 is aware that the number of possible full topologies increases rapidly as the number of

 points increases. Interestingly, an underlying assumption—which was shared, at least

 to some extent, by both Gergonne and Bopp—appears to be that full Steiner trees can

 only exist for point sets that form vertices of their own convex hull; a counter example

 to this assumption is given in Fig. 7.

 5 Personal record on Eduard Hoffmann obtained from Research Library for the History of Education at

 the German Institute for International Educational Research (http://bbf.dipf.de).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 347

 6 A modern treatment of the Steiner tree problem: Jarnik and Kössler [1934]

 After Hoffmann's paper, interest in the Steiner Tree problem seems to have vanished

 until the paper of Vojtëch Jarnik and Milos Kössler (Jarnik and Kössler 1934). These

 Czech mathematicians produced an impressive and modern treatment of the problem,

 not only in the plane, but also for general higher-dimensional Euclidean spaces. Their

 motivations for studying the problem, however, are far from obvious, and they were

 clearly unaware of any previous work in this area. Unfortunately, their paper was

 ignored by the mathematical community for more than 50 years despite Jarnfk's strong

 mathematical reputation, probably because it was written in Czech and was outside

 Jarnfk's usual mathematical topics of number theory and analysis (see Korte and

 Nesetril (2001 ) for more background on this paper). The first significant citation was

 by Du et al. (1987b);6 here, the authors completed Jarnfk and Kössler's study of

 minimum Steiner trees for the vertices of a regular polygon. In the final section of

 their paper, Jarnik and Kössler constructed minimum Steiner trees for the «-vertex

 regular polygons where n = 2, 3,4 and 5, and showed that a minimum Steiner tree

 for n = 6 or n > 13 coincides with a minimum spanning tree on the same set of

 vertices (i.e. contains no Steiner points). Du et al. (1987b) completed the remaining

 cases(« =7,8,9, 10, 11, 12), showing that again in these cases, the minimum Steiner

 trees and minimum spanning trees coincide.

 In 2001, Korte and Nesetril (2001 ) produced a translation into English and detailed

 discussion of the whole of Jarnik and Kössler's paper, other than this final section.

 Because of this, we only give a brief overview of their results here. One of the most

 notable features of their paper is the rigour and precision underlying their treatment.

 Their formulation of the problem is as follows: "given n points C|, Ci,..., C,„ find

 a connected set consisting of finitely many [line] segments, which contains the points

 C|, C2 C„, so that 'the total length' of this set is the least possible". The setting

 in which the authors study this problem is general J:-dimensional Euclidean space, and

 the main focus of the first half of the paper is the existence of such minimum length sets.

 The proof of this result is an elegant argument using elementary techniques—much of

 the modern machinery of graph theory and convex functions was not well developed

 at this time.7 The approach makes full use of the higher-dimensional setting; in fact,

 the proof for the planar case relies on embedding the problem into three-dimensional

 space and showing that the minimum solution there is also a minimum solution in two
 dimensions.

 As a consequence of this existence proof, Jarnik and Kössler derive some of the

 fundamental structural properties of minimum Steiner trees. Most importantly, they

 show that the angle at any vertex is at least 2jt/3 and that: "Every branching point [ie,

 Steiner point] of G has degree 3. The three sides of the graph incident to a branching

 point lie in a two-dimensional plane and any two have angle 2tt/3." This latter result

 generalises the similar result of Bopp for three-dimensional space. The authors use

 6 There were at least four earlier papers citing (Jarnfk and Kössler 1934), mostly in the Czech mathematical

 literature; however, none of these papers deal directly with the Euclidean Steiner Tree problem.

 7 In particular. Denes König's seminal textbook on graph theory, "Theorie der Endlichen und Unendlichen

 Graphen" was not published until 1936, two years after this paper.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 348 M. Brazil et al.

 these fundamental properties in the final section of the paper to begin a study of the

 solution of the Steiner problem for small numbers of terminals. After showing that

 the problem on three points has a unique solution, they make the following statement:

 "For n > 3 the situation is too complicated; we restrict ourselves, therefore, to a

 discussion of the case where the basic points [i.e. terminals] form the vertices of

 a regular n-gon." There follows a detailed treatment of minimum Steiner trees for

 n-vertex regular polygons, as discussed earlier.

 6.1 Gustave Choquet's Road Network problem

 It appears that the only other contribution to the Steiner problem in the twentieth

 century, before Courant and Robbins' book (Courant and Robbins 1941), was a brief

 paper by the French mathematician Gustave Choquet (Choquet 1938) published in

 1938 (when he was about 23 years old).8 The paper includes no proofs and is essentially

 an extended abstract. Here, Choquet discusses the problem of minimising the total

 length of a road network designed to interconnect a given set of n cities. Throughout

 most of the paper he assumes that there are no junctions between roads, except at

 the cities, in order to allow high volumes of traffic to travel unimpeded (this is the

 minimum spanning tree problem). However, in the final section, Choquet relaxes this

 condition (meaning that the network is now a minimum Steiner tree) and discusses

 some of the consequences, most of which are very similar to those derived by Jarnfk

 and Kössler. In particular, he notes that two roads meet at an angle of at least 120°,

 junctions not at cities have degree 3, and there are at most n — 2 such "bifurcation

 points". He also observes, like Jarnfk and Kössler, that if the problem is generalised to

 higher-dimensional Euclidean spaces, then Steiner points still have degree 3 and the

 three incident edges are co-planar.

 Choquet's most interesting and original contribution is a suggestion that the length

 of a minimum Steiner tree can be used as a metric for measuring any closed point set,

 where the length of such a set is defined as: "the upper bound of the absolute length of

 the [minimum length] networks joining any finite number of points of the set.9" This

 unusual way of thinking of Steiner trees reflects Choquet's interest in measure theory,
 for which he would later become renowned.

 7 Recent results and the development of current terminology [1941-1968]

 The work that has had the most important influence on the modern literature on the

 Steiner tree problem, which has developed steadily since the 1960s, is the 1941 book

 by Richard Courant and Herbert Robbins What is Mathematics? (Courant and Robbins

 1941 ). In this section, we discuss the treatment of the Steiner tree problem in this book,

 8 In a private communication, when asked why he worked on the minimum spanning tree and Steiner tree

 problems, Choquet simply replied that when he was young he worked on all kinds of different problems

 (and that he had nothing more to contribute on these two problems).

 9 This, in fact, corrects a mistake made by Menger ( 1931 ), who attempted to establish the same result using

 minimum spanning trees. It is unknown whether Choquet was aware of Menger's work.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 349

 and then briefly trace the subsequent Steiner literature through to the seminal paper
 of Gilbert and Pollak (1968).

 7.1 Courant and Robbins and the street network problem [1941]

 What is Mathematics?: An Elementary Approach to Ideas and Methods by Courant

 and Robbins was a successful and highly influential account of a range of mathematical

 areas from topics in analysis and number theory to geometry and topology. A mark

 of its success is the fact that it is still available today, having been republished in

 a new edition in 1996. This is not a book written specifically for the professional

 mathematician, rather it is an expository, informal survey of mathematics, designed

 to be accessible to students and the interested layperson with a "certain degree of

 intellectual maturity".

 The authors' discussion of the Steiner problem appears in Chapter VII: "Maxima

 and Minima". Section 5 ofthat chapter is titled "Steiner's Problem", and begins with

 an account of the three-point Fermat-Torricelli problem. The problem is described

 in terms of minimising the total length of a system of roads connecting three vil

 lages. The origins of the problem are ascribed to Jakob Steiner in the early nineteenth

 century, although his contributions to the Fermat-Torricelli problem were marginal.

 Kupitz and Martini ( 1997) argue convincingly that Courant and Robbins had read about

 the Fermat-Torricelli problem in a short paper of Jakob Steiner's appearing in pages

 729-731 of Steiner ( 1882). This is, in fact, a posthumous publication of one of Steiner's

 private manuscripts written by Steiner for himself only, and not surprisingly, it contains

 no references and some errors. Courant and Robbins' familiarity with this paper is con

 firmed by the fact that they repeat one of these errors on page 358, a mistake also noted

 by Krarup and Vajda (1997). The authors appear to be unaware of the role of Fermât,

 Toricelli and other early geometers in the development of solutions to the problem.

 In the final subsection of Sect. 5, the authors briefly discuss "Steiner's problem" (i.e.

 the Fermat-Torricelli problem) on more than three points, which they state "does not

 lead to interesting results.I0" Instead they suggest that a more interesting generalisation

 is that of the "street network problem" which they define as follows: "Given n points
 AI A„, [...] find a connected system of straight-line segments of shortest total

 length such that any two of the given points can be joined by a polygon consisting of

 segments of the system". The use of the word "polygon" is somewhat unusual here,

 but appears to mean a path composed of straight-line segments. Note that there is

 no suggestion by the authors that Jakob Steiner ever considered this generalisation,
 but ironically, it is this street network problem to which Steiner's name has become
 attached.

 In the last page of the section, the authors briefly mention (without proof or expla

 nation) some of the basic properties of these minimum networks, including that there

 are at most n — 2 "multiple intersections" (i.e. Steiner points) at each of which

 three segments meet at angles of 120°. They also demonstrate that solutions to the

 10 Kupitz and Martini (1997) argue that this dismissal of the generalised Fermat-Torricelli problem is
 based on a misreading of Steiner's paper in pages 729-731 of Steiner ( 1882).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 350 M. Brazil et al.

 problem are not necessarily unique, giving the networks for the vertices of a square as

 an example. The Steiner problem is also mentioned twice later in the book. The first

 of these is in Section 9 of Chapter VII, where it is shown that some Steiner trees can

 be thought of as limiting cases of an isoperimetric problem. The other mention is in

 Section 11 of the same chapter, where it is shown that locally minimal solutions to

 the Steiner problem can be found using soapfilms, via a mechanism consisting of two

 parallel glass sheets joined together by perpendicular bars (representing the terminals).

 The use of soapfilms to study minimal surfaces was a particular interest of Richard

 Courant's (see, for example, Courant 1940) and may have helped spark his interest in

 the Steiner problem.

 7.2 The development of the Steiner tree problem through to the 1960s

 We conclude by briefly outlining the development of the theory and terminology for

 the Steiner tree problem in the literature since Courant and Robbins' book, through to

 the publication in January 1968 of the seminal paper by Gilbert and Pollak (1968).

 The first paper on Steiner trees to be published after Courant and Robbins' book was

 by Miehle (1958), some 17 years later. Miehle proposes a mechanical method for solv

 ing the Steiner problem using strings which can be tightened and moveable pegs (for

 the Steiner points). He also sets up a numeric analytic model based on this mechanical

 system and compares the merits of the mechanical system, the mathematical model

 and Courant's soapfilm method, mentioned above. Miehle gives no particular name to

 the minimisation problem or the minimum networks, but, taking his lead from Courant

 and Robbins, he credits the early work on the three-point problem to Jakob Steiner.

 The following year Beardwood, Halton and Hammersley (Beardwoord et al. 1959)

 published their well-known paper showing that the length of the shortest closed path

 through n points in a bounded plane region of area v is "almost always" asymptotically

 proportional to *fnv as n -» oo. The authors show that this asymptotic bound also

 applies to the Steiner tree problem as the number of terminals in a bounded region

 increases. They call the Steiner tree problem "Steiner's street network problem", again

 referencing Courant and Robbins; this seems to be the first time Steiner's name is

 formally used as part of the name of the general network problem. In 1961, there

 appeared a short follow-up paper by Hammersley (1961) in which the problem was

 again called "Steiner's street network problem"; however, the title of that paper is

 simply "On Steiner's Network Problem". After this paper, the word "street" never

 again appears in the name of this problem.

 In the same year, Zdzislaw Melzak published a paper titled "On the Problem of

 Steiner" (Melzak 1961). The paper outlines a finite algorithm for generating a min

 imum Steiner tree for any given set of points. The idea underlying the algorithm is

 similar to the method devised by Gergonne, but shows a better appreciation of the

 "side problem" (as discussed in the second-last paragraph of Sect. 5.2). Melzak con

 sistently uses the terminology "Steiner problem" throughout the paper, but refers to

 the minimum trees as "S-trees" and Steiner points as "S-points". Melzak's exposure

 to this problem appears to have come from his links to the Bell Telephone Laborato

 ries; he acknowledges in the paper the encouragement of Robert C. Prim (of Bell

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 351

 Laboratories), and he apparently also knew Edgar N. Gilbert." Six years later,
 Melzak's student Cockayne wrote a paper (Cockayne 1967) improving Melzak's algo

 rithm and discussing the Steiner problem in other metrics. Cockayne's paper uses the

 same terminology as Melzak's.

 A little earlier than this, in 1966, Maurice Hanan published his highly influential

 paper on the Steiner problem in the rectilinear metric (Hanan 1966). This paper uncov

 ers most of the basic properties of minimum Steiner trees where distance is measured

 using the rectilinear norm (also known as the Manhattan or t\ norm), and correctly

 predicts the importance of this theory to the emerging area of "printed circuit technol

 ogy" (i.e. physical design of microchips). Hanan cites Melzak, and like him uses the

 phrase "Steiner problem" throughout the paper.

 Another significant and widely cited Steiner paper that appeared a year later was

 that by Cavalli-Sforza and Edwards ( 1967), giving an application of the Steiner tree

 problem to phylogenetic analysis (i.e. the construction of evolutionary trees). This

 paper not only uses the phrase "Steiner problem" but is also the first to refer to the

 resulting minimal trees as "Steiner Trees". Another important paper in the same year

 was the study by Edgar Gilbert (of Bell Laboratories) of weighted Steiner trees, with

 applications to communications networks (Gilbert 1967).

 Soon afterwards Edgar Gilbert and Henry Pollak published their comprehensive

 examination of the properties of minimum Steiner trees, entitled "Steiner Minimal

 Trees" (Gilbert and Pollak 1968). This paper was remarkable for setting up, with great

 clarity, almost all of the geometric framework that was to play a key role in the follow

 ing decades in gaining a detailed understanding of the properties of minimum Steiner

 trees. This framework led the way to the construction of fast algorithms for solving

 the Steiner problem, most notably the GeoSteiner algorithm (Warme et al. 2001 ). The

 paper also sets in place most of the modern terminology for this problem, including

 "Steiner minimal trees", "Steiner minimal tree problem" and "Steiner points". The

 authors were aware, however, that Steiner's contribution was only to the three-point
 problem, and that that problem itself was originally proposed by Fermât, but they

 presumably felt that Steiner's name was too closely associated with the problem in the

 recent literature to suggest any other alternatives. Their paper helped kindly a fascina

 tion with this problem in the mathematical community that has lasted to the present day.

 8 Conclusion

 One of the intriguing questions to emerge from the history of the Steiner problem

 is why the literature on this problem was so discontinuous in nature until the 1960s.

 There is no easy answer to this question, but it is worthy of some speculation. It may

 simply be that the popularising of the problem in What is Mathematics? eventually

 led to a sufficient critical mass of researchers actively working on the problem to keep

 it continuously alive, but this explanation is unsatisfactory, given that there were no

 published papers on the Steiner tree problem in the 16 years following the book's

 publication. Part of the answer appears to be that the period from the 1960s onwards

 '1 This is according to one of Melzak's students, Raymond Booth, in a private communication.

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 352 M. Brazil et al.

 provided, for the first time, a proper context for the Steiner Problem. The properties of

 minimum Steiner trees, rather than simply being geometric curiosities, could now be

 viewed as providing the ingredients for relatively efficient algorithms for generating

 such trees; this tied in with the formalisation of the concept of an algorithm in computer

 science in the 1950s and 1960s, and the ability to effectively implement algorithms as

 computer technology advanced. (Prior to this, the large number of topologies made the

 problem computationally intractable for more than four or five terminals). The Steiner

 tree problem could also be seen as belonging, to some extent, to the burgeoning field

 of operations research, being closely related to the area of facility location.

 Real-world applications appear to have also had a role in maintaining an active

 interest in this problem in the research community since the 1960s. Although some of

 the early statements of the problem in the 1800s were couched in terms of applications

 such as the design of canals or railway tracks, there is no evidence that the problem

 was ever studied as anything other than a problem in pure geometry. In the late 1950s,

 however, a genuine application emerged for the Euclidean Steiner tree problem. As

 Henry Pollak relates in Pollak ( 1978), the Bell Telephone Company faced the issue

 that its tariff for private line service was written in terms of the length of the minimum

 network connecting the customers' stations (that is, the customer would not be charged

 for redundancy or inefficient interconnections in the network). In theory, a customer
 could insist that the Bell Service adds a new terminal at a location that would reduce

 the cost of the minimum network (even if it was of no direct use to the customer), or at

 least that the customer be charged as though such a terminal existed. Hence, there was

 a real motivation for understanding how to compute the minimum network cost where

 such extra terminals (Steiner points) were allowed, which engaged the attention of a
 number of researchers working for or associated with Bell Laboratories.

 In the 1960s, there was also an emerging appreciation of the potential applications

 of the rectilinear version of the Steiner tree problem in the efficient physical design

 of microchips, following the paper of Hanan (1966); today, this is still an important

 application of the Steiner tree problem. By the end of the 1960s, the Steiner tree

 problem had established itself as a rewarding field of study, both from a pure and

 applied point of view. From that time onwards, there has been a continual interest in

 a range of different forms of the Steiner tree problem in the mathematical, computer

 science and engineering literature.

 Acknowledgments Two of the authors, Marcus Brazil and Doreen Thomas, were partially supported in

 the writing of this paper by a grant from the Australian Research Council. We would also like to thank:
 Francois Lauze (University of Copenhagen) and Morgan Tort (The University of Melbourne) for their

 generous assistance with the French translations required for this paper; Henry Pollak for useful commentary

 on Gauss' letters; Pavol Hell (Simon Fraser University) for assistance with translating (Jarnfk and Kössler

 1934); Jakob Krarup (University of Copenhagen) for help with providing some original sources; Donald

 Knuth for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper; and Konrad Swanepoel for

 alerting us to the existence of the paper of Menger ( 1931 ).

 Arora, S. 1998. Polynomial time approximation schemes for Euclidean traveling salesman and other geo

 metric problems. Journal of the ACM 45(5): 753-782.

 References

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Euclidean Steiner tree problem 353

 Beardwoord. J., J.H. Halton, and J.M. Hammersley. 1959. The shortest path through many points. Proceed

 ings of Cambridge Philosophical Society 55: 299-327.

 Bopp, K. 1879. Üeber das kürzeste Verbindungssystem zwischen vier Punkten. PhD thesis, Universität

 Göttingen.

 Cavalieri, B. 1647. Exercitationes Geometricae Sex.

 Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., and A.W.F. Edwards. 1967. Phylogenetic analysis: Models and estimation procedures.

 Evolution 21: 550-570.

 Cheng, X., Y. Li, D.Z. Du, and H.Q. Ngo. 2004. Steiner trees in industry. In Handbook of combinatorial

 optimization, vol. 5, ed. D.Z. Du, and P.M. Pardalos, 193-216. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

 Choquet, G. 1938. Étude de certains réseaux de routes. Comptes Rendus Acad Sei 206: 310-313.

 Cieslik, D. 2004a. The essential of Steiner's problem in normed planes. Technical report 8, Ernst-Moritz

 Arndt-Universität Greifswald, Preprint-Reihe Mathematik.

 Cieslik, D. 2004b. Shortest connectivity—Introduction with applications in phytogeny, combinatorial opti

 mization, vol. 17. New York: Springer.

 Cockayne, E.J. 1967. On the Steiner problem. Canadian Mathematical Bulletin 10: 431-450.

 Colbourn, C.J., and C. Huybrechts. 2008. Fully gated graphs: Recognition and convex operations. Discrete

 Mathematics 308: 5184-5195.

 167-174.

 Courant, R. 1940. Soap film experiments with minimal surfaces. The American Mathematical Monthly 47:

 Courant, R.. and H. Robbins. 1941. What is mathematics?. London: Oxford University Press.
 Dahan-Dalmedico, A. 1986. Un texte de philosophie mathématique de Gergonne. Revue d'histoire des

 sciences 39:97-126.

 de Fermât. P. 1891. Oeuvres, vol. I.

 Descartes, R. 1896. Oeuvres de Descartes, vol. II. Paris: J. Vrin.

 Du, D.Z.. and W. Wu. 2007. Approximations for Steiner minimum trees. In Hundbook of approximation

 algorithms and metaheuristics. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

 Du, D.Z., F.K. Hwang, G.D. Song, and G.Y. Ting. 1987a. Steiner minimal trees on sets of four points.

 Discrete and Computational Geometry 2: 401-414.

 Du, D.Z., F.K. Hwang, and J.F. Weng. 1987b. Steiner minimal trees for regular polygons. Discrete Com

 putational Geometry 2: 65-84.

 Franksen, O.I., and I. Grattan-Guiness. 1989. The earliest contribution to location theory? Spatio-economic
 equilibrium with Lamé and Clapeyron, 1829. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 31: 195-220.

 Gander, M.J., K. Santugini, and A. Steiner. 2008. Shortest road network connecting cities. Bollettino dei

 docenti di matematica 56: 9-19.

 Garey, M.R., R.L. Graham, and D.S. Johnson. 1977. The complexity of computing Steiner minimal trees.

 SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 32(4): 835-859.

 Gergonne, J.D. 1810. Solutions purement géométriques des problèmes de minimis proposés aux pages 196,

 232 et 292 de ce volume, et de divers autres problèmes analogues. Annales de Mathématiques pures et
 appliquées 1: 375-384.

 Gilbert, E.N. 1967. Minimum cost communication networks. Bell System Technical Journal 46:2209-2227.

 Gilbert, E.N., and H.O. Pollak. 1968. Steiner minimal trees. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 16( 1 ):

 1-29.

 621-629.

 63: 223-235.

 235: 1-17.

 Guggenbuhl, L. 1959. Gergonne, founder of the Annales de Mathmatiques. The Mathematics Teacher 52(8):

 Hammersley, J.M. 1961. On Steiner's network problem. Mathematika 8: 131-132.

 Hanan. M. 1966. On Steiner's problem with rectilinear distance. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics

 14(2): 255-265.

 Heinen, F. 1834. Über Systeme von Kräften. G. D. Bädeker.

 Hoffmann, E. 1890. Über das kürzeste Verbindungssystem zwischen vier Punkten der Ebene. In Program
 des Königlichen Gymnasiums zu Wetzlar für das Schuljahr von Ostern / 889 bis Ostern 1890. Schnitzler.

 Jarntk, V., and M. Kössler. 1934. O minimälnich grafeth obeahujictch n danych bodü. Cas Pest Mat a Fys

 Körte, B., and J. Nesetril. 2001. Vojtech Jarnik's work in combinatorial optimization. Discrete Mathematics

 Krarup. J„ and S. Vajda. 1997. On Torricelli's geometrical solution to a problem of Fermât. IMA Journal

 of Management Mathematics 8(3): 215-224. doi:l0.I093/imaman/8.3.215.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kupitz, Y.S., and H. Martini. 1997. Geometric aspects of the generalized Fermat-Torricelli problem. In

 Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies, vol. 6, ed. I. Barany, and K. Boroczky, 55-127. Budapest: Intuitive

 Geometry, Janos Bolyai Mathematical Society.

 Lamé, G., and B. Clapeyron. 1829. Mémoire sur lapplication de la statique à la solution des problèmes

 354 M. Brazil et al.

 relatifs à la théorie des moindres distances. Journal des Voies et Communications 10: 26-49.

 Melzak, Z.A. 1961. On the problem of Steiner. Canad Math Bull 4(2): 143-148.
 Menger, K. 1931. Some applications of point-set methods. Annals of Mathematics, Second Series 32:

 739-760.

 278-295.

 Miehle, W. 1958. Link-length minimization in networks. Operations Research 6(2): 232-243.

 Ollerenshaw, D.K. 1978. Minimum networks linking four points in a plane. Bulletin of the Institute of

 Mathematics and its Applications 15: 208-211.

 Pollak, H. 1978. Some remarks on the Steiner problem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A 24(3):

 Rubinstein, J.H., D.A. Thomas, and N.C. Wormald. 1997. Steiner trees for terminals constrained to curves.

 SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 10(1): 1-17.

 Schreiber, P. 1986. Zur Geschichte des sogenannten Steiner-Weber-Problems. Technical report,

 Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald, Mathematisch
 Naturwissenschaftliche Reihe. 58.

 Schumacher, H.C. 1810. Géométrie analitique. Solution anaiitique d'un problème de géométrie. Annales

 de Mathématiques pures et appliquées 1: 193-195.

 Scriba, C.J., and P. Schreiber. 2010. 5000 Jahre Geometrie. Berlin: Springer.

 Simpson, T. 1750. The Doctrine and applications of fluxions. London: John Nourse Publisher.
 Steiner, J. 1882. Gesammelte Werke, vol. II. Berlin: Reimer.

 Stigler, S.M. 1976. The anonymous Professor Gergonne. Historia Mathematica 3(1): 71-74.
 Tédenat, M. 1810. Questions résolues. Solution du premier des deux problèmes proposés à la page 196 de

 ce volume. Annales de Mathématiques pures et appliquées 1: 285-291.

 Torricelli, E. 1919. De maximiset minimis. In Operedi Evangelista Torricelli,ed. G. Loria,andG. Vassura.

 Faenza, Italy.

 Vol. II. Florence, Italy.

 Viviani, V. 1659. De maximis et minimis geometrica divination in quintum Conicorum Apollonii Pergaei,

 Warme, D.M. 1998. Spanning Trees in Hypergraphs with Applications to Steiner Trees. PhD thesis, Com

 puter Science Department, The University of Virginia

 Warme, D.M., P. Winter, and M. Zachariasen. 1999. Exact solutions to large-scale plane Steiner tree prob

 lems. In Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on discrete algorithms, 979-980.

 Warme, D.M., P. Winter, and M. Zachariasen. 2001. GeoSteiner 3.1. Department of Computer Science,

 University of Copenhagen (DIKU), http://www.diku.dk/geosteiner/.

 Winter, P., and M. Zachariasen. 1997. Euclidean Steiner minimum trees: an improved exact algorithm.

 Networks 30: 149-166.

 ■ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

