 

 

 

 

Orbital motion and force in Newton's "Principia"; the equivalence of the descriptions in

Propositions 1 and 6
Author(s): Michael Nauenberg
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 2 (March 2014), pp. 179-205
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569629
Accessed: 19-05-2020 10:00 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569629?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:179-205
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0136-6

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia;
 the equivalence of the descriptions in Propositions
 1 and 6

 Michael Nauenberg

 Received: 5 January 2014 / Published online: 26 February 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract In Book 1 of the Principia, Newton presented two different descriptions of

 orbital motion under the action of a central force. In Prop. 1, he described this motion

 as a limit of the action of a sequence of periodic force impulses, while in Prop. 6,

 he described it by the deviation from inertial motion due to a continuous force. From

 the start, however, the equivalence of these two descriptions has been the subject of

 controversies. Perhaps the earliest one was the famous discussion from December

 1704 to 1706 between Leibniz and the French mathematician Pierre Varignon. But

 confusion about this subject has remained up to the present time. Recently, Pourciau

 has rekindled these controversies in an article in this journal, by arguing that "Newton

 never tested the validity of the equivalency of his two descriptions because he does

 not see that his assumption could be questioned. And yet the validity of this unseen
 and untested equivalence assumption is crucial to Newton's most basic conclusions
 concerning one-body motion" (Pourciau in Arch Hist Exact Sei 58:283-321, 2004,

 295). But several revisions of Props. 1 and 6 that Newton made after the publication

 in 1687 of the first edition of the Principia reveal that he did become concerned to

 provide mathematical proof for the equivalence of his seemingly different descriptions

 of orbital motion in these two propositions. In this article, we present the evidence that

 in the second and third edition of the Principia, Newton gave valid demonstrations of

 this equivalence that are encapsulated in a novel diagram discussed in Sect. 4.

 Communicated by: Niccolö Guicciardini.

 M. Nauenberg (S)
 Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
 e-mail: mnauenbe@ucsc.edu

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 â Springer

 180 M. Nauenberg

 1 Introduction

 In Sect. 2 of Book 1 of his Principia, Newton presented two different descriptions

 for the orbital motion of a body due to the action of an attractive central force.1 One

 of these descriptions, which appears in Prop. 1, presents the orbit as uniform motion

 along the sides of a polygon, resulting from the action of a sequence of discrete

 central force impulses at equal time intervals. Then the orbit due to a continuous

 force is obtained by taking a limit of this polygonal motion when this time interval,

 and the sides of the polygon become vanishingly small. In this proposition, Newton

 proves that central forces lead to Kepler's area law. The other description that appears

 in Prop. 6 considers locally a short segment of an orbital curve and determines the

 deflection from inertial motion along the tangent of this curve due to the action of

 a continuous central force during a short time interval. The magnitude of this force

 is obtained by the limit when this time interval, and correspondingly the deflection,

 becomes vanishingly small. In Prop. 6, the proof of Kepler's area law for central forces

 is applied to express the time interval in geometrical form. Newton had developed a

 geometrical calculus, which allowed him to deal in a precise mathematical fashion

 with such limits of quantities which become vanishingly small, while their ratios

 approach finite values. He discussed this calculus in eleven lemmas which constitute

 the mathematical foundations on which the Principia rests.2 In a Scholium following
 these lemmas, Newton wrote:

 In any case I have presented these lemmas before the propositions in order to

 avoid the tedium of working our lengthy proofs by reductio ad absurdum in the

 manner of the ancient geometers (Newton 1999, 441 ).

 To understand these propositions, it is helpful to take a historical perspective and

 consider the origin of these propositions and their evolution, from Newton's first for

 mulation in De Motu,3 the earliest draft of the Principia that he sent to Halley in 1684,

 through the successive revisions which he made in the first (1687) and second (1713)

 editions of the Principia. After the publication of the first edition of the Principia, there
 is considerable evidence that will be discussed here that Newton became concerned in

 providing further mathematical proof for his two propositions and their equivalence

 in the continuum limit. The evidence for his concern is found in the changes and addi

 tions which he made in the second edition (1713) of the Principia, in his formulation

 of Props. 1 and 6 in Book 1. We will show that these modifications, which were also

 included in the same form in the third edition (1726) of the Principia, clearly indicate

 that Newton was well aware of the need to provide mathematical proof for the equiv

 alence of his two description for orbital motion and force in these two propositions.

 In particular, in the second edition of the Principia, Newton gave a proof that the

 ' For this force, Newton coined the name centripetal, seeking the center, in contrast to Huygens' name

 centrifugal, fleeing the center (Westfall 1980, 411).

 2 In spite of their importance, these lemmas are often ignored in discussions of the Principia.

 3 De motu corporum in gyrutn (On the motion of bodies) (Newton 1974, 30-74) was a nine page tract
 which Newton wrote, in the Fall of 1684, in response to the visit of Edmond Halley, who asked Newton if

 he knew the orbit for an inverse square attractive force.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principiu 181

 measure for a central force that he obtained by taking the continuum limit of discrete

 impulses in Prop. 1 is precisely the same as the one which he obtained in Prop. 6 from

 a description of orbital motion based on calculating the deviation from 1 motion due

 to the action of an uninterrupted force.

 In a review of the second edition of the Principia by an anonymous writer in the

 Acta Eruditorium (March 1713), the occurrence of changes in Props. 1 and 6 were

 pointed out. But the significance of these changes—to clarify these two propositions

 and to provide a proof of their equivalence—appears to have escaped the attention of

 some commentators of the Principia up to the present time. For example, B. Pourciau

 claims that "once in the Principia the text of both Prop. 1 and its demonstration remains

 virtually the same through all three editions" (Pourciau 2004, 271). But he ignored

 the important changes Newton made including new corollaries to this proposition and

 a substantial reformulation of Prop. 6 in the second edition of the Principia. We show

 that these changes provided a proof that in the continuum limit the measure of force

 and orbital motion in Props. 1 and 6 are equivalent

 In Sect. 2, we present a brief historical background on the role of the 1679 cor

 respondence between Newton and Hooke, and on the eighteenth-century controversy

 between Leibniz and Varignon on the different descriptions of force in Props. 1 and

 6. In Sects. 3 and 4, we review these two propositions as they appeared in the early

 draft, and later revisions of De Motu sent to Halley in 1684, and in the first and second

 editions of the Principia, indicating the significance of changes and additions that

 Newton made to provide further mathematical proof to clarify the relation between

 these two propositions.4 In Sect. 5, we discuss in detail the relation between the two

 descriptions of orbital motion and central forces in these two propositions and demon

 strate, with the aid of a novel diagram, Fig. 7, that in the second and third edition of the

 Principia, Newton gave a valid mathematical proof of their equivalence. Since these

 two propositions remained essentially unchanged in the third edition of the Principia,

 we are able to quote from the excellent new English translation of this edition by
 I. B. Cohen and Ann Whitmann Newton (1999). We conclude with a brief summary

 in Sect. 6 and with three appendixes. Appendix 1 shows that Newton's expression

 for the force in terms of the curvature of an orbit, Prop. 6, Cor. 3, corresponds to the

 modern differential equation in polar coordinates, Appendix 2 gives a brief descrip

 tion of Jacob Hermann's derivation of Kepler's area law, starting from Prop. 6, instead

 of Prop. 1, and Appendix 3 discusses the important Lemma 11 for Prop, 6, and an

 extension for its application to Prop. 1.

 2 Historical background

 In the Fall of 1679, Newton and Robert Hooke had a long correspondence in which

 they discussed fundamental problems concerning orbital motion. In the first one of

 these letters sent by Hooke on November 24, 1679, he asked Newton for comments

 4 For other presentations, see Francois de Gant, Force and Geometry in Newton's Principia (de Gant 1995),
 Niccolo Guicciardini, Reading the Principia (Guicciardini 1999), and I, B. Cohen, A Guide to Newton's
 Principia (Newton 1999).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 182 M. Nauenberg

 on a concept of planetary motion which Hooke had enunciated for the first time in

 a remarkable lecture on "Planetary Movement as a Mechanical Problem," presented

 at a meeting of the Royal Society of London on May 23, 1666, (Gunther 1930, 265;

 Nauenberg 1994a, 336; Nauenberg 2005a, 15):

 .. .And particularly if you will let me know your thoughts of that compounding

 the celestiall motions of the planets of a direct motion by the tangent & an

 attractive motion towards the central body [italics are mine]...(Newton 1960,
 297)

 It is interesting to compare this early formulation of planetary motion by Hooke, with
 a similar formulation that Newton had recorded in his notebook in 1664,

 If a body moves progressively in some crooked [curved] line ... it may be con

 ceived to consist of a number of straight lines. Or else, in any point of the crooked

 line the motion may be conceived to be on the tangent (Herivel 1965, 145)

 The second part of Newton's description of orbital motion corresponds closely to

 Hooke's description. Evidently, he and Hooke had arrived, independently of each
 other, at the same formulation of orbital motion which later Newton described in a

 more precise mathematical form in Prop. 6: that at each moment of time, motion along

 a curve can be viewed as straight line motion along the tangent of the curve, and that, as

 Hooke proposed, this motion along the tangent can be "compounded" by an attractive

 motion toward the central body. But a few days later, Newton responded to Hooke's

 letter, stating that

 .. .1 did not before ye receipt of your letter, so much as heare (that I remember)

 of your Hypothesis of compounding ye celestial motion of ye Planets of a direct

 motion by the tang[en]t of ye curve...(Newton I960, 81)

 This response is disingenuous, because there is some evidence that Newton had read
 Hooke's short tract (28 pages long), published in 1674, entitled On an Attempt to
 Prove the Motion of the Earth by Observation, where Hooke had outlined his con

 cept of planetary motion.5 Ten years earlier, Newton had also implemented such
 a "compounding" of two motions mathematically, for the special case of uniform
 circular motion, and he derived a relation for the acceleration toward the center of

 the circle (Herivel 1965, 195). This relation states that the acceleration is directly

 proportional to the square of the velocity and inversely proportional to the radius
 of the circle, a relation that had been obtained earlier by Christiann Huygens.6-7

 For general orbital motion, Newton first implemented mathematically the concept

 5 Hooke's tract was also reviewed in the Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society 101, (1674) 11-13.

 6 Huygens kept his result secret for 15 years, until finally publishing it in his Horoloxium Oscillatorum in
 1674(Huygens 1929.253).

 7 Newton applied this relation for the acceleration to deduce from Kepler's harmonic law for planetary

 motions (the square of the periods of the planets is proportional to the cube of their radii) that the gravitational

 force on the planets dependence inversely on the square of the distance from the Sun. He also verified that

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 183

 of compounding the tangential motion with an attraction or deflection toward the
 center of force in Theorem 3 of De Motu, which later became Prop. 6 of the Prin
 cipia.

 Shortly after the end of his correspondence with Hooke, Newton discovered that

 Kepler's area law is a general property of orbital motion for central forces. In a later
 recollection, he said that

 In the year 1679 in answer to a letter from Dr. Hook...I found now[my italics]

 that whatsoever was the law of the force which kept the Planets in their Orbs, the

 area described by the Radius drawn from them to the Sun would be proportional

 to the times in which they were described...(Bernard Cohen 1971, 293)

 Newton's mathematical proof of the area law for "whatsoever was the law of the

 force...," appeared as Theorem 1 of De Motu and later in Prop. 1, Book I, of the

 Principia. This proof was based on his approximate description of orbital motion

 by "straight lines," as he had recorded it in his notebook, some twenty years ear
 lier.

 In 1688, when Leibniz first read the Principia, but without acknowledging it,
 he adopted the description of force in Prop. 1, where the deflection due to an
 impulse could be described by uniform motion, apparently dispensing with accel

 erated motion (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 80).8 On the other hand, a contemporary of

 Leibniz, Pierre Varignon, preferred the description in Prop. 6 that led ab initio to

 accelerated motion. This led to a lengthy debate between them that lasted from

 December 1704 until 1706, aptly described as a "comedy of errors" (Bertoloni Meli

 1993, 81), because these two descriptions are equivalent, but this equivalence was
 not clarified until 1713, when the second edition of the Principia appeared (see

 Sect. 4). Leibniz also was able to express the description of orbital motion and cen

 tral force in Prop. 1 in the language of his differential calculus, and remarkably, he

 obtained the modern differential equation of motion in polar coordinates (Bertoloni
 Meli 1993, 134-137; Nauenberg 2010, 281-283). In the early part of eighteenth
 century, his pioneering work was followed by a number of able mathematicians in
 Europe, including Jacob Hermann. Johann Bernoulli, and Pierre Varignon (Nauen

 berg 2010, 269-300), who applied successfully Leibniz's differential calculus to the

 propositions in the Principia. But confusion and errors about the connection between

 Footnote 7 continued

 the ratio of the gravitational force at the surface of the earth to the gravitational force on the moon was

 "very nearly" proportional to the square of the ratio of the distance of the moon to the radius of the earth.
 However, Newton obtained the value of about 4,000, instead of 3,600, because he had used an incorrect

 estimate of the earth' radius (Herivel 1965,196).

 8 There was another more subtle reason for this choice that is generally not pointed out. Leibniz had

 introduce the concept of first-order and higher-order differentials that were defined as differences between

 lower order ones. The second-order differential associated with the displacement due to impulses in Prop.

 1 could be expressed as the difference of adjacent first-order differential representing the sides of the

 polygonal trajectory. But this connection cannot be made with the second-order deflection from tangential

 motion described in Prop. 6.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 184 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 1 Newton's diagram in De
 Fig. 1 Newton's diagram in De
 Motu associated with his proof
 Motu associated with his proof Vp
 of Kepler's area law. It shows 7^ *'•*'*
 of Kepler's area law. It shows
 the construction of a polygonal ■ \ j
 the construction of a polygonal
 orbit, A BCDEF, with the
 orbit, A BCDEF, with the

 motion counterclockwise under
 motion counterclockwise under »
 the action of a sequence of radial \<
 the action of a sequence of radial
 impulses toward a center at 5 ' ...
 impulses toward a center at S

 a--'

 JK.t

 s
 s

 Newton's two propositions and its interpretation continues to occur up to the present
 time.9 -10

 3 The development of Proposition 1

 In order to discuss the significance of the changes that Newton made in his formulation

 of Prop. 1 in the Principia, we review this proposition as it first appeared in early drafts

 and in the subsequent editions of the Principia. After his initial description of orbital
 motion in the De Motu, Newton became concerned in providing further mathematical

 proof of his fundamental propositions and considered a major revision of his book.
 The evidence for Newton's concern can be found by comparing the formulations of

 these propositions in De Motu, and in the first and second edition of the Principia

 In De Motu. Theorem I. Newton presented a geometrical construction for the orbit

 of h a body moving under the action of central impulsive forces at equal intervals of
 time. This construction corresponds to the description given in Prop. I, Book I of the

 Principia. Referring to Fig. 1, which shows the original diagram associated with this
 theorem, Newton gave a proof of Kepler's area law,

 9 For example, in discussing Prop. I, Eric Aiton wrote that "representing a curve by a sequence of first
 order parabolic arcs is equivalent to representing the curve by a polygon with second-order infinitesimal
 sides," and that the sides of the polygon in Prop. 1 could be interpreted as second-order infinitesimals
 (Aiton 1989. 211). The same error also was made by Derek Whiteside (Newton 1974, 34—39, n. 19), and
 subsequently, it has propagated in the literature; for example, in his recent Guide to Newton's Principia,
 I.B. Cohen "warmly" recommends this erroneous analysis (Newton 1999, 115). But in Prop. 1, the correct
 interpretation is that these polygon sides are first-order infinitesimals, as is demonstrated in Sect. 4.

 10 In a recent article in this journal (Arthur 2013. 580), Richard Arthur described Leibniz's treatment
 of circular motion by introducing first- and second-order differentials of the radial distance, but these

 differentials are equal to zero.

 '1 An English translation of the second edition is not available at the present time, but fortunately Props.
 1 and 6 in the third edition are identically the same as in the second edition, and therefore, it is possibly to
 use instead the recent English translation of the third edition (Newton 1999). For an English version of the
 first edition, I have relied on the excellent translation of Mary Ann Rossi (Brackenbridge 1995, 235-267),

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 185

 All orbiting bodies describe, by radii drawn to the center, areas proportional to
 the time

 which he generalized here for arbitrary central forces,

 Let the time be divided into equal parts, and in the first part of the time let the body

 by its innate force,12 describe the straight line AB. It would then in the second

 part of time, were nothing to impede it, proceed directly to c, describing the line

 Be equal to AB so as, when rays AS, BS, cS are drawn to the center, to make the

 areas ASB, BSc equal. However, when the body comes to B, let the centripetal

 force act in one single but mighty impulse13 and cause the body to deflect from

 the straight line Be, and proceed in the straight line BC. Parallel to BS draw cC

 meeting BC in C, and when the second interval of time is finished the body will

 be found at C. Join SC and the [area of the]triangle SBC will then, because of

 the parallels SB, Cc, be equal to the [area of the] triangle SBc and hence also

 equal to [the area of) the triangle SAB. By a similar argument, if the centripetal

 force acts successively at C, D, E..., making the body in separate moments of
 time describe the separate straight lines CD, DE, EF,..., the triangle SCD
 will be equal to the triangles SBC, SDE to SCD, SE F to S DE (and so on).

 In equal times, therefore, equal areas are described. Now let these triangles be

 infinitely small and infinite in number, such that to each individual moment of

 time there corresponds an individual triangle, the centripetal force acting now

 without interruption, and the proposition will be established. (Newton 1974,35)

 In this first draft, however, Newton did not give the slightest indication on how to

 implement the continuum limit by letting "these triangles be infinitely small and infinite
 in number."14

 One of the first persons to have seen a copy of De Motu, which had been sent by

 Newton to Halley and registered at the Royal Society, was Robert Hooke.15 Evidently,

 he recognized that Newton had implemented the concept of planetary motion that he

 had described to Newton in his November 24,1679, letter, explaining the origin of the

 gravitational force as a sequence of periodic "pulses" acting on the planets, and directed

 12 It seems strange that Newton regarded inertial motion as motion acted on by an innate or inherent force.

 I. B. Cohen regards it "as the most puzzling of all the definitions in the Principia" (Newton 1999,96-102).

 In definition 2 of De Motu, Newton states that "I call the force of a body or the force innate in a body by

 reason of which it endeavors to persist in its motion along a straight line," a description that he maintained

 also in the subsequent three editions of the Principia.

 13 Actually, this "mighty impulse (impulso unico sed magno)" is a first-order infinitesimal quantity giving

 rise to an instantaneous infinitesimal change Sv in velocity along the direction of the impulse. At C, for

 example, Sv = Cc/St, where St is the infinitesimal time interval between impulses, and the displacement

 Cc is a second-order infinitesimal quantity.

 14 In his book, Never at rest, Richard S. Westfall commented that "the derivation could not have survived

 critical examination, and Newton could not have built the Principia on a foundation so uncertain" (Westfall

 1980, 413). But in fact, Newton did precisely that, not changing his formulation by one iota, but adding

 lemmas and corollaries that clarified the meaning of his proposition.

 15 The Royal Astronomer, John Flamsteed, complained to Newton " I am obliged to your kind concession

 of ye perusall of your papers, tho I believe I shall not get a sight of them till our common friend Mr Hooke
 & the rest of the towne have been satisfied" (Newton 1960,405).

 "Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 186 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 2 Upper right hand pail of
 Fig. 2 Upper right hand part of
 Hooke's September 1685
 Hooke's September 1685
 diagram for a discrete elliptical
 diagram for a discrete elliptical
 orbit rotating clockwise under
 orbit rotating clockwise under
 the action of a sequence of
 the action of a sequence of
 impulses toward O that depend
 impulses toward O that depend
 linearly on the distance to this
 linearly on the distance to this

 center. Some auxiliary lines
 center. Some auxiliary lines
 have been deleted to show its
 have been deleted to show its

 correspondence with Newton's
 correspondence with Newton's
 diagram. Fig. I. in the De Motu
 diagram. Fig. I. in the De Motu

 toward the sun (Nauenberg 2005a). He then proceeded to apply Newton's geometrical

 construction in a novel way, by fixing the relative magnitude of the attractive impulses
 which Newton had left undetermined in his description of Prop. 6. Hooke assumed
 that these impulses depended linearly on the distance (Hooke's law) and obtained
 graphically the resulting polygonal orbital motion which for this case has its vertices

 on an ellipse with its center at the center of the impulsive force. His result, shown if

 Fig. 2 where we have enlarged the upper half of his diagram, is similar to Newton's de
 Motu diagram. Fig. 1, except that the body is rotating in the opposite sense. Hooke's

 diagram and associated text16 was dated September 1685, a year and a half before the

 appearance of the first edition of the Principia, but for unexplained reasons, it was left
 unpublished (Pugliese 1989. 181-205: Nauenberg 2005a, 12).

 Newton became aware that a discussion and proof of his limits in Prop. 1 was nec
 essary, and in an initial revision of de Motu, he included eleven Lemmas that describe

 the mathematical foundations—Newton's geometrical formulation of the calculus—
 on which the entire Principia rests. In this revision, he added an important remark at

 the conclusion of Prop. 1 :

 ... and the proposition will then, by Corollary 4 of Lemma 3 be established
 Q.E.D (Newton 1974. 125).

 In this Lemma, Newton discussed the area under a monotonie curve by approximating

 it by a sequence of rectangles or parallelograms. By evaluating both upper and lower

 16 For a full discussion of Hooke's diagram and text see (Nauenberg 1994a, 332).

 4ü Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 187

 <f e

 ...ES~

 / \
 /Z ?
 /* / \ \

 \.\ c

 / / / '

 / / X
 / / X

 / / /"
 / / X v
 / /' /

 I if
 \//y
 if-:

 Fig. 3 Newton's diagram in Prop. 1, but with the original lines Se, Sd, Se and Sf deleted, and a curve
 ABC DE F added, that does not appear in the original, containing the vertices A to F

 bounds, he then gave a geometrical proof that as the width of these parallelograms

 become vanishingly small, the sum of their areas approaches the area under the curve.

 It is clear that in order to apply Cor. 4 of Lemma 3 to Prop. 1, Newton would have had in

 mind that the vertices A, B, C, D, E.. .of the triangles in his geometrical construction

 in Prop. 1 were on a curve that remained fixed as these "triangles be infinitely smaller

 and infinite in numbers." Although it was not shown in the diagram for Prop. 1, this
 curve corresponds to the orbital curve in the continuum limit that Newton must have
 assumed to be given (Nauenberg 2003, 441-456). This is also the interpretation that
 Leibniz took, and later also Jacob Hermann, to translate Prop. 1 into the language of
 Leibniz's differential calculus (Nauenberg 2010, 269-300).

 In Cor. 2 of Lemma 3, Newton wrote,

 ... the rectilinear figure that is comprehended by the chords of the vanishing
 arcs AB, BC, CD, . .[Fig. 3] coincides ultimately with the curvilinear figure
 (Newton 1999,434).

 and in Cor. 3 of Lemma 3,

 And it is the same for the circumscribed rectilinear figure that is comprehended
 by the tangents of these same arcs (Newton 1999, 434).

 In modern terms, for finite arc length, Cor. 2 gives a lower bound, and Cor. 3 an upper

 bound for the area under the curve, and these areas coincide in the limit of vanishing

 ':£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 188 M. Nauenberg

 of the Principia,17

 arc length. These corollaries remained essentially unchanged in all the three editions

 In the first edition of the Principia, there is an important addition in Newton's

 statement of Prop. I and in two corollaries that were added. The statement of Prop. 1

 is now given in the form,

 The areas that bodies driven in orbits describe with radii having been constructed

 to a stationary center of force, lie in stationary planes and are proportional to the

 times (Brackenbridge 1995, 245).

 Comparing this statement with the previous one in de Motu, one sees that Newton has

 included the property that for central forces, the orbits must lie in a plane. This property

 follows immediately from his geometrical construction of an orbit for impulsive forces,

 where the position of the plane of the orbit is determined by the initial conditions, i.e.,

 the plane of the initial radial line 5/1 and the initial displacement AB not parallel to

 5/4. Newton added a comment to his previous description in Prop. 1:

 then these [lines] lie in the same plane

 referring to the lines comprising the polygonal orbit associated with force impulses.

 It is evident that in the limit that this polygonal orbit becomes a continuous orbit, this

 orbit must also be planar, that is, lying in the same plane which is determined by the

 initial conditions. This constitutes a perfectly valid proof of for the planarity of orbits

 under the action of centripetal force. The conclusion of Prop. 1 now reads

 Now let the number of triangles be increased and the width be diminished indef

 initely, and their ultimate perimeter AD F (by the fourth corollary of the third
 lemma) will be a curved line; hence the centripetal force in which a body is

 perpetually drawn away from the tangent of this curve, will act uninterruptedly;
 but whatever areas S ADS and SAFS described which are always proportional

 to the times of the descriptions, will be proportional to the same times in this
 case,Q.E.D. (Brackenbridge 1995, 245)

 Two added corollaries indicate the changes which occur if the force is not directed

 to a common center. In practice, this is the case when additional external forces are

 included, as is the case in the treatment of the motion of the moon and the planets

 discussed in Book 3, and in the case of motion of body in a gas or fluid which Newton

 treats as a resisting medium in Book 2 of the Principia.'8

 17 For a sequence of finite periodic impulses at equal time intervals ft, the time t„ at the n th vertex of

 the polygonal orbit is t„ = nSt. According to Prop. 1, Ar is proportional to the equal area of the triangles

 subtended by this orbit. Then, in the limit that ft vanishes, and n approaches infinity, t„ -*■ r, where t is the

 time at a given point on the orbit that is kept fixed during this limiting process. Hence, the time t at a point

 on the continuum orbit is proportional to the area subtended by the corresponding arc of this orbit.

 18 Corollary I states that

 In non resisting media if the areas are not proportional to the times, [then] the forces are not directed

 along the path of the radii (Brackenbridge 1995, 245).

 and Corollary 2 adds.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 189

 In the second edition of the Principia, Newton added six new corollaries to Prop. 1,

 evidently intended as clarifications and further mathematical proof of this Proposition.

 The original 2 corollaries were moved to Prop. 2.

 Cor. 1 gives an expression for the velocity v in terms of the perpendicular distance

 p from the center to the tangent of the orbit. This corollary implies that for central

 forces the angular momentum / = vp is a constant of the motion.

 In nonresisting places, the velocity of a body attracted to an immobile center is

 inversely as the perpendicular dropped from the center to the straight line which

 is tangent to the orbit. For the velocities in those places A, B,C, D, and E are

 respectively as the bases of the equal triangles AB, BC, CD, DE, and EF, and

 these bases are inversely as the perpendiculars dropped to them (Newton 1999,
 445).

 The bases of the equal triangles correspond to vSt, and the perpendiculars that we

 label p give the differential area of each of these triangles, SA = vpdt, that by Prop. 1

 is proportional to St, i.e., vp is a constant.

 Cor. 2 gives further evidence that in Prop. 1, Newton had in mind that the vertices

 A, B,C... lie on a fixed curve,

 If chords AB and BC of two arcs successively described by the same body in

 equal times in non-resisting spaces are completed into the parallelogram ABCV,

 and the diagonal B V (in the position that it ultimately has when those arcs are

 decreased indefinitely) is produced in both directions, it will pass through the
 center of forces(Newton 1999,445)

 Evidently Newton had in mind that the sides AB, BC, CD..., of the polygon in
 his geometrical construction for Prop. 1, Fig. 1, are the chords of successive arcs
 AB, BC, CD ..., of a curve, but he did not draw this curve in his diagram. This
 curve is the orbit of the body in the continuum limit (Nauenberg 2003,441-456) and

 justifies Newton's application of Lemma III, Cor. 4, to describe this continuum limit in

 Prop. I.19

 Footnote 18 continued

 In all mediums, if the description of areas is accelerated, the forces do not tend towards the point
 where the radii meet but deviate forward [ or in consequentia] from it. (Newton 1999,447)

 Cohen and Koyre (1971, 91) have pointed out that with some further revisions, Corollary 1 of the first

 editions plus the addition in the MS Errata became in the second edition the Corollary 1 to Prop. 2 (see also

 footnotes aa, bb, cc in I. B. Cohen, Guide to Newton's Principia (Newton 1999, p. 447)) which reads

 In nonresisting spaces or mediums, if the areas are not proportional to the times, the forces do not

 tend toward the point where the radii meet, but deviate forward [or in consequentia] from it, that

 is, in the direction toward which the motion takes place provided that the description of the areas

 is accelerated; but if it is retarded, they deviate backward [or in antecedentia, i.e., in a direction

 contrary to that in which the motion takes place] (Newton 1999,447).

 19 Here, Newton has set the stage to obtain a measure of the force in the continuum limit. Since according to

 Newton's construction in Fig. 1, Cc has been taken parallel to SB, it follows that for finite chords AB, BC

 the diagonal BV is along the line SB. But in this corollary, Newton states that BV will "pass through the
 center of forces" in the continuum limit, while in his diagram, this is also true for finite time intervals.

 Evidently, Newton must have been aware that when AB and BC are finite chords of two arcs described in

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 190 M. Nauenberg

 In Cor. 3, Newton states that

 If chords AB, BC and DE, E F of arcs described in equal times in nonresisting
 spaces are completed into parallelograms ABCV and DEFZ, then the forces

 at B and E are to each other in the ultimate ratio of the diagonals BV and EZ

 when the arcs are decreased indefinitely. For the motions BC and EF of the
 body are (by corol. 1 of the laws) compounded by the motions Be, BV and
 Ef, EZ; but in the proof of this proposition BV and EZ, equal to Cc and Ff,

 where generated by the impulse of the centripetal force at B and E, and thus are

 proportional to these impulses (Newton 1999, 445)

 In this corollary, Newton shows that the diagonals B V and E Z are equal to the

 displacements Cc and Ff, which are proportional to the impulsive forces acting at

 two distinct points B and E of the orbit. He then asserts, without giving a proof, that in

 the continuum limit when BV and EZ become vanishingly small, their ratio BV/EZ

 remains finite and approaches a finite value. This limit corresponds to the ratio of

 the continuous force acting at B and at E, because these impulses act at equal time

 intervals as will be discussed further in connection with Prop. 6 in the next section.

 In this proposition, Newton gave a proof that in the continuum limit, the force at B

 is the limit of the ratio BV/St2 of the displacement BV divided by the square of the

 time interval St elapsed between impulses. Likewise, since the force at E is obtained

 by the ratio EZ/St2, the ratio of these two forces is BV/EZ, and the existence of this
 ratio in the continuum limit is therefore ensured.20

 In Cor. 4, Newton added,

 The forces by which any bodies in nonresisting spaces are drawn back from
 rectilinear motions and are deflected into curved orbits are to one another as

 those sagittas of arcs described in equal times which converge to the center of

 forces and bisect the chords when the arcs are decreased indefinitely. For these

 sagittas are halves of the the diagonals with which we dealt in corol. 3

 Footnote 19 continued

 "equal time" intervals, the location of C is not generally the same as the location obtained by his geometric

 construction with finite chords, where equal time refers to time interval time elapsed between successive

 inertial motion along the chord, instead of orbital motion along the arc, see Fig. 3. In Newton's geometrical

 construction for Prop. 1. equal times correspond to equal areas of the triangles bounded by the chords and

 the radii. But for continuous orbital motion and forces, which is the limit of vanishingly small triangles,

 equal times for finite arcs of the orbit is associated with equal areas of the sectors bounded by these arcs

 and the radial lines. Thus, for finite arcs. AB and BC, given A and B the position of C obtained by the

 requirement that the areas of sectors ASB and BSC be the same, will in general differ from the position

 C obtained from Newton's geometrical construction described in Prop. I, where equal areas refer to the

 areas of the finite triangles ASB and BSC. In Cor. 2, Lemma 3, however, Newton indicated that in the

 limit that "the width of the triangle becomes vanishingly small and the number goes to infinity" the sum of

 the areas of the triangles bounded by chords, approach the area of the sum of the sectors bounded by the

 corresponding arcs.

 20 In Prop. I, Newtow did not prove that the displacements Cc. Ff, etc., are second-order quantities and,
 therefore, that the ratios Cc/dr. Ff/dr are finite in the limit that these differentials vanish. This proof

 was given in Prop. 6 by applying Lemma 10, in the first edition, and lemma 11 in the second one, assuming
 that the curvature is finite.

 •ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 191

 In this corollary Newton introduced the sagitta (arrow) of an arc which is a line

 segment between the midpoint on the arc and a point on its chord which approaches the

 middle of the chord in the continuum limit.21 Newton relates impulsive displacements,

 such as BV and EZ discussed in the previous corollary, Cor. 3, with the sagittas of

 a pair of adjacent arcs. For example, the chord of the two arcs AB and BC adjacent

 to the point B is described by the line AC, which is the diagonal of the parallelogram

 ABCV introduced in Cor. 1. Hence, half the line B V is then, by Newton's definition,

 the sagitta of the arc AC,

 Cor. 5 states,

 And therefore these forces are to the force of gravity as the these sagittas are to

 the sagittas, perpendicular to the horizon, of the parabolic arcs that projectiles
 describe in the same time

 In this corollary, Newton illustrated his description of force in the continuum limit

 for an orbit under the action of gravity near the surface of the earth. In this case, the

 force is approximately a constant directed perpendicularly toward the surface which
 Newton refers here as the horizon. Galileo had demonstrated that in this case, the orbit

 is a parabola, and Newton also found that finite arcs of this orbit are "parabolic arcs."

 Since the motion along the sides of the polygonal orbit under the action of force

 impulses is inertial motion, the velocity on each side is constant. Its magnitude u,

 is given by the ratio of the first-order differential length <5/, of each side (labeled

 here by the subscript i) divided by the periodic first-order differential time interval

 St between pulses, i.e., v, = 8lj/8t which approaches a finite value in the limit that

 8t, and correspondingly <5//, vanishes. Each impulse gives an instantaneous change

 in velocity 8v,- directed toward the center of force, but in Prop. 1, Newton did not

 give a proof that its magnitude must be a first-order differential proportional to this

 time interval, i.e., Svj = a,8t, where a, is a measure of the magnitude of the impulse

 that in the continuum limit becomes the acceleration imparted by the force. Hence,

 <52/, = 8v,8t is the magnitude of the displacement due to an impulse at the /th vertex,

 transversed at the uniform differential velocity 8u, ; a second-order differential such

 that a,- = <52/, /8t2 is in accordance with the definition of accelerative force in Prop. 6.22

 Early on, by applying Prop. 1, both Leibniz and Hermann obtained an expression

 for the force (acceleration) in terms of differentials. For example, Hermann's diagram,

 shown in Fig. 4, clearly corresponds to a segment of Newton's Prop. 1 diagram, Fig. 3,

 but with the motion directed clockwise along the curve ABCD around the center of

 21 Newton aptly chose the Latin word sagitta for arrow to describe the various displacements of the

 midpoint of an arc from its chord. Andrew Motte, however, who in 1728 translated the Principia into

 English, gave it the mathematical expression versed sine, which applies only to the special case that the

 sagitta is normal to the chord.

 22 A proof that the deviations <52/; from inertia! motion due to impulses are second-order differentials,

 requires the assumption that the arcs of the underlying orbital curve (left out of Newton's diagram for Prop.

 1 but included in Fig. 3) that determines the magnitude of these deviations have finite curvature. Then, a

 proof can be obtained by a straightforward extension of Lemma 11, considering the deviation from inertial
 motion from an extension of the chord, instead of the tangent, of an arc (see Appendix 3). For uniform

 circular motion, which has constant curvature, such a proof was carried out by Leibniz (Bertoloni Meli
 1993, 80-81).

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 4 Hermann's version of
 Fig. 4 Hermann's version of
 Newton's diagram for Prop. I
 Newton's diagram for Prop. I
 (see Fig. 3). but with the motion
 (see Fig. 3). but with the motion
 along the arc ABCD directed
 along the arc ABCD directed
 clockwise
 clockwise

 / K ti
 / K ü

 +

 / / .
 / / .  k
 / *'
 / *'
 //
 //

 f£

 .Z... / fp
 ... / i w
 ]u A. 5
 A. jS

 *
 M

 force at 5. The impulse at C is represented here by the short line ED, taken parallel to
 the radial line SC, where the vertex E is obtained by extending the chord BC to CE,

 setting it equal in length to BC, and D is the intersection of this line with the curve.
 Then, Hermann introduced Cartesian coordinates by taking the horizontal line LASI
 as the x axis, and he obtained the displacement E D as a second-order differential,

 ED = ddx^Jx2 + y2/x, (1)

 where dx = BH, dx' = CG, and ddx = dx' — dx = KGp Assuming the validity of
 Kepler's area law,24 he set the time interval df equal to twice the area of the triangles
 BSC — CSD,\.e.,dt = xdy — ydx,25 and applying Prop. 6, he obtained a differential

 expression for the force,26

 22 The first-order differentials d.v. d.v' are not equal, but defined to be transversed during equal time intervals
 dr.

 24 At the time, Hermann, Varignon and others, failed to recognize that Prop. 1 demonstrates the validity
 of Kepler's area law. In Cartesian differential coordinates, it takes the form d(xdy — ydx) = 0. A one line
 proof is obtained by also expressing the displacement ED in terms of the second-order differential ddy,
 which implies that ddy = (y/.v)ddx (Nauenberg 2010, 277). But neither Hermann nor his contemporaries
 noticed this relation, and it took him another 6years before he developed a proof, based on Prop. 6 instead
 of Prop. 1, of this fundamental theorem (see Appendix 2). He published it in his main work, Poronomia,
 and claimed that it was the first valid proof of Prop. I (Guicciardini 1999,211-215).

 22 In polar coordinate r, H, the area d/1 of a differential triangle with a vertex at the center of coordinates,

 base of length r, and height r AO is

 AA = (\/2)r2AH. (2)

 and substituting r- cos2 H for .r2. obtain

 dA = ( 1 /2)(.rdy - ydx) (3)

 In Cartesian coordinates, r = v/.v2 + y2. and tan ft = y/x. Hence d(tan ft)= dff/cos2ft = (xAy — yAx)/x2,

 26 According to N. Guicciardini, (Guicciardini 1999. 207), Hermann obtain this expression by "focusing"

 on Prop. 6. But it is important to recognize that, like Leibniz, he first applied Prop. 1 to obtain a relation for

 the force in terms of the displacement from the extension of the chord of an arc of the orbital curve, rather

 than from its tangent as described in Prop. 6.

 <0 Spri  nger

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 193

 ED _ dd.xjx2 + y2
 dt2 ~ x(xdy - yàx)2' ( )

 that he solved for the inverse square force, F = 1 /(x2 + y2), demonstrating that the
 orbit is an ellipse (Nauenberg 2010, 272-276).

 4 The development of Proposition 6, Book 1

 In De Motu, Theorem 3, which later became Prop. 6 in the Principia, Newton gave

 an expression for a continuous centripetal force acting on a body moving on a curve

 that, according to Prop. 1, must satisfy Kepler's area law. Referring to the diagram

 associated with this proposition, Fig. 5, he wrote,

 If a body [located at the point] P in orbiting around the center S shall describe

 any curved line A P Q, and if the straight line P R touches that curve at any point

 P and to this tangent from any other point Q of the curve there be drawn QR

 parallel to the distance S P, and if Q T be let fall perpendicular to this distance S P :

 I assert that the centripetal force27 is reciprocally as the solid SP2 x QT2/QR,

 provided that the ultimate quantity of that solid when the points P and Q come

 to coincide is always taken (Newton 1974,41),

 In the first edition of the Principia, this theorem became Prop. 6, theorem 5, and

 except for minor clarifying alterations in language it remained essentially unchanged.

 The only significant change was that Newton now cited Lemma 10 to justify his

 assertion that the measure of central force is proportional QR/St2, where St is the

 time interval elapsed for the body to travel from P to Q, that by Prop. 1 is proportional
 to SP x g7.28 In Lemma 10, Newton demonstrated that,

 Spaces which a body describes at the urging of any standard force are, at the

 very start of motion, in the double ratio of the times. (Brackenbridge 1995,241)

 This lemma is a generalization for the case, first considered by Galileo, of the accel
 eration of falling bodies under a constant gravitational force. Then the arc QP is a

 segment of a parabola (Fig. 5).29

 The extended statement of Prop. 6 now reads:

 27 Newton considered here the accelerative centripetal force or simply the acceleration, as opposed to the

 motive centripetal force that appears in the Principia, Definition 6, as the conventional definition - force

 = mass times acceleration. But this distinction is often ignored by commentators of Prop. 6, although it is

 evident that this proposition has nothing whatsoever to do with mass.

 28 The constant of proportionality is the inverse of the angular momentum / for unit mass, / = vSY.

 where v is the velocity, and ST is the component of SP perpendicular to the direction of the velocity, i.e.,

 St = (l/l)QT x SP (see Cor. 1 of Prop. 1). For Hermann's proof that I is a constant which is based only
 on Prop. 6 see Appendix 2.

 29 For circular motion, it was first applied by Huygens in 1659 to derive the central acceleration a for a

 body moving with uniform velocity v in a circular orbit of radius p. Huygens approximated the arc QP

 of the circle by the arc of the parabola QR = (\/2p)RP~ with vertex at P. Then setting RP = vSt, and
 QR = (l/2)aSt2, he found a = v2/p. In Prop. 6, the factor 1 /2 is missing.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 194 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 5 Newton's diagram for
 Fig. 5 Newton's diagram for
 Theorem 3 in De Motu, which
 Theorem 3 in De Motu, which

 31

 later became Prop. 6 in the
 later became Prop. 6 in the
 Principia. In this diagram, QR
 Principia. In this diagram, QR
 is drawn as an extension of SQ
 is drawn as an extension of S Q

 yt<

 s

 >A

 In the indefinetely small figure QRPT, Fig. 1, the nascent line segment QR is,

 given the time [ interval ], as the centripetal force (by law 2), and given the force,
 as the square of the time (by Lemma 10) (Brackenbridge 1995, 252).

 In other words, QR oc F St2, where F is the force (acceleration) acting during the
 time interval St. Actually, QR = ( 1 /2)aSt2, where a is the acceleration, but the factor

 ! /2 is missing in all the three editions of the Principia, where Newton confined his

 expressions to proportionality relations. But this factor 1 /2 is important to relate, in the

 continuum limit, the expression for accelerative force in Prop. 1 which is equivalent
 to F — 2QR/8t2 (see Sect. 5).

 In the second edition of the Principia, there appeared a drastic alteration in the
 formulation of Prop. 6. The statement of this proposition that appeared in the first
 edition is now relegated to a corollary, and the new statement of Prop. 6 reads as
 follow:

 If in a nonresisting space a body revolves in any orbit about an immobile center

 and describes any just-nascent arc in a minimally small time, and if the sagitta of

 the arc is understood to be drawn so as to bisect the chord and, when produced,

 to pass through he center of forces, the centripetal force in the middle of the
 arc will be as the sagitta directly and as the square of the time inversely For the

 sagitta in a given time |interval] is as the force (by Prop. 1 and Cor. 4), and if
 the time [interval] is increased in any ratio, then -because the arc is increased
 in the same ratio - the sagitta is increased in that ratio squared (by Lemma 11,
 Corols. 2 and 3), and therefore is as the force once and the time squared [the
 product of the force and the square of the time interval].30 Take away from both
 sides the squared ratio of the time, and the force will become as the sagitta
 directly and as the time squared inversely Q.E.D. (Newton 1999, 453)

 Newton defined the sagitta (arrow) associated with a point P on a small arc of a curve

 by the segment PX of the radial line SP intersecting the chord of this arc at its midpoint
 X. But he did not show this arc and the corresponding sagitta in his diagram, Fig. 6,

 In the first edition of the Principia Newton referred to Lemma 10 for this relation, but he did not
 invoke it in the second edition, referring instead to Lemma I I. In this lemma. Newton gave a proof that
 QR = QP-/2p, when the force is directed along the radius of curvature p. For the case of a circle, his
 proof corresponds to Euclid's Prop. 36 in Book 3. Since QP = vSl, in this case QR = aSt2, which is the
 content of Lemma 10.

 0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 195

 Fig. 6 Diagram for Prop. 6 in
 Fig. 6 Diagram for Prop. 6 in -y f
 ^ Y'
 the second and third edition of " - Y
 the second and third edition of
 the Principia, with a section of
 the Principia, with a section of ,.* p
 /
 the circle of curvature at P and
 the circle of curvature at P and / /
 center at C superimposed. The
 center at C superimposed. The p
 dashed line PC is the radius p / y UK yL
 dashed line PC is the radius p
 of this circle, with the chord
 of this circle, with the chord y
 PV = 2pcos(a) along the / /' / / /'
 P V = 2pcas(a) along the
 radial line 5 P. The dashed line / / / \ * * -
 radial line SP. The dashed line
 /.' PY' is the tangent line at /'. I /// Ot '' \Z'
 Z'PY' is the tangent line at P.
 which was drawn incorrectly in / ^ V
 which was drawn incorrectly in
 the original diagram as the black ( j ■ ■ / »;
 the original diagram as the black
 line ZPY / -A,
 line ZPY

 a

 /

 31 We have added the sagitta PX to a corrected version of this diagram in Fig. 7.

 32 In his new statement of Prop. 6, Newton defined the centripetal force at a given point P of the orbit as

 the limit of the ratio sagitta /i5t2, where the sagitta was first introduced in Cor. 4 of the version of Prop. 1
 in the second edition of the Principia. In Prop. 6, Newton describes the saggita for a small arc of the orbit,
 with P located on the middle of the arc, as a line from P which bisects the cord of the arc. A subtle point

 here is what Newton meant by the middle of the arc where the centripetal force is defined. The answer is
 obtained by turning to Prop. 1, Cor. 4 where the arc describing the sagitta is defined by two adjacent arcs
 transversed in equal time intervals. Hence, the middle of the arc is not the geometrical middle, which is
 obtained by dividing an arc into two arcs with the same length.

 0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 associated with this proposition.31 As the paragraph following this new formulation
 of Prop. 6 shows, Newton introduced the sagitta for the specific purpose of relating
 the definition of a continuous central force in Prop. 6 to the definition of force in Prop.

 1, where it is given in terms impulses during equal time intervals in the limit that these

 intervals vanish. For any finite arc, however, only one of Newton's two requirements

 for the sagitta can be met simultaneously, unless the line "produced to pass through the

 center of force" is normal to the tangent of the curve at P. But this problem disappears

 in the limit that the arc length becomes vanishingly small.32

 Newton followed his new statement of Prop. 6 with a new corollary, Cor. 1, which

 consisted of the formulation of Prop. 6 in the first edition of the Principia. In Cor. 1,
 Newton also added the statement that,

 the displacement QR is equal to the sagitta of an arc which is twice the length
 of arc QP, with P being in the middle. (Newton 1999, 454)

 According to this description, the sagitta is nearly equal to QR, where QR is taken
 parallel to SP, and the middle of the extended arc is now the geometrical middle,
 because in this case the corresponding chord must be nearly parallel to the tangent
 line ZPR (see Fig. 7). The sagitta, which is also taken parallel to SP, does not bisect

 196 M. Nauenberg

 Y

 J* c

 B

 /

 Fig. 7 The diagram for Prop. 6 in the second and third edition of the Principia, Fig. 6, with a section of
 the diagram for Prop. 1. Fig. 3, superimposed on it in dolled Hues. The cord B Q, not drawn in the original
 diagram, of the arc B PQ.i s approximately parallel to the tangent line ZPY at P and intersects the radial
 line SP at X, describing the saj>itta PX ss QR

 the chord as announced in the statement of this proposition, but as we will show in the

 next section, it does in the limit as Q approaches P.

 In addition, Newton included an important new corollary, Cor. 3. based on the

 geometrical concept of the local radius of curvature of a general curve, that he, and
 independently Huygens, had developed earlier (Brackenridge and Nauenberg 2002).
 In his 1679 correspondence with Hooke (see Introduction), there is evidence that he

 applied this concept early on to obtain the approximate shape of orbits under the action

 of general central forces (Nauenberg 1994b, 222-225). In a preliminary corollary, Cor.
 2, he applied the relation SY/SP = QT/QP, where SY is a line from the center of
 force at S normal to the tangent line ZPR intersecting it at Y, to obtain that "the
 centripetal force is inversely as the solid SF2 x QP2/QR."

 Cor. 3 states,

 If the orbit APQ either is a circle or touches a circle concentrically or cuts

 it concentrically - that is, if it makes with the circle an angle of contact or of
 section which is the least possible - and has the same curvature and the same

 radius of curvature at point P, and if the circle has a chord going from the body

 through the center of forces, then the centripetal force will be inversely as the
 solid SY2 x PV. For PV is equal to QP2/QRP

 In Newton's diagram for Prop. 6, the circle of curvature and its radius p was not drawn.

 In Fig. 6, we show this circle with center at C by a dotted line and its radius of curvature
 PC = p by a dashed line from P to the center of curvature C (Brackenbridge 1995,

 -13 Around 1705. the expression for the central force in terms of the radius of curvature was obtained
 independently by the mathematician Abraham De Moivre. who then showed it to Newton. But Newton
 replied that he had already obtained a similar formula (Guicciardini 1999. 226).

 ß Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 197

 115).34,35 Then the chord of this circle "going from the body [at P\ through the center

 of forces" is P V = 2pcos(a), where a is the angle between p and the radial line SP.
 The relation PV = QP2/QR follows from a generalization of Lemma 11, where
 Newton shows that QR = QP2/2p for the special case that a = 0.36

 This corollary, which was absent in the first edition of the Principia,37 is extremely

 important, because it justifies, for curves with a finite radius of curvature p, the exis

 tence of a limit for the ratio QR/QP2 when Q P -*■ 0. Moreover, it gives an expression

 for the force in terms of finite instead of infinitesimal quantities. In particular, express

 ing the radius of curvature in polar coordinates, it reduces to the modern differential

 equation for the orbit in these coordinates [Nauenberg 2005b, 345 (see Appendix 7)].

 5 Proof of the equivalence of Propositions 1 and 6 in the continuum limit

 In this section, we show that in the second and third edition of the Principia, Newton

 gave a mathematical proof that established, in the continuum limit, the equivalency

 of the two apparently distinct descriptions in Props. 1 and 6 of orbital motion under

 the action of a centripetal force. In Prop. 1, the force is a periodic impulse that acts

 instantaneously, while in Prop. 6, the force acts continuously in time. But in this

 continuum limit, these two mathematical descriptions give the same result.

 To demonstrate this equivalence, we combine in Fig. 7 the diagram associated with

 Prop. 6 in the second and third edition of the Principia, Fig. 6, with a segment of the

 diagram associated with Prop. 1, Fig. 3. This segment is shown in Fig. 7 by the dotted

 lines, but the labels for the vertices in Fig. 3, and those in this figure are different.38

 In particular, the arc ABC, which does not appear in the Prop. 1 diagram, but is

 mentioned in Cor. 2 of this proposition, corresponds to the arc BPQ,39

 According to Prop. 6, given any point P on the curve APQ, Fig. 7, the deviation

 from inertial motion along the tangent line ZP Rio this curve at P, due to a continuous

 force acting along the arc QP, is represented by the short line QR, parallel to SP,

 from a nearby point Q, intersecting this tangent line at R. Correspondingly, according

 34 After Lemma 11, Newton devotes a Scholium to discuss curves for which the radius of curvature become

 infinite at certain points.

 35 We have superimposed this circle on Newton's diagram as it appeared in the third edition of the Principia.

 The original tangent line Z P Y at P had been drawn incorrectly, and an improved line is shown as a dashed

 lineZ' PR' (The center C that is obtained by the intersection with the line perpendicular to Z P Y at P gives

 a grossly exaggerated radius of curvature which does not contain the chord PV).

 36 For uniform motion with velocity a on a circle of radius p, by 1669 Newton already had shown that the
 central acceleration a = a2/p. Since according to Prop. 1, a a 1/SK, then fora = 0,1/a a ST2 x PV oc
 2p/v2.

 37 But already in Prop. 28, Book3, in the first edition of the Principia, Newton applied his curvature relation

 to obtain the shape of the lunar orbit due to the perturbation of the sun.

 38 The vertices A, B, C, c in Fig. 3, become B, P, Q, c, respectively, in Fig. 7.

 39 Cor. 2 starts with,

 If chords AB and BC of two arcs successively described by the same body in equal times in
 nonresisting spaces ...

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 198 M. Nauenberg

 to Prop. 1, the deviation Qc, also parallel to SP, due to a radial impulse at P, is

 obtained by extending the chord PB from a certain point B on the curve to a point
 c such that Pc = PB.40 For a continuous force, the motion along QR is assumed
 to be uniform accelerated motion from rest, and by Lemma 10, the acceleration is

 a = 2QR/St2, while an impulse at P generates an instantaneous infinitesimal change
 in velocity Sv = Qcßt along Qc. Hence, Qc is transversed with a constant but
 infinitesimal velocity, as Leibniz had insisted in his lengthy exchange with Varignon

 (see Introduction). But in the continuum limit, it corresponds to a radial acceleration
 a1 = Sv/St = Qc/8t2. Hence, for the demonstration of equivalence, i.e., a' = a, it is

 sufficient to show that in the limit that Q approaches P, Qc/QR = 2. Such a proof

 is straight forward when the arc BPQ is the arc of a circle, which in this limit is the
 curvature circle.41 42 •43

 6 Summary

 After the publication of the first edition of his Principia in 1687, Newton started to

 consider major revisions of his work in order to clarify and justify further some of

 the fundamental propositions that supported his demonstrations (Brackenbridge 1995,

 141). In this paper, we discuss only those changes and additions that he made for this

 purpose in propositions 1 and 6. In Prop. 1, Newton gave a proof for the area law

 and the planarity property of orbital motion under the action of central forces, and

 in Prop. 6, he derived a relation to calculate these forces for a given orbital curve

 of finite curvature satisfying the area law. Newton's proofs in these two propositions

 were based on two different descriptions of orbital motion. In Prop. 1, he described

 the orbit in the continuum limit of polygonal motion due to periodic central force

 impulses, while in Prop. 6, he attributed the orbit to the action of an uninterrupted

 central force which continually deflected it from inertial straight line motion along

 the local tangent of this orbit. While in the first edition of his Principia, Newton did

 not relate these two different descriptions of orbital motion, the changes and additions

 which appeared in the second edition indicate that he was well aware of the need to

 demonstrate their mathematical equivalence. Indeed, in five new corollaries added to

 Prop. 1, Newton demonstrated that the force measure in the continuum limit of forces

 40 To obtain the point c, first extend the line QR and then find its intersection with the extension of the
 chord BP of an arc BP such that Pc = BP.

 41 Such a proof is obtained by replacing the tangent line in Lemma 11 with the extension of a chord, as
 shown in Fig. 7 (see Appendix 3). In Cor. 4 of Prop. I, Newton asserted that PX = (l/2)ßc, which is

 evident from his diagram for Prop. I.

 42 In the literature, it is customary to represent Newton's second law of motion in two forms: (1) F oc Sv

 for an impulsive force and (2) F oc Sv/St for a continuous force (Newton 1999, 116). But in Prop. 1, we
 have shown that for I ) the correct expression is SI oc Sv, where SI is an infinitesimal first-order impulse,

 and that F = fil /Ht oc Sv/St. In the continuum limit, this is the same expression for force as in 2).

 42 According to Michel Blay, "it is nevertheless difficult to account for the exact relation between 'the force

 acting at once with a great impulse", and the centripetal force acting uninterrupted'" (Blay 2001,233). This
 quote is repeated in Cohen's guide to Newton's Principia (Newton 1999, 71,Note 73), but the supposed

 difficulty is resolved by the realization that the impulse is not "great." as Newton misleadingly wrote in

 Prop. I, but it is a first-order infinitesimal impulse SI = FSt, where F is the force in the continuum limit.

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 199

 impulses corresponded to the force measure defined in Prop. 6. This proposition was

 also substantially extended, with its original formulation becoming a corollary, and

 with the addition of three important new corollaries. The new opening statement of

 Prop. 6 expresses the deflection from inertial motion in terms of the sagitta of a small

 arc of the orbital curve, instead of the equivalent displacement from the tangent at a

 point on the curve, given in the first edition. This change was evidently introduced to

 show the equivalence of the definition of force in this proposition and in corollaries 3

 and 4 of Prop. 1.

 Since the appearance of the first edition (1687) of the Principia, however, the

 equivalence of the descriptions in these two propositions has been the subject of

 controversies. Perhaps the earliest one was the exchange from December 1704 to

 1706 between Leibniz and Varignon (Bertoloni Meli 1993, 81), but confusion about

 this subject has remained up to the present time. Recently, for example, B. Pourciau

 has claimed that Newton took the equivalence of his two descriptions for orbital

 motion for granted, either as an "axiom" or as "an article of faith" that does not

 require any mathematical proof (Pourciau 2004, 284; Nauenberg 2012, 931). But as

 has been shown in Sects. 3 and 4, there is ample evidence that Newton was concerned

 to provide mathematical proof for the equivalence of these two descriptions. This

 evidence is found in the changes for this purpose that Newton made to Props. 1 and 6

 in the second edition of the Principia, which remained unchanged in the third one.

 The description in Prop. 1 of central forces by impulses is in accordance with
 Newton's formulation of the second law of motion, in all the three editions of the

 Principia,

 A change in motion [mass times velocity] is proportional to the motive force and

 takes place along the straight line in which that force is impressed

 But the fact that such impulses SI, and the corresponding velocity changes <St>, are

 both first-order infinitesimals was not spelled out in the Principia, and this neglect
 has been a source of continuous misunderstanding (see footnote 9). This problem is

 clarified in Sects. 3 and 4, where we demonstrate that in the continuum limit, SI/St is

 equal to the accelerative force F described in Prop. 6.44

 Although Prop. 1 and Prop. 6 are equivalent, these two propositions lead to differ

 ent mathematical expressions for central forces. In the Principia, Newton primarily

 applied the continuum expression in Prop. 6, to deduce the force acting on bodies

 moving on various orbital curves, while Leibniz and Hermann translated the impulse

 formulation in Prop. 1 in terms of first- and second-order differentials, leading to

 equations that could be solved for the orbital curve, given the radial dependence of the

 force.45 The reason for not basing this translation on Prop. 6 was that in this proposi

 tion, the deflection QR for the measure of the central force is taken from the tangent

 44 In definition 7, Newton wrote that

 the accelerative quantity of centripetal force is the measure of this force that is proportional to the

 velocity that is generated in a given time (Newton 1999,407).

 45 In this sense, Newton's and Leibniz's approach were not "equivalent in practice," as has been emphasized
 by N. Guicciardini (Guicciardini 1999,250-255).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 200 M. Nauenberg

 line at a fixed point P of a curve. But such a tangent cannot be expressed directly in

 terms of the differentials dx and dy associated with a curve in Cartesian coordinates x

 and y, while these differentials are directly related to the sides of the polygonal orbit in

 Prop. 1, when these sides are viewed as the chords of a limiting orbital curve. Then, the

 difference between the differentials for adjacent chords is a second-order differential,

 ddx = dx' - dx, and ddy = dy' - dy, that could be directly related to the action of

 the force impulse, giving rise to a differential equation of motion (Nauenberg 2010,
 272—276).46

 In some advanced applications, Newton also resorted to the description of forces

 by the periodic impulses introduced in Prop. 1. For example, in Corollaries 3 and 4 of

 Prop. 17, he outlined the effects of external perturbations to the elliptical motion due

 to an inverse square force, by a periodic sequence of impulses that instantaneously

 changed the parameters (major axis, eccentricity, and orientation) of the ellipse. In a

 manuscript in the Portsmouth collection of his mathematical papers (Newton 1969,

 508-538), he also showed that in the continuum limit, this perturbation gave rise to

 differential equations for the time evolution of these parameters that now are attributed

 to Euler and Lagrange (Nauenberg 2000, 167-194).

 To conclude, we quote Newton's own assessment of the equivalence of Prop. 1

 and Prop. 6. When dealing with the effects of air resistance, in connection with Prop.

 10, Book 2 (Nauenberg 2011, 567-587), he remarked in a Scholium that remained

 unpublished:

 "It would have been permissible to imagine that the projectile were to proceed

 in the chords, GH, H I, IK of the arcs, and be disturbed through the force of

 gravity and the force of resistance at the sole points G, H, 1 and K, exactly as

 in Proposition I of the first book a body was disturbed through an intermittent

 centripetal force; and then the chords to be infinitely diminishes so that the forces

 were rendered continuous. And the solution of the problem by this means would

 have turned out very easy" (Newton 1981, 366).47

 Acknowledgments I would like to thank Niccolö Guicciardini for many interesting comments on several

 of the topics covered here.

 7 Appendix 1: Prop. 6, Cor. 3, on curvature and force in polar coordinates

 In 1671, Newton obtained the radius of curvature p of a general curve in coordinates

 that are equivalent to polar coordinates r, 8. Written in the language of Leibniz, in
 terms of the first-order differentials dr, dd and the second-order differential ddr, it

 takes the form (Newton 1969, 169-173; Nauenberg 2005b, 345),

 46 Varignon, Johann Bernoulli, de Moivre, Keill and Cotes, were able to translate Prop. 6 into differential

 calculus after discovering that the second-order displacement from the tangent could be expressed in terms
 of the radius of curvature of the orbit, before Newton included this connection in the second edition of the

 Principia, in Cor. 3 of this proposition (Guicciardini 1999, 223, 220).

 47 I am indebted to N. Guicciardini for calling my attention to this interesting Scholium.

 "£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where F is the central force (acceleration). Substituting Eq. 5 leads to the modern

 equation of classical mechanics,

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 201

 1 2d r2 — rddr + r2 dd2

 » W/

 p cos3(a) r3 dö2

 where

 rdO

 cos(a) = -, . , = y. (6)

 Vr2d6»2 + dr2

 and a is the angle between the radial line and the normal to the tangent of the curve

 at r, 8, shown in Fig. 6.

 Since S Y = r cos(a), it follows from Prop. 6, Cor. 3, that48

 1 1 m

 a SY2 x PV 2r2pcos3(a)'

 '2Fa(è+1);' <8)

 apart from the constant of proportionality. Setting dr = (1/2)(SP x QT)/l, where I

 is the constant angular momentum for unit mass, one finds that this constant is I2.

 By expressing the second-order displacement QR and the first-order line QT (see

 Fig. 6) in polar coordinates, this equation can also be obtained from Newton's basic

 expression for F in Prop. 6,

 PFoc^. (9)

 But such a derivation hides the important role of curvature in Newton's dynamics.

 8 Appendix 2: Hermann's derivation of Kepler's area law

 It is of historical interest that in 1716, Jacob Hermann obtained a derivation of the

 generalized Kepler area law that Newton had given for an impulsive central force in

 Prop. 1 of the Principia, by starting, instead, with his expression for a continuous

 central force in Prop. 6. For this purpose, he applied the relation for this force in terms

 of the radius of curvature of the trajectory.49 Referring to the diagram, Fig. 8, associated

 with this proposition, he set the differential time interval St = PQ/v, where v is the

 velocity at P, and then demonstrated that the ratio I = SP x QT/St is a constant,

 corresponding to the angular momentum (for unit mass) / = v x SY. In essence,

 Hermann's proof was a consistency check, filling a gap in Newton's demonstration

 48 For similar derivations by Bernoulli and by Varignon see reference (Nauenberg 2010,285-289).

 49 First published in the 1713 (second) edition of the Principia in Prop. 6 Cor. 3.

 <£] Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 202 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 8 The diagram for Prop. 6
 Fig. 8 The diagram for Prop. 6
 in the second and third edition of
 in the second and third edition of

 the Principia, with the addition
 the Principia, with the addition
 of the line QY' tangent at Q, the
 of the line QY' tangent at Q, the
 normal SY' to this line, and the
 normal ST' to this line, and the

 radius of curvature p at P with
 radius of curvature p at P with
 center at C
 center at C

 "X"7r yi
 / •
 /a/ /

 S^v Vs

 /p \

 J

 6cp /

 !

 [ .

 ■>

 -^s

 V

 of the equivalence of Prop. 6 with Prop. 1 that was lacking in the first edition of the

 Principia,50 For completeness, we present a brief derivation of Hermann's proof in
 somewhat different form.51

 Referring to Fig. 8. which corresponds to Newton's diagram for Prop. 6, Fig. 6,
 but with the addition of a line QY' tangent at Q, and the normal SY' to this line, let
 p = SY, p = SY', Sp = SY' - SY, q = PY and 8s = PQ. Then

 Sp = —qStp, (10)

 Fr = — — , (12)

 p p

 and substituting 8t = 8s/v = p8(j>/v in Eq. 11,

 d v = —8(/). (13)

 50 Hermann claimed that he was the first to give a proof of the area law (Guicciardini 1999,216), which is

 valid provided it is qualified that his proof was based on Prop. 6. instead of Prop. 1.

 51 Hermann's original derivation is given in reference (Guicciardini 1999, 211-215).

 4T) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where 8<p is the angle between the tangential lines QY and QY' and also between
 the corresponding perpendicular lines PC at P, and QC at Q, which intersect a C.
 Hence, PC = QC — p, the curvature radius of the arc PQ and 8s = pSs. We have

 (Su = FpSt (11)

 where Fj is the tangential component of the force. Applying the expression for this

 component in terms of the radius of curvature p,

 which corresponds to Eq. 13.

 9 Appendix 3: An extension of Lemma 11

 In this appendix, we discuss Lemma 11 for Prop. 6 and an extension for its application

 to the continuum limit in Prop. 1. In Fig. 9, associated with this lemma, Newton has

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 203

 Finally, substituting this relation for 8<j> in terms of 8v in Eq. 10,

 8p — ——8v (14)

 v

 which implies that the angular momentum I = pv is a constant of the motion.

 To understand why the radius of curvature p does not appear in Eq. 13, we express

 the second-order displacement QR from inertial motion in the form

 where a is the angle between the lines SP and SY. Then, by Prop. 6,

 8s8d>

 QR=T-^- (15)

 2 cos a

 2ßflsina

 Ft = —-rt , (16)

 and

 Sv = FpSt = tana = v8(p— (17)

 8s8(b q

 8t p

 Fig. 9 Newtons diagram for
 Fig. 9 Newtons diagram for
 Lemma 11, with an extended arc
 Lemma 11, with an extended arc
 B'b'A, and lines B'AD', b'Ad'
 B'b'A, and lines B'AD', b'Ad'
 superimposed in dotted lines
 superimposed in dotted lines

 d'
 4 D
 A 4 D

 b>

 is

 c

 J

 I

 ® Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204 M. Nauenberg

 drawn the tangent AD at a point A of an arc A B of a curve and the perpendicular AG

 to this tangent. The line DB is the perpendicular from B intersecting the tangent at

 D, AB is the chord of the arc, and BG is a perpendicular to Aß intersecting AG at G.

 The vertices d, b and g and corresponding lines are similar to those associated with

 D, B and G. If AB is the arc of a circle with radius AJ / 2, then G = g = J and

 DB = --, db = —— (18)

 AB2 Ab2

 AG Ag

 For a general arc A B, in the limit that B and b both approach A, BG and bg intersect

 at J, where AJ/2 is the radius of curvature of the arc at A.

 In the absence of the tangent line AD, as is the case in Prop. 1, Newton's proof is

 readily generalized by assuming that A is a point approximately in the middle of an
 arc B'AB and b'Ab. Let AD' = AB be the extension of the chord AB' and Ad' the

 corresponding extension of the chord Ab'. Then, if B'AB is the arc of a circle,

 D'B = 2~, d'b = 2^, (19)

 AG Ag

 Likewise, for a general arc B'AB the proof is the same as the previous one.

 References

 Centuurus 31: 207-221.

 67: 553-593.

 Aiton, Eric. 1989. Polygons and parabolas: Some problems concerning the dynamics of planetary orbits.

 Arthur, Richard T.W. 2013. Leibniz's syncategorematic infinitesimals. Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 Blay, Michel. 2001. Force, continuity, and the mathematization of motion in the seventeenth century. In
 Isaac's Newton's natural philosophy, ed. Jed Z. Buchwald, and I. Bernard Cohen, 225-248. Cambridge,
 MA: The MIT Press.

 Brackenbridge, J. Bruce. 1995. The Key to Newton's Dynamics with and English translation from the Latin

 of the first three sections of the 1687 edition of the Principia, by Mary Ann Rossi.

 Brackenridge, J. Bruce, Nauenberg, Michael. 2002. Curvature in Newton's dynamics. In Cambridge Com

 panion to Newton, ed. I. Bernard Cohen, and George E. Smith, 85-137. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer

 Bernard Cohen, I. 1971. Introduction to Newton's Principia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

 Bertoloni Meli, Domenico. 1993. Equivalence and priority: Newton v.r. Leibniz. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 de Gant, Francois. 1995. Force and Geometry in Newton's Principia, translated by C. Wilson. Princeton:

 sity Press.

 Princeton Univ. Press.

 Guicciardini, Niccolo. 1999. Reading the Principia. The debate on Newton's mathematical methods for

 natural philosophy from 1687 to 1726. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Gunther, R.T. 1930. Early Science in Oxford (Oxford University Press, Oxford 193) vol VI, p. 265; T. Birch

 The History of the Royal Society of London (Royal Society, London, 1756-1757), pp. 91-92.

 Herivel, John. 1965. The background to Newton's Principia. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Huygens, Christiaan. 1929. De Vi Centrifuga, in Ouvres Complètes de Christiaan Huygens XVI, The Hague,

 Nauenberg, Michael. 1994a. Hooke, orbital motion and Newton's Principia. American Journal of Physics

 Nauenberg, Michael. 1994b. Newton's early computational methods for dynamics. Archive for the History

 of Exact Sciences 46: 221-252.

 pp. 253-301.

 62: 331-350.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Orbital motion and force in Newton's Principia 205

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2000. Newton's Portsmouth perturbation method and its application to Lunar motion.
 In The foundation of newtonian scholarship, ed. R. Dalitz, and M. Nauenberg. Singapore: World
 Scientific.

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2003. Kepler's area law in the Principia: Filling in some details in Newton's proof of

 Proposition 1. Historia Mathematica 30: 441-456.

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2005a. Robert Hooke's seminal contribution to orbital dynamics. Physics in Perspec

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2005b. Curvature in orbital dynamics. American Journal of Physics 73: 340-348.

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2010. The early application of the calculus to the inverse square force problem. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 64: 269-300.

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2011. Proposition 10, Book 2, in the Principia, revisited. Archive for History of Exact

 tive 7: 4-34.

 Sciences 65: 567-587.

 Physics 80: 931-933.

 Nauenberg, Michael. 2012. Comment on "Is Newton's second law really Newton's". American Journal of

 Newton, Isaac. 1960. The correspondence of Isaac Newton, vol. II, 1676-1687, ed. H.W. Turnbull. Cam

 bridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

 Newton, Isaac. 1969. The mathematical papers of Isaac Newton, Vol. 3, ed. D.T. Whiteside.

 Newton, Isaac. 1974. The mathematical papers of Isaac Newton, Vol. 6, ed. D.T. Whiteside.

 Newton, Isaac. 1981. The mathematical papers of Isaac Newton, Vol. 8, ed. D.T. Whiteside.

 Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

 Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

 Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

 Newton, Isaac. 1999. Principia, third edition. A new translation by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman
 with a Guide to Newton's Principia by I. Bernard'Cohen. University of California Press, Berkeley.

 Pourciau, Bruce. 2004. The importance of being equivalent: Newton's two models of one-body motion.

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 58: 283-321.

 Pugliese, P. 1989. Robert Hooke and the dynamics of motion in a curved path. In Robert Hooke: New

 studies, ed. M. Hunter, and S. Schaffer. Woodbridge: Boydell Press.

 Westfall, Richard S. 1980. Never at rest: A biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge

 University Press.

 "ö Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

