 

 

 

 

Poncelet's porism: a long story of renewed discoveries, I
Author(s): Andrea Del Centina
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 1 (January 2016), pp. 1-122
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913467
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:12 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913467?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2016) 70:1-122
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-015-0163-y

 CrossMark

 Poncelet's porism: a long story of renewed discoveries, I

 Andrea Del Centina1

 Received: 26 September 2014 / Published online: 26 August 2015
 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract In 1813, J.-V. Poncelet discovered that if there exists a polygon of n-sides,
 which is inscribed in a given conic and circumscribed about another conic, then infi

 nitely many such polygons exist. This theorem became known as Poncelet's porism,
 and the related polygons were called Poncelet's polygons. In this article, we trace the

 history of the research about the existence of such polygons, from the "prehistorical"

 work of W. Chappie, of the middle of the eighteenth century, to the modern approach

 of P. Griffiths in the late 1970s, and beyond. For reasons of space, the article has been

 divided into two parts, the second of which will appear in the next issue of this journal.

 Contents

 General introduction 2

 Introduction to part I 4
 1 The prehistory: from Chappie to Steiner 5
 2 The theorems and methods of Poncelet 20

 3 Jacobi and the use of the elliptic functions 33
 4 Trudi: the forgotten work 42
 5 Cayley's explicit conditions 52
 6 An algebraic approach through invariants 64
 7 Other contributions from 1850 to 1875 71

 To all my teachers, friends and colleagues.

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 S Andrea Del Centina

 a.delcentina@unife.it

 1 Dipartimento di Matematica, Università di Ferrara, Via Machiavelli 45, 44100 Ferrara, Italy

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 2 A. Del Centina

 8 (2, 2)-Correspondences and closure problems 83
 9 The theorems of Darboux 91

 lOPoncelet polygons in Halphen's treatise 102
 References 118

 General introduction

 In 1822, Jean-Victor Poncelet published the Traité sur les propriétés projectives des

 figures. In this fundamental work, he gave a synthetic geometric proof of the following

 theorem, which became known as Poncelet's closure theorem,1 or Poncelet's porism2:

 let two smooth (real) conics be given in the plane, if there exists a polygon of η sides,
 which is inscribed in one conic and circumscribed about the other, then there are

 infinitely many such polygons, and every point of the first conic is vertex of one of
 them (Poncelet 1822, sections 565-567) (Fig. la, b).

 This theorem, which undoubtedly is one of the most important and beautiful theo

 rems of projective geometry, was discovered by Poncelet in 1813 during his captivity

 in Russia as a prisoner of war.

 Any polygon inscribed in C and circumscribed about D is called Poncelet's
 polygon (related to C and D), and sometimes inter-scribed polygon, or even in-and
 circumscribed polygon (to C and D).

 Poncelet proved the theorem as a corollary of a more general one, to which we refer
 as Poncelet's general theorem and that can be stated as follows: letC, D\, D2,Dn
 be smooth conics from a pencil, if there exists a polygon of η sides whose vertices

 lie on C, and each side is tangent to one of the others D\, £>2, · · · » Dn, then infinitely

 The proofs that Poncelet gave of his theorems were heavily based on the unproved

 "principle of continuity," and for this he was criticized by some contemporaries, and

 many such polygons exist.

 especially by Cauchy.

 Six years after the publication of the Traité, Jacobi recognized the existence of a

 relation between these theorems and the elliptic function "amplitude." In his elegant

 paper (Jacobi 1828), he gave a new proof of the theorem, in the "particular" case of

 two circles lying within each other, by applying some recursion formulae that arise in

 the iterated addition of a constant to an elliptic integral of the first kind.

 Numerous mathematicians have been inspired to further studies in order to extend

 Jacobi's method to conics and to find the conditions on two conics C and D allowing the

 existence of a polygon, of a given number of sides, inter-scribed to them. At the same

 time, since the problem was originally an algebraic one (indeed, conics are algebraic

 curves, and the conditions of intersection and tangency are algebraic conditions too),

 some geometers considered Jacobi's transcendental solution somehow unsatisfactory

 and looked for a purely algebraic-geometric approach to the problem.

 1 From the German word Schliessungstheorem see Hurwitz (1879), also Dilgeldey (1903, p. 46).

 2 From the Greek word πορίσμον. a proposition affirming the possibility of finding the conditions under

 which a certain problem becomes indeterminate or capable of infinite solutions. See for instance (Cayley
 1853b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 1 Poncelet's closure theorem, a for η = 5, and b for η = 7

 These themes, especially until the last decade of the nineteenth century, produced

 a huge literature concerning variants, alternative proofs and generalizations of the
 Poncelet theorem. The major works of this period are due to Nicola Trudi, Arthur
 Cayley, George Salmon, Adolf Hurwitz, Gaston Darboux and George H. Halphen.

 Around 1920, two new important contributions appeared. In 1919, Fran-cesco Ger

 baldi applied what he called Halphen's continued fractions, in order to get the bidegree
 of the covariant whose vanishing guarantees the existence of an inter-scribed n-gon
 (Gerbaldi 1919), and 2 years later, Henry Lebesgue gave an elegant geometrical proof
 of the general Poncelet theorem and a re-interpretation of Cayley's result (Lebesgue
 1921).

 Poncelet's porism, I

 3

 P3

 P'

 P*.

 (a) (b)
 (b)
 (a)

 Pi

 Pi

 After the 1920s, Poncelet's theorem seemed less appealing, and it almost fell into
 oblivion. Only a few isolated papers on the subject were published in the following

 50 years, and, with the exception of Todd (1948), they were either not very relevant or

 considered Poncelet's problem only for circles. It was only in the late 1970s that Phillip
 Griffiths and Joseph Harris, with their papers (1977, 1978a), renewed the interest of
 mathematicians (and physicists) in Poncelet polygons and related questions.3 Then
 in the nineties, W. Barth and J. Michel presented in a modern algebraic-geometric
 setting some result of Halphen and Gerbaldi (Barth and Michel 1993).

 Over the years, several historical contributions on the subject have been published.

 We mention here only those we believe to be of historical relevance—others will be
 quoted in the text. (Loria 1889a), a detailed report on the papers that were published

 on this subject after (Jacobi 1828) until the last decade of the nineteenth century; (Bos

 et al. 1987), which extensively discusses the works of Poncelet, Jacobi and Griffiths
 Harris; (Flatto 2009), the first monograph devoted to Poncelet's theorem; (Dragovic
 2011), which presents, in a modern setting, some of the major works on the subject,
 and explains the mechanical significance of the Poncelet closure theorem.4

 3 The trajectory of a free particle [called billiard, see Birkhoff (1927)], which moves along a straight line
 inside an ellipse and reflects at the boundary according to the law for a light ray, is tangent to a confocal
 conic (Sinai 1976).

 4 The book offers an excellent insight into the applications of Poncelet's closure theorem and its gener
 alizations, to the theory of integrable system, billiard dynamics, PDEs and statistical mechanics, with an

 extended bibliography. Moreover, chapter four is a very good summary of such geometrical topics as pencils
 of conics, polarity, invariants of pairs of conics, duality, etc.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4

 A. Del Centina

 Leibniz, in the first page of Historia et origo calculi differentialis, wrote:

 Utilissimum est cognosci veras inventionum memorabilium origines, presertim

 earum non casu, sed meditandi innotuere. Id enim non eo tantum prodest, ut

 historia literaria suum cuique tribuat et alii ad pares laudes invitentur, sed etiam ut

 augeatur ars inveniendi, cognita methodo illustribus exemplis [It is most valuable

 to know the true origins of memorable inventions, particularly of those revealed

 not by chance, but through the force of reasoning. Its use is not just that History

 may give everyone his due and that others may look forward to similar praise,

 but also that the art of discovery be promoted and its method known through

 illustrious examples.5] (Leibniz 1846).

 This work aims at giving a thorough historical account of these studies, spanning

 two centuries before the true nature and all facets of the problem were unveiled, on

 the occasion of the bicentennial jubilee of Poncelet's famous theorem.6

 For reasons of space, the article, which has sixteen sections, has been divided into

 two parts. Part I, sections 1-10, deals with the history of the research developed on the

 subject until the end of the nineteenth century ; Part II, sections 1-6, takes into account

 those developed in the twentieth century. For the convenience of the reader, each part

 has been equipped with its own list of references.

 Part II will be published in the next issue of this journal.

 Introduction to part I

 The first section of Part I is devoted to the "prehistory," i.e., to the studies relating to

 the existence of triangles, and other polygons of a small number of sides, inter-scribed

 to two circles, carried out from the middle of the seventeenth century until about 1822.

 We count contributions by William Chappie, John Landen, Leonhard Euler, Nicolas
 Fuss, Simon A.J. Lhuilier and Jakob Steiner.

 In the second section, we present the theorems of Poncelet and the proofs he gave.

 His methods were those proper of the school of Monge, but that Poncelet perfected,

 by formalizing the method of central projection and introducing some new concepts

 and tools, such as the controversial "principle of continuity." This, roughly speaking,

 can be stated as follows: A projective property that holds for a particular position of

 the figures involved holds true for any position of the figures, even if some of them

 disappear becoming imaginary. This principle allowed him to prove the theorems for

 circles and then pass to conics by a central projection.

 Section three is devoted to illustrating the proof of the closure theorem for two

 circles, one lying inside the other, that Jacobi gave by means of the elliptic function

 "amplitude" (Jacobi 1828), and gives a glimpse of the "elliptic nature" of the problem.

 Jacobi ended his paper by saying that it would be of great interest to make similar

 considerations directly for a system of two conics, so avoiding the use of the principle

 of continuity, but he never returned to this subject.

 5 For the last sentence we have adopted the translation due to André Weil (Weil 1980, p. 226).

 6 In the same occasion (Dragovic and Radnovic 2014) offers the current state of the art on billiard dynamics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 5

 His program was carried out by Trudi and, independently, by Cayley 25 years later.

 The work of Trudi is presented in the fourth section. In his main memoir (1853), he

 used the algebraicity of the complete integral of Euler's differential equation, and the

 addition theorem for elliptic integrals of the first kind, to prove the closure theorem.

 Through his method, the role that symmetric (2, 2)-correspondences will play in clo

 sure problems can be seen to emerge. Unfortunately, Trudi's paper remained almost

 unknown outside the Kingdom of Naples.

 Section five is mainly devoted to the explicit conditions that allow the existence of an

 inter-scribed n-gon to two conics, first found by Cayley in ( 1853b), and further detailed

 in (1861), by using Abel's addition theorem. His method revealed, in the form of the

 "Cayley cubic" y2 — □(*) = 0 (□(*) is the discriminant of the pencil generated by

 the two conics), the existence of an elliptic curve closely connected with the problem.

 Section six is dedicated to Salmon's algebraic approach, developed in his work

 (1857), that uses the projective invariants of a pair of conics.

 In the third quarter of the nineteenth century, many papers were published concern

 ing new proofs of the Poncelet theorem and its generalizations, to curves of higher

 degree or to quadrics surfaces in space. We illustrate this literature in section seven,
 remarking that some of these works, such as (Weyr 1870) and (Darboux 1870a,b,

 1873a,b), strongly inspired mathematicians and physicists many decades later.

 Around the 1870, the deep connection between Poncelet's closure theorem and

 symmetric (2, 2)-correspondences emerged clearly. This aspect of the story, which

 reached its height in Hurwitz (1879), is discussed in section eight.

 In section nine, we present, in some detail, the work of Darboux, who devoted a

 large part of his mathematical studies to questions connected with Poncelet polygons.

 The new system of plane coordinates that Darboux introduced, now called "Darboux

 coordinates," and the symmetric (2, 2)-correspondences were the main tools that he

 used for developing the theory.

 In 1888, the second volume of Halphen's treatise on elliptic functions was published.

 In it, he applied the theory developed in the first volume in terms of the Weierstrass

 ρ and σ functions, to several questions of geometry, mechanics and geodesy. Chapter

 ten of the book was expressly devoted to the Poncelet polygons, but other results on

 the same subject were inserted in chapters nine and fourteen. In section ten of the

 present article, we illustrate the content of these three chapters and discuss, at some

 length, what he called the "elliptic representations of point of the plane," and his use

 of the development in continued fractions of X a polynomial of degree 3 or 4, to

 provide a new proof of Poncelet's theorem.

 1 The prehistory: from Chappie to Steiner

 Properties of triangles, which are inscribed in, or circumscribed about, a given circle,

 have been known since the Hellenistic period. For instance, it was known how to

 express the area of the inscribed triangle in terms of its sides and the radius and that

 among all the inscribed triangles the equilateral has maximal area. It was also known

 that given two concentric circles, of radii r, R with r < R, a triangle inscribed in the

 larger and circumscribed about the smaller exists, only if r = R/2, and that, in this

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 6

 A. Del Centina

 case, all the (infinitely many) triangles that can be inter-scribed to the two circles are

 equilateral. Similar results were also known for other regular polygons.

 In this section, we present some results on triangles, and other polygons, inscribed in
 one circle and circumscribed about another eccentric to the first, that were discovered

 from about the middle of the eighteenth century until few years after the publication
 of Poncelet's treatise.

 1.1 Chappie

 It seems Chappie was the first to study the problem of the existence of inter-scribed

 polygons, specifically triangles, to two non-concentric circles.7 His essay (1746) starts
 as follows:

 The following enquiry into the properties of triangles inscrib'd in, and circum

 scrib'd about given circles, has let me to the discovery of some things relating

 to them, which I presume have not been hitherto taken notice of, having not

 met with them in any author; though an ingenious correspondent of mine, in the

 isle of Scilly, to whom I communicated some of the propositions herein after

 demonstrated, informs me that he had begun to consider it some years ago, but

 did not go thro' with it; however I must acknowledge that a query of his to me,

 relating thereto, gave me the first hint, and induc'd to pursue the subject with

 more attention, than perhaps otherwise I should have done.

 In his paper, which probably remained unknown to professional mathematicians,

 Chappie stated that if there exists a triangle which is inscribed in one circle C of radius

 R and is circumscribed about another circle c of radius r (lying inside the first), then

 the distance a between the centers of the circles must satisfy the equation

 a2 — R2 — 2rR. (1.1)

 This formula is sometimes called "Chappie's formula."

 J.S. Mackay called attention on Chappie's essay only in 1887, but in his historical

 note (Mackay 1887) he gave just a partial transcription of it without commenting.8

 To illustrate the work of Chappie, whose arguments are often confused and whose

 logic is very poor, even for the standard of his time, is not easy especially when trying

 to keep as faithful as possible to his thought.

 7 From the obituary published in the Exeter Flying Post we learn that William Chappie (1718-1781), who

 served for 40 years as Secretary of the Devon and Exeter Hospital, was an enthusiastic amateur of mathemat

 ics who studied John Ward's, The Young Mathematician's Guide.VBeing a Plain and Easy/introduction/to

 the/Mathematicks/in five Parts, whose fourth edition appeared in London in 1724. Chappie was capable
 of using fluxions and contributed several articles to the English periodicals the Gentlemen's Magazine,
 Miscellanea Curiosa Mathematica and Ladies ' Diary.

 8 Chappie was quoted in Chappie (1901, pp. 552-553) and in Dingeldey (1903, p. 47) but not in Kôtter
 (1901), whose sections 8-11 of chap. XVIII were devoted to the history of the Poncelet closure theorem. Let

 us remark that Chappie's paper also escaped to Gino Loria (see Loria 1889a,b, 1896). To our knowledge,
 the work of Chappie has been discussed in some depth only in Bos et al. (1987).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 7

 Chappie considered two (real) circles one lying inside the other. He first noticed

 (see his propositions I and II) that, if there exists an inter-scribed triangle having area

 A and whose sides have length x,y,z, one must have

 A = ±±l±A = 'Ji, (1.2)

 2 4 R

 from which he deduced

 2rR= XyZ · (1.3)

 * + y + z

 Chappie recalled (see his proposition III) that if the two given circles are concentric,

 then an inter-scribed triangle exists only if 2r = R, and, in this case, it is always
 equilateral because—he observed—the circumcenter and incenter must coincide. He

 also remarked that the equilateral triangles have largest area among those inscribed in

 the exterior circle. Moreover, Chappie asserted (see his proposition IV, but the proof

 is very muddled) that, if the two circles are not concentric, then they may admit an

 inter-scribed triangle only if 2r < R.

 Next Chappie stated two propositions:

 (V) (If there exists an inter-scribed triangle, then) "An infinite number of trian

 gles may be drawn, which shall inscribe and circumscribe the same two circles,

 provided their diameters, with respect to each other, be limited, as in the two last

 propositions,"

 (VI) "The nearest distance of the peripheries of the two given circles, or, which

 amount the same, the distance of their centers, in order to render it possible to inscribe

 and circumscribe triangles, is fixed, and will be always the same."

 To prove (V), Chappie argued as follows. From ( 1.3), it is plain that, if χ, y and ζ are

 required to be found from the given r, R, the question is capable of innumerable solu

 tions. In fact, he remarked one side, at least, of the inter-scribed triangle can be chosen

 at pleasure, provided that it does not exceed the longest segment that can be drawn

 within the larger circle and tangent to the smaller circle inside. Hence, he continued,

 if the mutual position of the two circles is fixed so that a triangle may be inter-scribed

 to them, innumerable triangles may be inscribed and circumscribed to the same two

 circles (1746, p. 120). Let us notice that Chappie missed one more relation which the

 data R,r,x,y, ζ must satisfy when an inter-scribed triangle exists, the one derived
 from Heron's formula A2 = p(p - x)(p - y)(p - z), being ρ the half perimeter of

 the triangle.

 To show (VI), Chappie proceeded in a very complicated way, but his reasoning

 was essentially as follows. He considered the two circles positioned so that an inter

 scribed triangle exists and supposed that a is not fixed, i.e., that the inner circle can

 move freely while still allowing an inter-scribed triangle. He called AB the chord of

 the outside circle parallel to the direction of the motion and tangent to the inner circle,

 drew an inter-scribed triangle with this chord as one of its sides (so Chappie assumed

 the closure theorem, and accordingly his argument was circular), and denoted by Ε the

 third vertex of this triangle (Fig. 2a). He observed that moving the inner circle, from

 the initial position along the fixed direction AB, the vertex Ε also moves and leaves

 the outside circle, because the altitude of Ε decreases moving from the periphery of

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a)
 (a) (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 2 a Let Α Ε Β be an inter-scribed triangle to two circles one inside the other. Chappie observed that
 moving the inner circle along the chord A Β the vertex Ε leaves the outside circle, b Chappie's use of
 isosceles triangles to prove formula (1.1)

 the chord toward the middle. So, concluded Chappie, the inner circle cannot move
 while still allowing an inter-scribed triangle, unless a remains the same.

 Chappie used propositions (V) and (VI) (i.e., his unproved closure theorem) to

 derive the formula (1.1). For, he first stated the following proposition

 (VII) "Of the innumerable triangles that may be inscrib 'd and circumscrib 'd in and

 about two given (eccentric) circles, to must of course isoscelar, the vertexes of which

 will be in the common diameter of those circles, which will cut their bases at right
 angles; now the content of that isoscelar triangles which hath the least base, and the

 greatest altitude, will be the greatest, and that of the other the least of all the triangles

 that can be inscribed and circumscrib'd in the given circles."

 He proved the proposition through a number of geometrical lemmas that we will

 not consider here. At the end of his proof, he observed:"the proposition is every way
 demonstrated; and tho' the method herein taken seems a little tedious and intricate,

 it is perhaps more concise and less troublesome than any which Fluxions would have

 afforded us." Finally (see pp. 123-124), by using the existence of the isosceles triangles
 he proved formula (1.1). Chappie argued as follows. He put (see Fig. 2b) AF = x,
 FC = y, hence G F - 2R — χ and y — *J2R — χ; then, since sin LCAF — —

 ,y , with a simple computation he found χ = R + r + \/R2 — 2Rr, and this,

 8

 A. Del Centina

 A
 A

 *Jx2+y2
 being a = χ — R — r, is equivalent to formula (1.1).

 There is no doubt that, despite the many failures in his proofs and logic, Chappie

 grasped some fundamental aspects of the problem.

 In order to draw attention to his paper, Chappie proposed to prove formula (1.1) as

 "prize question" in the Ladies' Diary for the year 1746.

 Robert Heath, editor of the journal, answered somewhat unsatisfactorily the year
 following (see The mathematical Questions 1817, pp. 393-395). In his answer, Heath

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 9

 H
 H

 (a)
 (a)

 G

 H
 H

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 3 The first case of Landen's question: the circle δ falls within ABC. a The circle δ is inside the circle
 Δ, and b the circle δ in outside the circle Δ

 also mentioned the solution he had received from J. Landen, a non-professional mathe

 matician, that a few years later would be tackling the problem from a new point of view.

 1.2 Landen

 Landen9 devoted Part I of his Mathematical Lucubrations to the following question
 (Landen 1755, p. I)10:

 The two circles ABH and mno whose centers are D and d, respectively, being given

 in magnitude and position; let any given chord AB in the circle ABH touch the circle

 mno at o; and, from the extremities of that chord, let two other tangents be drawn to

 the circle mno, touching it at m and n, and intersecting each other at C: It is proposed
 to find the radius AE of the circle ABG circumscribing the triangle ABC (see Figs. 3a,
 b, 4a, b).

 In the following, it is convenient to denote the circles mno, ABH and ABG, respec

 tively, δ, A and Γ.

 9 Although considered a mathematician of high rank, John Landen (1719-1790) was never a professional
 one. He began contributing to the Miscellanea Curiosa and to the mathematical problem section of the
 Ladies ' Diary from 1744. In 1754, he published the first of his eight papers in the Philosophical Transactions,
 and the following year he published the Mathematical Lucubrations. His name is often associated with an

 important transformation giving a relation between certain Eulerian integrals.

 10 This work of Landen, which was summarized in Mackay (1887), is also quoted in Dingeldey (1903, p.
 47) but not in Loria (1889a, b, 1896), Cantor (1901), Kôtter (1901) and Bos et al. (1987).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 4 a The second case of Landen's question: the circle S falls without ABC and ο falls between A and
 B. b The third case: the circle δ falls without ABC but ο does not fall between A and Β

 10

 A. Del Centina

 H
 H

 G'" H
 G

 (a) (b)
 (a)
 (b)

 Landen denoted by R and r the radii of Δ and <5, respectively, and called d the
 distance between their centers. He considered the axis I of the given chord and called

 F the intersection of AB with /. Moreover, he drew the parallel to AB passing through

 d and denoted ρ its intersection with /. He also denoted Ε the center of the circle Γ
 circumscribing the triangle ABC and put b — AF, χ — AE. Always considering δ as
 standing upon AB (see the figures), he found the quotes of D above F, and above p,
 to be, respectively, ±VR2 — b2, and ±VR2 — b2 — r2. Then, he got

 dp = -Jd2 — R2 + b2 — r2 ± 2ryJR2 — tè,

 Ao = b + d2 — R2 + b2 — r2 ± 2rVR2 — b

 Bo = b — yj'd2 — R2 + b2 — r2 ± 2r\lR2 — b'2.

 At this point, Landen wrote: "To proceed with perspicuity, it will convenient to
 consider distinctly the different cases of the circle mno falling within or without the
 triangle (ABC)," namely

 1. S falls within the triangle ABC (Fig. 3a, b),
 2. δ falls without ABC but ο falls between A and Β (Fig. 4a),
 3. δ falls without ABC and ο does not fall between A and Β (Fig. 4b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 11

 Case 1. Landen drew the segment AG, G being the point above AB where the line

 FH intersects Δ, and noticed that the triangles AFG and dmC are similar, in fact they

 are both right and AG F = mCd. Therefore, ±V*2 — b2 and χ ± y/x2 — b2 being

 the quotes of Ε and G above F, respectively, the proportion

 b : χ ± Vx2 — b2 = r : Cm,

 holds true, and so Cm = Cn = £ί±ί^!ΞΕ Then,

 AC = b + ^d2 - R2 + b2 - r2 +rX ±r^X^-^,

 BC = b - Jd2 - R2 + b2 - r2 ±2rJ R2^b2 + rX ±ry/X-—,

 b

 b

 b in this case being always greater than oF.11

 The perimeter of the triangle ABC is 4b + 2rx±2r^x2~Ji ; hence, its area Λ is equal

 to 2br + prom the known formula

 Λ = -(AC χ BC) sin AC Β

 2

 it follows that

 AC χ BC — 4rx Λ ,

 2r2x2 ± 2r2xVx2 - b2

 b

 then, by equating this value with that obtaining multiplying the values of AC and BC

 above, and solving with respect to x, Landen got

 R2-d2T 2rjR2 - b2 b2r

 χ = h

 4r R2-d2^ 2r^/R2 - b2

 Springe;

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From this expression is clear that, if d2 = R2 — 2Rr, whatever b may be, one has

 χ = R.

 similarly and he found that

 In the other two cases, that here for brevity we omit to discuss, Landen proceeded

 ±2rVR2 -b2 +d2 - R2 b2r

 χ = +

 ±2rV R2 — b2 + d2 — R2

 Again he observed that if d2 = R2 + 2rR, then, whatever b may be, is χ = R.

 11 In all cases, the proper sign of <JR2· — b2 is + or —, according if the center D is on the same, or on the

 contrary, side of AB with the center d\ and the proper sign of -Jx1 - b2 is + or —, according if the center

 Ε is on the same, or on the contrary, side of AB with the center d (Landen 1755, p. 5). See Figs. 3, and 4.

 12

 A. Del Centina

 Finally, as a corollary, he stated (Landen 1755, p. 5):
 It follows from what has been said that, d being equal to ^ R2 — 2rR or
 \/R2 + 2r R, whatever b may be, Ε will fall in D, and the circle circumscribing the

 triangle always coincides with the given circle ABH; a thing very remarable!

 It seems to us that all this amounts to the following: given the two circles Δ and

 8, if the distance d between their centers is given by R~ — 2rR (or by R2 + 2rR

 in the second and third case), then there exists a triangle ABC which is at the same

 time inscribed in Δ and circumscribed about 8, and moreover, the triangle can be

 constructed starting from any point A on Δ, the condition being independent of 2b,

 i.e., the length of the chord AB.

 This means that, not only condition (1.1) is sufficient for the existence of an inter

 scribed triangle to the two circles, but also that, in this case, the closure theorem is

 proved since the chord AB can be arbitrarily chosen.

 Landen was aware of this, although he did not explicitly state it at this point. On the

 other hand, as we have noticed at the end of the previous subsection, Landen had been

 aware since 1747 that (1.1) represents a necessary condition, and he had certainly read

 Chappie's (1746), so he knew that the existence of an inter-scribed triangle implies the

 existence of infinitely many others. This is well shown by the sequel of his memoir.

 After having stated the corollary, Landen wrote:

 For this to happen and the circle mno fall within the triangle, it is obvious R

 must be no less than 2r, for, if it be, -JR2 — 2rR, the quantity to which d ought

 to be equal, will be imaginary.

 But, that the circle falling without the triangle, the same thing may happen though

 R be less than 2r, so that R be greater than r/4. The reason why R, in this case,

 must be greater than r/4 appears from this consideration. The distance of the

 center d from that point in the periphery ABH which is the farthest from the

 center is d + R — VR2 — 2rR + R, whose distance must be greater than r\

 otherwise, the circle ABH will fall entirely within the circle mno, and no chord in

 that can be tangent to this. Therefore, since V/?2 — 2 rR + R must be greater than

 r, R2 — 2 rR must be greater than r — R, R2 +2rR greater than r2 —2r R + R2,

 Consequently, since r must be less than 4R, d must be less than V/?2 — 2rR, or

 and R greater than r/4.

 its equal 3 R.

 Here, Landen observed that, by a orthographic projection, i.e., a affine parallel

 projection, two circles—in a same plane—and their tangents can be mapped into two

 similar ellipses, i.e., having the same eccentricity, and their tangents (Landen 1755, p.

 6). Then, he stated the following (see Fig. 5a, b):

 If within or without any ellipsis whose transverse axis is 7',12 a second concentric

 similar ellipsis be described with its transverse axis t, in the same direction with T, and

 a third ellipsis be described, similar to the other two, with its center any where in the

 •τΊ *2 ι ο

 periphery of the second ellipsis, and having its transverse axis equal to [τ =] 2τ >

 12 For "transverse axis" he meant the "half of the major axis".

 13 This condition translates formula (1.1) in the present case, where t stands for a, Τ for R, and τ for r

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 13

 Fig. 5 a Landen observed that if there exists an inter-scribed triangle to the circles Δ and S, then there
 exist such triangles for all circles δ', δ",... whose centers have distance from the center of Δ equal to the
 distance of the center of δ. b By using orthographic projection, Landen extended the property illustrated in
 (a) to the case of concentric similar ellipsis

 and parallel to the transverse axes of the other ellipses; any tangent being drawn to

 this third ellipsis and continued both ways till it intersects the periphery of the first

 ellipsis in two points, and two other tangents being drawn to the same third ellipsis
 from those points of intersection, the locus where these last tangents continued to
 intersect each other will always be in the periphery of the first ellipsis.

 The drawing of the tangents in that manner will be impossible unless t be less than

 3T.

 It is worthy underlining that Landen wrote: "any tangent being drawn to this third

 ellipsis and continued both ways till it intersects the periphery of the first ellipsis in

 two points, and two other tangents being drawn to the same third ellipsis from those

 points of intersection, the locus where these last tangents continued to intersect each
 other will always be in the periphery of the first ellipsis," clearly this is the closure

 theorem for triangles and circles, or ellipses, in the previous configurations.

 Landen concluded the first part of his essay by saying: "Other conclusions of a like

 nature may be drawn from what is done above and a consideration of other projections,

 but I have no inclination to pursue the speculation farther." The projective methods of

 the school of Monge were still far in the future; nevertheless, these words show how

 Landen had perception of the projective nature of the question.

 We can safely state that Landen's work, although unfortunately it remained
 unknown outside England, contained in germ some ideas that Poncelet was to develop

 60 years later.

 1.3 Euler

 Some nineteenth-century authors, first of all Steiner (see below), attributed formula
 (1.1) to Leonhard Euler. In his paper (1765), which can be considered a milestone
 in triangle geometry, he studied the positions and mutual distances of barycenter,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 14

 A. Del Centina

 orthocenter, incenter and circumcenter.14 In particular, he found that if a triangle,

 with side lengths x, y, z, is inter-scribed to two circles, one inside the other, then the

 distance a between their centers satisfies the following equation:

 „2 = - g . (1.4)

 16 A2 x + y + z

 Surprisingly enough in his article, Euler did not investigate the relation between a

 and the radii r, R of the two circles, and in fact this formula does not express a in terms

 of r, R. We notice that one can get formula (1.1) from (1.4), by taking into account
 ( 1.2) and (1.3), which were known to Euler. Nevertheless, we should add that N. Fuss,

 who was certainly well acquainted with Euler's work, did not attribute formula (1.1)

 to him (see below). Moreover, as stressed in Bos et al. (1987, p. 295), formula (1.4) is

 not a formula by which a closure theorem could be detected, since α is a function of

 the sides of the triangle, which depend on it, and not of the radii, which are fixed.

 1.4 Fuss

 Nicolaus Fuss, in his paper (Fuss 1797), studied first several problems concerning

 quadrangles which are inscribed in, or circumscribed about, a given circle. For instance,

 he determined the radius R of the circumscribed circle, and the radius r of the inscribed

 circle, as functions of the length of the sides a, b, c, d of the quadrangle, for which he

 found, respectively:

 1 I (ab + cd)(ac + bd)(ad + be)
 4 V abed

 Vabed

 a + c

 Only at the end of his paper did he consider the following problem (Fuss 1797, section
 30):

 Datis radiis circolorum quadrilatère ABCD inscripti et circumscripti, invenire dis

 tantia centrorum [Find the distance between the centers of the circumscribed circle

 and of the inscribed circle to the quadrangle ABCD].

 To solve the problem Fuss proceeded as follows (see Fig. 6a). He denoted
 2α, 2β, 2γ, 28 the four angles at the vertexes A, B, C, D of the quadrangle. From

 the above formulae for R and r, he got

 rV 1 +2 sin 2a sin2^

 sin 2a sin 2β

 14 In this paper, Euler discovered the nine point circle (i.e., the circle on which lie the three midpoints of

 the sides, the three feet of the altitudes, and the three midpoints of the line segments from each vertex to

 the orthocenter), and the line now referred to as Euler line, to which belong barycenter, orthocenter and
 circumcenter.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 15

 c
 C

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 6 a Fuss' construction for the quadrangle, b Illustration of how Fuss proceeded in order to get a direct

 proof of formula (1.1)

 and, putting m = cos (α + β), and η = cos (α — β), he wrote R in the form

 rV 1 + n2 — m2

 r = —2—2—

 ηΔ — mL

 He called d the distance between the centers Ο and ο and denoted by Τ the inter

 section between the line through ο orthogonal to AB and the line through Ο orthogonal

 to the previous one. He found that

 -—- rV 1 — η2 — r(n2+m2 — 1) rV I + m2 — n2
 TO = , To— = = , d= 7j 5
 η — m ηΔ — nz — mz

 obtained

 and so

 (R2 -d2)2 = 2r2(R2-d2)

 d2 = R2 + r2 ± r^4R2 + r2,

 which clearly generalizes formula (1.1) to the case of quadrangles.

 In the subsequent, final, section, Fuss gave a direct proof of formula (1.1), and for

 this he argued as follows (see Fig. 6b).

 He considered a triangle ABC inscribed in the circle Δ of center Ο and circum
 scribed about the circle 5 of center o, lying inside the first. He observed that the
 line through A and ο meets Δ in a new point D and CB in the point F; moreover,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Taking into account the last formula for R and computing R2 — d2, R2 + d2, he

 16

 A. Del Centina

 Ao and Co bisect BAC and ACB, respectively; the line through D and Ο meets
 Δ in a new point E\ the diameter DE meets perpendicularly in V the side CB
 of the triangle. Then, he let Τ and Ρ be the points of intersection with the diam

 eter Ε D and the side CB of the respective perpendicular through o. He found that

 d2 = R2 — 2R ■ DT + Do2. Moreover, CVD = DBV — π/2, and BED = DCV since

 they belong to the same chord. It follows that the triangles CVD and EBD are similar,
 and so ~DV/CD = ~BD/DE; therefore, (H)xlW = lJVxl)E = 2R· ~DV.
 Clearly, CoD = ZMC + oCA and oCD = oCF + DCF.15 Since oCF = oCA
 and DCF — DCB = DEB = DAB — oAC, is CoD = oCD. It follows that

 Do = CD — BD and Do" = CD χ BD — 2R ■ DV, substituting this last
 value in the above formula for d2, he found d2 = R2 — 2R(DT — DV), and, since
 DT - DV = TV = ~ÔP = r, Fuss finally got d2 = R2 - 2Rr.

 Let us remark that this was the first occurrence of formula ( 1.1 ) in a widely circulated

 journal known to an international mathematical public.

 In a subsequent paper (Fuss 1802), Fuss considered the same question for polygons

 having more than four sides. However, the great difficulties he encountered in dealing

 with the general problem forced him to limit his analysis to polygona symmetrice

 irregularia [symmetrically irregular polygons], i.e., irregular inter-scribed polygons

 that are divided into two equal parts by the line of centers of the circles.

 He let R, r, a be as above, and put ρ R + a, q := R — a and s := pq/r. Then,
 using trigonometric formulae with great skill and a large amount of work, he got the

 following conditions for η = 5, 6,7, 8, respectively:

 p2q2 — r2(p2 + q2) = jq-r
 p2q2 + r2{p2 — q2) VP + i'

 3Λ4 - 2p2q2r2(p2 + q2) - r\p2 - q2),

 j_, 2 , \ n, s Vpip + q)(s - q)
 ±(r - s(p -q)~ 2pq)

 ι , 2 2 2^9(P + 9)(s-p) ,(s-P + q\,2, 2 2x
 ±{s - ρ -q) =±l l(s +p -q),

 Although the results of Fuss were published in a prestigious journal, many mathe
 maticians failed to notice them. In fact, in the first volume of Gergonne's Annales

 15 In (Fuss 1797, p. 124), it is erroneously written oCD = oCE + DCE, and then (in the line below)

 oCE = oCA, DCE = oAC which is clearly false. Since our figure is the same as (Fuss 1797, Fig. 4) we

 may argue that the letter Ε and F were interchanged when printing the paper.

 1.5 Lhuilier

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 p2r-Jq2 - r2 + q2rjp2 - r2 = p2r2 - J(p2 - r2)(q2 - r2).

 Since Fuss was unaware of any closure theorem, he did not realize that his results

 were true in general, i.e., without restriction to symmetrical irregular polygons.

 Poncelet's porism, I

 17

 de mathématiques pures et appliqués for the years 1810-1811, the following two

 questions were proposed:

 I) Un cercle étant donné et un point étant donné arbitrairement sur son plan et dans

 son intérieur, il y a toujours une longueur, et une seule longueur, laquelle étant prise

 pour rayon d'une nouveau cercle ayant pour centre le point donné, il arrivera qu'un

 même triangle pourra être à la fois inscrit au premier des deux cercle, et circonscrit
 au second;

 II) Un cercle étant donné et un point étant donné arbitrairement sur son plan, il y

 a toujours une longueur, et une seule longueur, laquelle étant prise pour rayon d'une

 nouveau cercle ayant pour centre le point donné, il arrivera qu 'un même triangle
 pourra être à la fois circonscrit au premier des deux cercle, et inscrit au second
 (Gergonne 1810, pp. 62-64).

 The two questions can be reformulated as follows:

 /) Given a circle C and a point Ρ inside it, there is exactly one length r such that

 if D is the circle of center Ρ and radius r, there exists a triangle which is inscribed in
 C and circumscribed about D\

 II) Given a circle D and a point P, there is exactly one length R such that if C

 is the circle of center Ρ and radius R, there exists a triangle which is circumscribed
 about D and inscribed in C.

 It seems that the proposer knew the formula (1.1) (in fact it was so), and had noticed

 that, fixed a, there is only one R for any given r, and viceversa.

 These questions were soon solved by Lhuilier16 in his memoir (Lhuilier 1810).17

 From a footnote in the first page of Lhuilier's paper, the editors explain that they had

 known the theorem since 1807. It was communicated to them by Monsieur Mahieu,

 professor of mathematics in Alais, who learned it from Monsieur Maisonneuve, a

 mines engineer.

 In the same footnote, the editors presented the proof given by Maisonneuve and

 that we think worthy enough to be reproduced here below.

 If a denote the distance between the centers and x, y, ζ are the length of the sides

 of the inter-scribed triangle, one has:18

 = (x + y + z)(j + ζ - x)(x + ζ
 2A = r(x + y + ζ),
 ARA = xyz.

 - y)(x + y - ζ),

 16 Simon Antoine Jean Lhuilier, sometime written L'Huilier (1750-1840), Swiss mathematician, professor

 at the University of Geneva and member of several European Academies. He is mainly known for his studies

 in Analysis and for having generalized the Euler formula to planar graphs.

 17 The questions posed by Gergonne, and the solution given by Lhuilier, completely escaped Loria but
 were cited in Lhuilier (1901, p. 151).

 18 Maisonneuve probably deduced this formula from (1.4) and Heron's formula.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 a2 _ (xyz)2 xyz

 (x + y + z)(y + z-x)(x + z-y)(x + y-z) x + y + z'

 on the other side, as well known, the following relations hold true

 18

 A. Del Centina

 From the first two relations, it follows that

 x + y + z

 and also, by equating the square of the third with the first, it follows that

 (x + y + z)(y + ζ - χ)(χ + ζ - y){x + y - ζ)

 (xytf = r2

 Then, taking into account the above expression of a2, from the last two formulae

 immediately follows a2 = R2 — 2rR.

 2

 Lhuilier expressed formula (1.1) in the form Zz = R(R — 2r), being Ζ and ζ

 the centers of the circles. The proof he submitted was quite complicated, but it can

 be seen as a trigonometric translation of Maisonnneve's proof. We will not present it

 here, preferring to insist on Lhuilier's clear perception of the closure theorem.

 After having proved formula (1.1), he wrote:

 La relation entre la distance des centres de deux cercles et les rayons R et r

 de ces cercles, étant telle qu'ill vient d'être dit; si on circonscrit au cercle dont

 le rayon est r un triangle dont un des côtés soit une corde de l'autre cercle, ce

 triangle sera inscrit à ce dernier cercle; et réciproquement, si l'on inscrit au cercle

 dont le rayon est R un triangle dont un des côtés soit tangent à l'autre cercle,

 ce triangle sera circonscrit à ce dernier cercle. Il y a donc un nombre illimité de

 triangles qui peuvent être à la fois inscrits à un cercle et circonscrits à une autre

 cercle. Lorsque les rayons de ce cercles et la disatnce de leurs centres sont liés

 2

 par l'équation Zz = R(R — 2r) [If the relation of the distance between the
 centers of the circles and the radii R and r of these circles is as we have just

 said, then if we circumscribe about the circle of radius r a triangle having a side

 which is a chord of the other circle, this triangle will be inscribed in the last circle

 and vice versa. If we inscribe in the circle of radius R a triangle having a side

 which is tangent to the other circle, this triangle will be circumscribed about

 this last circle. Hence, there are infinitely many triangles which are inscribed

 in a given circle and circumscribed about another if the distance between their

 —2

 centers satisfies the equation Zz = R(R — 2r)].

 So, similarly to Chappie, it was the degree of freedom implicit in the equation (1.1)

 that led Lhuilier to the clear enunciation of the closure theorem for triangles inter

 scribed to two circles, one inside the other. Nevertheless, his proof, based exclusively

 on the above argument, was not complete.

 1.6 Steiner and the attribution to Euler of formula (1.1)

 In the second volume of Crelle's journal, in the section Aufgaben unci Lehrsat-ze,

 Jakob Steiner asked the reader to solve the following problem (Steiner 1827, p. 96):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 19

 3. Aufgabe. Wenn ein gegebenrs (irregulàres)19 Vieleck (n Eck) so beschaffen
 ist, dafs sowohl in als um dasselbe ein Kreis beschrieben werden kann, so soli

 man zwischen des Radien (r, R) der beiden Kreise und dem Abstande (a) ihrer

 Mittelpuncte von einander eine Gleichung finden. (Fiir das Dreieck ist diese

 zuerst von Euler gefundene Gleichung bekanntlich a2 = R2 — 2rR). [If a (irreg

 ular) polygon (n-gon) is given such that a circle can be drawn in and around it, it

 is required to find the equation relating the radii (r, R) of the two circles and the

 distance (a) between their centers. For triangles this equation, that was found

 for the first time by Euler, is a2 = R2 — 2rR)\.20

 Following Steiner, other authors attributed formula (1.1) to Euler; see for instance
 (Jacobi 1828; Loria 1889a, 1896; White 1916).21 It seems that Steiner was not aware
 of Fuss (1797).

 In a subsequent note, Steiner gave, without proofs, the equation that R, r, a must

 satisfy for the existence of an inter-scribed n-gon when η = 4, 5,6, 8, respectively
 (Steiner 1827, p. 289):

 (R2 -a2)2 = 2r2(R2 + a2),

 r(R — a) = (R +a) |V(^ — r + a)(R — r — a) + \/(R — r— a)2/?j ,

 3(R2 - a2)4 = 4r2(R2 + a2)(R2 - a2) + 16r4a2R2,

 j(/?2 + a2) [(/?2 - a2)4 + 4rVi?2] - 8r2a2R2(R2 - a2)}

 x8r2 [(/?2 - a2)2 - r2(R2 + a2)] = [(Λ2 - a2)4 - 4r4a2R2^.

 We do not know how Steiner obtained them, but, since he had Poncelet's treatise

 handy, we may argue that he proved the formulae for symmetrically irregular polygons

 and extended their validity to irregular polygons via Poncelet's theorem.

 The lack of proofs was deplored by Jacobi (1828, p. 376). In this paper, that will

 be discussed in section 3, Jacobi felt compelled to challenge the paternity on behalf

 of Fuss, who had recently died, the results claimed by Steiner. He also affirmed that

 the case η — 7, that omitted by Steiner, was the most difficult to solve, and comparing

 the formulae of the two authors he established their equivalence in all cases except for
 η = 8.22

 19 It is quite probable that Steiner was referring to irregular polygons as "completely irregular polygons,"
 and not to "symmetrically irregular polygons" in the sense of Fuss.

 20 Steiner did not quote any paper by Euler.

 21 No reference to Euler's papers were provided in Jacobi (1828) and White (1916). Loria quoted Novi
 Comm. Ac. Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae, vol. 2 (1749), published in 1750, but, although this volume contains

 two memoirs by Euler, none of them presents results which may lead to formula (1.1).

 22 In fact, Steiner's formula for η = 8 is not correct [see for instance (Dingeldey 1903, p. 47)].

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 20

 A. Del Centina

 2 The theorems and methods of Poncelet

 In 1822, Jean-Victor Poncelet published his Traité sur les propriétés projectives des
 figures (Poncelet 1822).23

 In this treatise, Poncelet adopted a highly synthetical approach and introduced two

 concepts that would be crucial in the setup of his entire book: the ideal chord and

 the principle of continuity (see below). Although Cauchy and Gergonne criticized the

 use of the principle of continuity,24 the treatise was well received by contemporaries,

 and the tools developed therein were adopted for decades in the nineteenth century
 [see (Chasles 1837; Kôtter 1901) and also (Kline 1972, pp. 163-165), (Gray 2007,
 chap. 4)].

 In his extremely rich book, largely conceived between March 1813 and June 1814

 during his captivity as a prisoner of war in Saratov25 Poncelet formulated the follow

 ing theorem that became known as the Poncelet closure theorem (PCT for short) or

 Poncelet's porism (Fig. 7a):

 Theorem PCT Let C and D be two smooth conics in the projective plane, if there
 exists a polygon of η sides which is inscribed in C and circumscribed about D, then

 for every point Ρ € C there is one such polygon having Ρ as one of its vertices.

 Poncelet obtained this theorem as a corollary of a more general result, which we

 will refer to as Poncelet general theorem (PGT for short), that can be formulated as

 follows (Fig. 7b):

 Theorem PGT Let C, D\, Dj, ■. ■, D,,_i be conics from a pencil $. Consider a
 n-gon P, Pi,..., /*„_ ι inscribed in C and having the side Ρ P\ tangent to D\, the side

 P\ P2 tangent to D2 and so on until Pn-2Pn-\ tangent to D„-\. Then, if Ρ move along

 C in such a way the sides Ρ Pi, P\ P2 etc. remain tangent, respectively, to D\, D2 etc.,

 the nth side Ρη-ι Ρ envelops a conic belonging to

 23 A second enlarged edition of this work appeared in two volumes more than 40 years later (Poncelet
 1865-1866).

 24 See Cauchy's report on the paper that Poncelet presented to the Academy in 1820 (Cauchy 1820), also
 reproduced in Poncelet (1822).

 25 Poncelet took part, as Lieutenant of Engineers, in Napoleon's Russian campaign in 1812. After the

 retreat of the French army, following the defeat at Borodino (September 1812), Poncelet was left for dead

 on the battlefield of Krasnoi (November 1812), here he was found by the enemy soldiers. Asa prisoner of

 war, he was forced to march for almost five months until he was imprisoned in Saratov, on the banks of the

 river Volga (Didion 1870). During his captivity, Poncelet wrote seven notebooks, called by him "Cahiers de

 Saratoff," where on the basis of what he had learnt from Carnot and Brianchon at the École polytechnique,

 he developed the projective theory of conic sections. Poncelet wrote the seventh notebook with the intent of

 presenting it to the Academy of Sciences of St. Petersbourg, with the hope, if accepted, of being called to

 Moscow until a peace agreement was reached between France and Russia. The events of 1814 interrupted

 this project. Poncelet based the development of his treatise (Poncelet 1822) on the Cahiers, of which the

 seventh might be regarded as a first attempt at a redaction. After his return to France, Poncelet published
 some of the results he had obtained in Saratov. In particular, in 1820, he presented to the Paris Academy

 the paper Mémoire relatif aux propriétés projective des sections coniques in which, for the first time, he

 presented the "principle of continuity" as a tool for solving difficult problems concerning conics. But it

 was only in 1862 that he published the seven notebooks in their entirety, as a part of the first volume of his

 new treatise Applications d'analyse et de géométrie (Poncelet 1862, vol. 1 ). For a detailed analysis of the
 content of the Cahiers (see Belhoste 1998).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) (b)
 (a) (b)

 Fig. 7 a Poncelet's closure theorem for η = 5. b Poncelet's procedure in order to prove the general theorem

 for circles belonging to a same pencil

 The proof of PGT presented in the Traité was a slight variation of one that he

 had written during his imprisonment, but which was published much later (Poncelet
 1862, sixth Cahier). In both variants, Poncelet first proved the theorem for circles,
 proceeding by induction on n, and then he extended its validity to conics using the
 method of projection (see below). The two proofs differ only in the first step of the
 induction, i.e., in the case of three circles. In fact, in Saratov, Poncelet had proven it

 by an enormous straightforward computation, while in the Traité he proceeded by the

 synthetical method, developing several preliminary geometrical lemmas, and applying
 an ad hoc reasoning, heavily based on the principle of continuity. We will discuss these

 In an article published in 1817, Poncelet announced new methods in geometry. The

 problems that he said were solvable by these methods included the following (Poncelet

 proofs later on.

 1817, p. 154):

 Deux section coniques étant tracées su un même plane, construire un polygone de

 tant de côtés qu'on voudra qui soit, à la fois, inscrit à l'une d'elles et circonscrit à

 l'autre, en ne faisant usage que de la règle seulement [given two conics in traced

 in the same a plane, it is asked to construct a polygon, inscribed in one of them
 and circumscribed about the other, having whatever number of sides making use

 only of the ruler].

 The formulation of the problem does not allude at all to the existence of a closure

 theorem, but rather suggests the existence of such a polygon for any pair of given
 conics. This fact led G. Loria to doubt that Poncelet knew the PCT much before the

 Poncelet's porism, I

 21

 publication of the Traité (Loria 1889a, pp. 9-10).26 For this reason, many historians
 were unaware that Poncelet had achieved the proof of the theorem in 1813.

 It is worthwhile stressing that, although in the Traité Poncelet did not explicitly

 express the link between PCT and the existence of conditional equations, such as

 26 This is curious because, in footnote n.4 Loria quoted the first volume of Applications d'analyse et de
 géométrie, where the general theorem is stated and proved, and on its title page is written: "Sept cahiers
 manuscrits rédigés à Saratoff dans les prisons de Russie (1813-1814)."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 22

 A. Del Centina

 formula (1.1) or those given by Fuss and Steiner, he had been clear about this since

 his imprisonment in Saratov. In fact, in Poncelet (1862, pp. 357-358) he affirmed

 that if a polygon of η sides is inter-scribed to two circles of radii R, r, an equation

 f(R, r, a\ n) = 0, being a the distance between the centers, must necessarily hold.

 2.1 Poncelet's methods

 Poncelet's geometry always concerned the real plane and real space extended with

 the elements at infinity. In this setting, he aimed at deducing properties for systems

 of lines and conics by projectively generalizing properties proved for systems of lines
 and circles.

 With this goal in mind, during his captivity Poncelet developed systematically the

 method of central projection, introduced by Brianchon (1810) and that he based on

 five fundamental principles.

 The first three, which he gave without proof, being already largely accepted by

 geometers, affirm the projective equivalence of a circle and a conic, and the projective

 equivalence of a pencil of parallel lines and a pencil of intersecting lines.

 The last two, which are more delicate, state, respectively: the projective equivalence

 of a system of a conic and a line at finite distance with a system of one circle and the

 line at infinity, and the projective equivalence of a system of two conics with the

 system of two circles [(see Poncelet 1862, vol. 1, p. 122; pp. 287-307; pp. 380-388)
 also (Poncelet 1822, Art.s 109-111; 121)]. Precisely:

 Theorem (4th principle) Let C be a conic and 1 be a line in the real plane at finite

 distance. Then, C and I are projective images of a circle and of the line at infinity.

 Theorem (5th principle). Any pair of conics is the projective image of a pair of
 circles.

 As already remarked, Poncelet considered only real objects in real planes and
 spaces. For this reason, he was able to prove the fourth and fifth principle only for

 certain positions of the figures involved. So, in order to extend their validity for all

 positions of the elements, even when some of them disappear becoming "imaginary,"

 he invoked the principle of continuity.

 Before we discuss Poncelet's proofs of the last two principles, it is useful to recall

 his concept of "ideal chord."
 The concept of "ideal chord"

 In his early studies at the École Polytechnique, Poncelet had already met imaginary
 elements in connection with the intersection of a conic and a line, or the intersection

 of two conics. To take into account these elements, without actually extending the real

 plane with complex points,27 he introduced the concept of "ideal chord."

 Let C be a (real) conic, and let I be a (real) line which intersects C in two points

 P\ and Pi (Fig. 8a). The segment P\ Pi is the chord of C corresponding to I. Let d be

 27 Complex projective geometry entered into the mathematical scene only around the middle of the nine

 teenth century.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 23

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 8 a The real chord Pi P2 of the conic C. b The ideal chord /?| Rn of the conic C

 the diameter of C conjugated to /, let Q i, Q2 be the points of intersection of C with
 d, and say Q the intersection l Π d. Then, the one has

 (QP\)2 = c(QiQ)(Q2Q),

 where c is a real number that does not change for any lines parallel to / intersecting C.

 When Γ is a line parallel to I, but "exterior" to C (Fig. 8b), Poncelet, unaware of

 the complex elements, associated with /' and C not the pair of conjugate points that
 constitute the intersection /' Π C in the complex projective plane, but a segment in

 the real plane. He did this by simply extending the above relation to the present case,

 precisely: he let M — d Π /' and let R1 and R2 be the two points on /' such that

 (MR\)2 = c(Q\M)(Q2M),

 and MR\ = M R2. Then, Poncelet defined the segment R\ R2 to be the ideal chord
 intercepted by (the ideal secant) I' on C.

 In Poncelet's mind, the ideal chord was a "real" justification for the "imaginary."

 His thinking is well expressed in (Poncelet 1822, Art.s 50, 54):

 En supposant qu'on ne veuille pas créer des termes nouveaux pour désigner
 la droite mn [/] et ce qui lui appartient, et qu'on persiste à la regarder comme
 une secante de la courbe quand elle cesse de la rencontrer, nous dirons, a fin de
 conserver l'analogie entre les idées et le langage, que ses points d'intersections
 avec la courbe, et par conséquent la corde correspondente, sont imaginaires,
 qu'elle est elle-même sécante idéale de cette courbe... et on pourra regarder
 M'N' [ 1 /?2J comme représentant, d'une manière fictive, la corde imaginaire
 qui correspond à la droit m'n' [/'] considérée comme secante de la courbe [Let us

 suppose that we do not want to create new terms for the line I and for what pertains

 to it and that we continuing to look at this line as a secant of the curve even when
 the intersection no longer exists; we will say, with the objective of preserving

 the analogy btween the ideas and the language, that the points of intersection
 with the curve, and consequently the corresponding chord, are imaginary, it is
 itself an ideal secant of that curve ...and we can look at the segment R\R2 as

 24

 A. Del Centina

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 9 Poncelet defined the radical axis of a pencil of circles as the locus of points from which tangent
 segments drawn to all circles of the pencil have equal length, a The construction for the case of intersecting
 circles and b the construction in case of not intersecting circles

 a fictional representative of the imaginary chord corresponding to V considered
 as a secant of the curve].

 Let us observe that if T\ — (a + ib, c + id), T2 = (a — ib, c — id) are the two

 complex conjugate intersection points of /' and C in the complex plane, then we can
 write Tic = S ± iD where S = (a, c) and D — (b, d) represented real points in the
 plane. It is easy to see that R\ — S + D and R2 = S — D and S is the middle point of
 the segment R] R2· Vice versa it is also clear that from R] and R2 one can find T\,T2
 So, by the concept of ideal chord, Poncelet was able to develop many features
 that nowadays are introduced by embedding the real plane into the complex one. In
 particular, he showed that two (real) conics always have two common chords (real or
 ideal), i.e., two conics always intersect in four points (real or imaginary) (Poncelet
 1822, Art.s 58-59).

 Let us to stress that Poncelet was aware that endpoints and chords may lie on

 the line at infinity. In particular, he noticed the existence of the two points at infinity

 through which all circles pass, i.e., of those points that later were called circular points
 (Poncelet 1822, Art. 94).

 Poncelet introduced the concept of a "system of conics having two common chords"

 (real or ideal), which corresponds to the modern concept of a pencil of conics. In
 particular, a pencil of circles was defined by Poncelet as the system of circles having
 a real or ideal common chord. He also defined the radical axis of a pencil of circles
 as the locus of points from which tangent segments drawn to all circles of the pencil

 have equal length (Poncelet 1822, Art.s 71-77).28 This allowed Poncelet to extend the

 concept of radical axis to the case of non-intersecting circles (Fig. 9a, b); in fact, this

 28 This definition, as Poncelet remarked, had already been introduced in Gaultier (1813). J. Steiner called
 it line of equal power (Steiner 1826). Defining power of a point Ρ with respect to a circle the quantity

 h = drp — r~, where dp is the distance of Ρ from the center of the circle of radius r, the radical axis of a
 pencil of circles is the locus of points Ρ whose power is the same with respect to all circles of the pencil.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 25

 line coincides with the real line on which lies the real or ideal common chord of all

 circles of the pencil.
 Poncelet's "principle of continuity"

 In its essence, the principle of continuity may be stated as follows: if for a figure in

 the plane certain properties have been deduced from the given data and theorems, these

 properties remain valid after a continuous deformation of the figure, even if during the

 deformation some aspects of the figure disappear becoming imaginary.

 This principle, that "was admitted without saying by many geometers" as Poncelet

 recalled,29 enabled him to avoid the use of the "imaginary," and to deduce results as

 if he was working into the complex projective space.

 He formulated the principle of continuity in various ways and discussed it at length
 in several places of his treatise (see (Poncelet 1822, pp. xiii-xiv; Art.s 135-140)).
 When in Saratov, Poncelet expressed this principle as follows (Poncelet 1862, p. 379):

 Quand on se proposera de découvrir quelque propriété générale de position d'une

 figure, on pourra imaginer que cette figure soit projetée sur un nouveau plane
 (d'après la manière indiquée ci-après), de telle sorte qu'ne ou plusieurs parties

 de cette figure soient réduites à des circonstances plus simples; on aura ainsi

 une nouvelle figure qui pourra remplacer la première, sinon pour toutes les dis

 positions possibles au moins en général; on raisonnera sur cette figure comme

 tenant lieu de la première d'où l'on est parti, et les propriétés, les conséquences

 géérales qu'on en déduira seront également applicables à cette figure, quoiqu'il

 arrive des cas où la projection soit imaginaire [When it is proposed to discover

 certain general position properties of a figure, we can imagine that figure pro

 jected on a new plane (in the way specified here below), so that one or several

 parts of it are reduced to more simple situations; thus, we will have a new figure

 that can replace the first, if not in all cases at least in general; we will argue on

 this figure as on the first from which it came, and the properties, the general

 consequences that can be deduced will be equally applicable to this figure, even

 if obtained by an imaginary projection].

 We clarify Poncelet's use of the principle of continuity by shortly discussing his

 proofs of the fourth and fifth fundamental principles mentioned above.

 To prove the fourth principle, Poncelet proceeded as follows.

 Let C and / be, respectively, a conic and a line in a plane π, which is thought of
 as immersed in real space. If I does not intersect C, one can find a point S ψ π and

 a plane π' such that, under the projection from S in π', the conic C is mapped onto a

 circle and I onto the line at infinity. In Saratov, Poncelet gave an analytical proof of this

 fact, while in the Traité he provided a synthetic proof (Poncelet 1822, Art.s 109-111).

 If I intersects C, such S and π' cannot be found in the real space, then Poncelet

 claimed, on the basis of the principle of continuity, the validity of the fourth principle
 also in this case.

 29 See Poncelet (1862, p. 124). The principle was used only occasionally until G. Monge revived it estab
 lishing certain theorems of descriptive geometry (Kline 1972, pp. 163-165). A similar principle was also
 used by Carnot in his Géométrie de position (1802).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 26

 A. Del Centina

 Poncelet proceeded to prove the fifth principle similarly.

 If Cι and C2 have at most two real points in common, then they have an ideal

 common chord along a certain line / not intersecting them. Hence, according to the

 fourth principle, C\ and I are the projective image of a circle C and of the line at

 infinity l00. Then, the projective image of Cj passes through C Π loo (i-e., the circular

 points) and so is a circle.

 If the two conics have more than two real points in common, this program is not

 realizable by a real projection, in fact two circles with three points in common coincide.

 Then, Poncelet extended the validity of the fifth principle by invoking the principle of

 continuity.

 Poncelet enounced and proved also the following (Poncelet 1822, n. 131)

 Theorem Β Two conics C\, C2 which are tangent to each other in two different points,

 are the projective image of two concentric circles.

 His reasoning was as follows. By the fifth principle, the two conics are the projective

 images of two circles and, at the same time, the two points of contact are the images

 of the circular points. Because the two circles are tangent to each other at the circular

 points, the line at infinity has the same pole with respect to them, and so they are
 concentric.

 Let us remark that the fourth and fifth principle and theorem Β are actually correct

 in the extended complex plane, so, ultimately the principle of continuity led Poncelet
 to correct results.

 It can be observed (see Bos et al. 1987, p. 303) that these three results are succes

 sively more counterintuitive, in the context of the real geometry. The first two can still

 be seen to be correct in certain cases, but the third does not apply at all in the real case:

 two real circles which are tangent one each other in two points coincide. This shows

 how daring Poncelet's use of ideal chords and of the principle of continuity really was.

 2.2 The analytical proof PGT

 Poncelet first considered the case of two circles (C) and (C'), of centers c and d and

 radii r and R, respectively (the first lying inside the second). He denoted by a the

 distance between the two centers and wrote the equations of the circles as:

 (C): x2 + y2 = r2, (C) : (x - a)2 + y2 = R2. (2.1)

 From a point a := (α, β) on (C), so that

 β2 {a — a)2 — R2, (2.2)

 he drew two chords of (C) tangent to (C), say ax\ and ax" (Fig. 10a), and showed

 that, if a moves along (C"), then the chord x\x" varies and envelopes a circle (C")

 from the pencil determined by (C) and (C')· Poncelet proved this result by a direct

 laborious computation. He first found the equations of ax\ and ax", then he obtained

 the equation for x\x"\

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 27

 (Poncelet 1862, pp. 314-319). Then, Poncelet proved that (C") belongs to the pencil
 determined by (C) and (C") by showing that the ideal common chord of (C) and
 (C") coincides with the ideal common chord of (C) and (C") (Poncelet 1862, pp.
 319-320).

 Let us observe that the equation (2.3) reduces to that of (C) when one puts a2 =

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 10 Illustration of how Poncelet proceeded in order to prove his general theorem in case of two circles
 (a) and of three circles (b)

 fi(R2-a2)y + [a(R2-a2)+a(R2+a2)]x + (R2-a2)-2R2r2+a(R2-a2)a=0.

 Taking into account the relation (2.2), he was able to eliminate α and β from this

 equation, and for (C") he obtained the following equation:

 x2{R2 - a2)2 + y2(R2 - a2)2 - 2a [(/?2 - a2)2 - 4R2r2~j χ

 = R2(R2 -a2 -2r2)2 -a2(R2 -a2)2 (2.3)

 R2 — 2rR.

 After having examined certain special cases in which (C") may degenerate, Pon
 celet proceeded to the case of three circles (C), (C) and (C") from a same pencil
 (Poncelet 1862, pp. 323-339).

 He represented these circles by the following equations

 (C) : x2 + y2 = R2, (C) : (x-a)2+y2 = r2, (C") : (x - a')2 + y2 = r'2.

 From a point a (α, β) on (C) he drew four chords of (C), say ax", 01x2, oi\x"
 and «1X2. the first and the third tangent to (C), the second and fourth tangent to (C")
 (Fig. 10b).

 Through extremely long and involved calculations, Poncelet was able to find the

 equation of the chord x"x2?° but it proved too complicated to admit calculating the
 envelope by eliminating the parameters α, β.

 30 See for instance pp. 327, 330, 336 where the formulae to be written down require sheets folding out to

 the width of some quarto pages.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 28

 A. Del Centina

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 11 Illustrations of how Poncelet applied the main lemma in order to prove the general theorem for
 η > 3

 Then, he proved the existence of a point on the line of centers, whose distance from
 the chord x"xi is the same whatever is the point a on (C), and therefore, that the

 enveloped curve of this chord is a circle (C'"), for which he got the following equation

 R2(a-a')(r' ~rj^\ ^ R2[(R2 - a'2) + r'(R2 - a2)J

 + y2 =

 (R2 — aa

 ')(>-' + '/?)

 (R2 — aa

 ')2 (r' + rjïj

 Finally, arguing as in the previous case, he proved that (C'") is from the same pencil

 that (C), (C) and (C") belong to. He also showed that the chord \x'[x\ envelops the
 same circle (C'").

 We will call this result main lemma.

 At this point, Poncelet generalized these results to the case of η > 3 circles.
 He considered η circles (C), (C'), (C"),..., from a same pencil J, and
 a transversal ax'x"x'"... inscribed in (C), and whose sides are tangent, in some
 order, to the inner circles (C), (C")> ■ · ■ > (C("_1)). Clearly, without loss of gener
 ality, one can suppose that ax', x'x",..., 1 ' are, respectively, tangent to
 (C', (C"),..., (see Fig. 11a). By the previous result, the chord ax" envelops
 a circle from J. Similarly, since the chord ax" and the chord x"x'" are tangent to two
 circles from 5, the chord ax'" envelops a circle from 5, and so on (see Fig. 1 lb).
 Clearly, envelops a circle from the pencil 5·

 Poncelet used projection and the principle of continuity to extend these results to
 conics, but we will discuss this generalization later on, when we will comment the
 proof of PCT he gave in Poncelet ( 1822).

 After having proved PGT, Poncelet enounced the closure theorem as follows (Pon

 celet 1862, p. 355):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 29

 II est impossible, généralement parlant, d'inscrire à une courbe donnée du
 deuxiè-me degré un polygone qui soit en même temps circonscrit à une autre

 courbe de ce dedré, et quand la disposition particulière de ces courbes sera telle

 que l'inscription et la circonscription simultanées soient possibles pour un seul

 polygone essayé à volonté, il y aura, par la même, une infinité jouissant de cette

 propriété à l'égard des coniques données. Pour démontrer ce théorème directe

 ment, soient deux ligne quelconque du second degré; d'après nos principes, ces

 ligne pourront, en général, être projectées suivant deux circonférences de cercle,

 bie que, dans des cas particuliers cela puisse devenir illusoire... [In general it
 is impossible to inscribe in a conic a polygon which is at the same time cir

 cumscribed to another conic, but when, for the particular disposition of the two

 conics, it can be proved that this is possible for a particular polygon, then there

 will exist infinitely many polygons having the same property with respect to the

 given conics. For a direct proof of this theorem, let two curves of second degree

 be given, from our principles these curves can, in general, be projected onto two

 circles, although in some cases this may become illusory...].

 Poncelet considered two circles, (C) and (C') (the second lying entirely in the
 interior of the first), and a polygon a, x, x', x", inscribed in (C), whose sides

 are all tangent to (C") except a'a, which will be tangent only for particular positions

 of the two given circles. Then, in order to prove PCT, he reasoned as follows.

 Suppose that one can deform the polygon, maintaining the same number of sides, in

 such a way that it assumes all possible positions around (C') while remaining inscribed

 in (C). If, by chance, there exists a polygon of the same number of sides which is inter

 scribed to (C) and (C'), it is evident that there is a position of a, x, x', x",..., a' in

 which a'a is tangent to (C). This is impossible, unless a'a is tangent to (C") for any

 position of the polygon. In fact, a'a envelops a circle (C") (from the same pencil of
 (C) and (C')) and if, for a certain position of the polygon, a'a is tangent to (C),
 then (C") necessarily coincides with (C) and all polygons α, χ, χ', x", will
 be inter-scribed to the two circles (C) and (C).

 Hence, on the basis of the fundamental principles, Poncelet concluded (Poncelet

 1862, p. 357):

 on peut conclure des principes posés au commencement du Ille Cahier, que la
 double proposition d'abord énoncée est vrai quelle que soit la situation relative

 des deux cercles donné (C) e (C) [from the principles given at the beginning

 of the third Notebook, it follows that the proposition stated above holds true for

 every mutual position of the two given circles (C) e (C")]

 and finally, he extended the validity of the theorem to the case of conics by projection

 (Poncelet 1862, p. 364):

 Le deux cercles (C) et (C') peuvent être considérés comme la projection de

 deux courbes quelconques du second degré, au moins en général; car, pour des

 positions particulières de ces courbes, la projection peut devenir imaginaire,
 impossible géométriquement [the two circles (C) et (C") can be considered

 as the projection of two arbitrary curves of second degree, at least in general,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 30

 A. Del Centina

 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 12 Poncelet first proved Proposition 1 for two concentric circles (a), then, by applying the principle
 of continuity, he extended the proposition to the case of two bitangent conics (b)

 because, for particular positions of these curves, the projection may become
 imaginary, geometrically impossible].

 2.3 The synthetical proof of PGT

 Poncelet presented the proof of PCT in Art. 534 of his treatise, as a corollary of the
 PGT. Much of the proof of this theorem rests on the following proposition that he
 inserted in Art. 53131 :

 Proposition (Main lemma) Let (c), (c'), (c") be three circles having a common chord
 mn, real or ideal (i.e., from the same pencil $. Let ABC be a triangle inscribed in (c")
 whose sides AB and AC are tangent, respectively, to (c') and (c). If we move A on (c")
 in such a way the sides AB and AC remain tangent, respectively, to (c') and (c), then
 the third side BC of the triangle will envelop a circle (c'") having the same common

 chord with the given circles (i.e., from the pencil $)

 As we have seen, Poncelet had already produced an analytical proof of the first part
 of this proposition in the notebooks of Saratov. In the Traité, in accordance with the

 spirit of the whole book, he wanted to give a synthetical proof.

 Before we proceed to discuss this proof, it is useful to briefly review what Poncelet

 had shown in the previous Art. s 431^139 of his treatise.

 In Art. 431, he stated the following:

 Proposition 1 Let ABC be an inscribed triangle to a given conic y. IfC moves along
 γ in such a way that the triangle remains inscribed in γ and the sides CA and CB
 rotate, respectively, around two fixed points Ρ and Ρ', arbitrarily chosen on them,
 then the side AB will envelop a conic γ' which is bitangent to γ at the two points (real

 or ideal) where the line Ρ, Ρ' meets γ. Moreover, if t is the point where AB touches
 γ', then PB and P'A met in a point R on Ct (see Fig. 12b).

 ^ Here and in the following we maintain Poncelet's notation.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 31

 To prove it, Poncelet first considered (Art. 433) the simpler case of concentric
 circles. Let (C) and (C) be concentric circles with center in O, the second lying
 inside the first (Fig. 12a). Suppose ABC is a triangle inscribed in (C) with the side

 AB touching (C) at t. If C moves along (C), in such a way that the sides CA and CB
 remain parallel to the original direction, then the side AB rotates around (C). This
 is evident, claimed Poncelet, because all the chords AB have the same length and so

 have the same distance from Ο. Moreover, considering the parallelogram ABCR with

 AR//BC and BR//AC, it follows that the line Ct passes through R.

 To complete the proof Poncelet argued as follows. By theorem B, the conic γ and

 the line through Ρ, Ρ' are the projective image of a circle and of the line at infinity. In

 this way, the present configuration (Fig. 12b) is the projective image of the previous

 one (Fig. 12a), and then, the claim follows from what has been proved above for two
 concentric circles.

 Unfortunately, the assumption that Ρ, P' are real points is not correct, in fact they

 are the images of the circular points, and, as known, under a projective map, either all

 the real points of a line have real images, or at most two of them have real images. So

 in general Ρ and P' will not be real (see Bos et al. 1987, p. 308).32

 In Art. 434, Poncelet stated the reciprocal of the proposition above33:

 Proposition 2 Let ABC be a triangle inscribed in a conic y. If C moves along y so

 that the triangle remains inscribed in y, the side AB moves remaining tangent to a

 same conic y' having a double contact with γ along the direction TT', and the side

 AC rotates around a fixed point Ρ placed onTT', then the third side will rotate around
 another point P' placed on TT'.

 Then, he observed (Art. 437) that the conic y, enveloped by the side AB, reduces

 to the point O, pole of the line PP1, when the points Ρ and P' are placed so that the

 polar line of one of them passes through the other.

 By applying propositions 1 and 2, in Art. 439 Poncelet proved the following gen

 eralization:

 Proposition 3 If a triangle inscribed in a conic moves, remaining inscribed in it, so

 that a first side passes through a fixed point, and a second side envelops a conic having

 a double contact with the first, then the third side will envelope another conic having

 double contact with the first.

 We will return on these propositions later on, when we will discuss certain gener

 alizations due to A. Cayley.

 Now let see how Poncelet proved the main lemma.

 First of all he found the point A' at which C Β touches the enveloped curve. He

 supposed the given circles have a real common chord Μ Ν on the line mn (see Fig. 13).

 32 According to Bos et al. (1987, p. 308), it is possible to prove this part of the theorem along the lines

 implicit in Poncelet's approach, by using cross-ratios to generalize the concept of parallelism and angles
 from the real to the complex case. This procedure, however, being rather laborious, these authors offered,

 in section 8.5 and specifically lemma 8.5 of their work, a modern alternative proof by means of closed
 conditions on Zariski-dense sets.

 33 This proposition will be useful in section five.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 32

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 13 Illustration of how Poncelet proceeded in order to prove the main lemma

 He observed that an infinitesimal displacement of the triangle ABC causes an infini
 tesimal displacement of its sides, which, he affirmed, may be considered the same as
 the displacement that would occur if the points of contact B' and C" of the chords A Β
 and AC with (c) and (c') were fixed and the chords rotate around them.34 Then, by
 what he had observed above, it follows that the chord BC envelopes a conic γ having a

 double contact with (c"). Hence, the point A', where BC touches γ, is the same point
 where it touches the curve unknown (cTherefore, he concluded, if D is the point

 of intersection of BB' and CC', the line AD will intersect AH in the point A'.

 At this point, Poncelet considered the intersection points F, G, Η of the line mn,

 respectively, with the lines AC, AB and BC. From well-known properties of the circle,
 he deduced that:

 TW1 = FM ■ FN = FA ■ FC,

 GXy2 = CM ■ GN = G A ■ GB.

 From these relations, by applying what he had already shown in Art.s 162-163, Pon
 celet deduced that

 ΊΤΑ*2 = Η Β ■ HC = HM ■ ΗΝ

 holds true. Finally, he remarked that this relation characterizes the circles passing
 through M and Ν. Thus, he had proved the proposition in case of circles having real
 intersections.35

 34 Poncelet gave no further argument. His reasoning can be made rigorous by using the modern theory of
 deformation (see Bos et a). 1987, section 8).

 35 For a deeper analysis of the arguments exposed in this subsection, we refer to Bos et al. (1987 sections.
 4, 8).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 33

 For extending the proof to circles in any position, Poncelet used the principle of

 continuity as follows:

 Ce raisonnement suppose, il est vair, que les cercles (c), (c') et (c") aient deux

 points communs réels; mais, en vertu du principe de continuité, on peut l'étendre

 directement à celui où ces poins deviennent imaginaires, et où par conséquent
 la droit mn est une sécante idéale commune aux cercles proposés. Ainsi notre

 théorème est général et comprend tous les cas... [This reasoning supposes, of

 course, that the circles (c), (c') and (c") have a real common chord; but, by the

 principle of continuity, it can be directly extended to the case in which the points

 of intersections are all imaginary, and the line mn is an ideal secant of the given
 circles. So our theorem is general and includes all cases...]

 Poncelet proved the PGT, in Art. 534, and the PCT, in Art.s 565-567, in the same

 way he had done in the Cahiers de Saratoff.

 The work of Poncelet was appreciated by Dupin, Hachette, Malus and others former

 students at École Polytechnique, and partly also by Gergonne, Cauchy and Chasles.

 But it was in Germany that Poncelet had major followers: Plucker, Steiner and Von
 Staudt.

 In 1834, Poncelet was elected to the Académie des sciences. In the following years,

 he virtually abandoned geometry in favor of more experimental studies, in particular

 mechanics, a discipline in which he pointed out the central role of geometry.

 The year after his death the Poncelet Prize was established. It was to be awarded

 by the French Academy of Sciences for the advancement of the science. Darboux and

 Halphen were among the first recipient of the prize.

 3 Jacobi and the use of the elliptic functions

 In the extended Note historique in Poncelet (1862, pp. 480-498), Poncelet traced the

 history of the research on polygons inter-scribed to two conics in the 40 years since

 1822. He recalled that Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi went to Paris in 1829, shortly after

 the publication of Jacobi (1828) and that he had several meetings with him, during
 which they exchanged ideas on that subject. At page 485, we read:

 M. Jacobi... m'apprit qu'au début de ses études sur ce suject, il avait aussi imag

 iné de faire varier un tel polygone, d'une quantité infiniment petite, de manière

 que les arcs élémentaires décrits respectivement par les extrémités de l'un quel

 conque de ses côtes, divisés par la longueur des segments correspondantes formés

 sur sa direction, à partir du point de contact avec le cercle auquel il est tan

 gent, représentaient autant de différentielles elliptiques de la première espèce,
 et fournissaient ainsi, par leur comparaison relative à chacun des côtés, autant

 d'équations distinctes, les mêmes qu'Euler Lagrange et Legendre avaient primi
 tivement intégrées sous une forme rationelle, dans leurs mirables recherches sur

 la matière [Mr. Jacobi told me that at the beginning of his studies on this subject,

 he had also thought to move such a polygon by an infinitesimal displacement,

 in such a way that the elementary arches described by the extremities of each of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 34

 A. Del Centina

 ds ds' 2Κάψ 2 Rd<p'
 Τ ~ Ύ ~ δ ~ δ' '

 ·-/) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (b)
 (a) (b)
 (a)

 Fig. 14 Two steps of Jacobi's thought on the use elliptic functions in the proof of Poncelet's theorem in
 case of two circles, one inside the other. An infinitesimal displacement of the chord QP gives rise to an
 elliptic differential of the first kind. This idea was confirmed in the letter he wrote to Hermite on the 6th of
 August 1845

 its sides, divided by the length of the corresponding segments along its direc

 tion, represent as many elliptic differentials of first kind, which, by their relative

 comparison with each sides, give as many distinct equations, equal to those that
 Euler, Lagrange, and Legendre had previously integrated in rational form...].

 All this seems to be confirmed by what Jacobi wrote to Hermite in a letter dated 6

 of August 1845 (Jacobi 1846, pp. 178-179) (see Fig. 14a):

 Je suis aussi parvenu à étendre au théoréme d'Abel ma construction de l'addition
 des fonctions elliptiques. Dans cette dernière, la corde PQ d'un cercle touche
 constamment un autre cercle. Soit Τ le point d'intersection de deux positions
 consécutives de la droite; les deux angles Q'QT at PP'T étant égaux d'après
 une propriété du cercle, on aura ΡP'/PT = QQ'/Q'T ce qui est l'équation
 différentielle, dont par la construction de la droite inscrite à l'un et circonscrite
 à l'autre cercle on trouve l'intégtrale complète et algébrique, la même qui à
 été donnée par Euler [I have been also able to extend my construction for the
 addition of elliptic functions to the theorem of Abel. In this latter case, the chord

 PQoia circle constantly touch another circle. Let Τ be the point of intersection
 of two consecutive positions of the line; the two angles Q'QT and PP'T being
 equal by a property of the circle, one has ΡP'/PT = QQ'/Q'T which is the
 differential equation, for which, by the construction of the line inscribed in one
 and circumscribed about the other circle, one finds the complete integral to be

 algebraic, the same that was given by EulerJ.

 It is likely that Jacobi argued as follows (see Fig. 14b). The triangles PTP' and

 QTQ' are similar. So setting 8 PT, ds := PP' and S' — P'T, ds' = QQ', it
 follows that:

 C and c, one has S2 = Pc — r2. Therefore, since Pc — R2 + a2 + 2Ra cos 2φ, one

 Poncelet's porism, I

 35

 where 2 ψ = LO CP and 2φ' = IOC Ρ'. If a denotes the distance between the centers

 2 2

 gets

 and hence

 82 = (R + a)2 — r2 — 4Ra sin2 φ,

 Γ ds _ ίψ 2 Rd<p
 Jo S Jo y/(R + a)2 — r2 — 4Ra sin2 φ

 Putting k2 = 4Ra((R + a)2 - r2)~ï, this integral can be written

 2 R ff dtp

 y/(R + a)2 — r2 Jo y/\ — k2 sin2 φ

 which is readily seen to be an elliptic integral of the first kind, of modulus k (see
 Legendre 1825).

 Summing up: Jacobi was lead to consider the elliptic function amplitude by looking

 at "the rolling" of a side of the polygon on the inner circle.

 From the historical note of Poncelet, we also learn that Steiner suggested to Jacobi

 the use of elliptic functions, in fact at page 481 we read:

 D'après ce qu'a bien voulu me faire savoir plus tard M. Steiner,... ce serait par ses

 encouragements propres, ses avis éclairés que Jacobi, ayant pris connaissance

 du Traité des propriété projectives des figures, aurait été conduit à appliquer

 la théorie des fonctions elliptiques à démonstration des théorèmes (p. 322 et
 suiv. de cet ouvrage) sur les polygones simultanément inscrits et circonscrits

 à plusieurs cercles [Later Mr. Steiner kindly informed me that it was through
 his enlightened advice and encouragement that Jacobi, when he learned of the

 Traité des propriété projectives des figures, was led to apply the theory of elliptic

 functions in order to prove theorems (p. 322 and following of this work) on
 polygons simultaneously inscribed and circumscribed about several circles].36

 3.1 Jacobi's proof of PGT for circles

 Let us see, in some detail, how Jacobi proved the general theorem of Poncelet. He

 considered two circles (C), (c), the second within the first, respectively, of centers C,
 c and radii R, r, and a polygonal line (or transversal) AA'A"A'"... inter-scribed to

 them (see Fig. 15). He put LPCA = 2<p, LPCA' = 2φ', /.PCA" = 2φ", etc. and
 denoted by a the distance between the two centers.

 36 From November 1822 to August 1824, Steiner attended courses at the University of Berlin. Jacobi,

 8 years younger than Steiner, was at that time also a student in Berlin and soon they became friends.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 36

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 15 Jacobi's procedure in order to prove PGT for circles

 Then, one has the following equations

 R cos(^/ — φ) + a cos(<p' — φ) — r
 R cos(^>" — φ') + a cos(^" — φ') — r,
 R cos (φ'" — φ") + a cos(^"' — φ") — r,

 which can be put in the form

 (R + a) cos φ' cos φ + (R — a) sin φ' sin φ = r,
 (R + a) cos φ" cos φ' + (R — a) sin φ" sin φ' = r,
 (R + a) cos φ'" cos φ" + (R — a) sin φ"' sin ψ" = r,

 (3.1)

 By subtracting each of these equations from the following one, since

 tan (^-p), he got the following system of equations

 about which, at page 35 of his paper, Jacobi wrote:

 In dieser Form der Gleichungen springt es sogleich in die Augen, dass sie mit
 denjenigen iibersinkmmen, welche sur Vervielfachung der elliptischen Tran

 scendenten aufgestellt werden [In this form, it is plain to see that these equations

 are the same as those for the multiplication of elliptic transcendentals].

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 37

 With this in mind, he considered the elliptic integral of first kind

 γψ dx

 u = F (φ) = / (3.2)
 Jo γ 1 — k sin2 χ

 with its inverse function (amplitude)

 φ = am (m).

 Then, chosen any angle a := am(/), he put φ' = am(w + t), φ" = am(w + 21),
 and from the basic results on elliptic functions [see for instance (Legendre 1825, pp.
 19-25)] he deduced

 tan (^ ^ = Aam(/) tan φ', (3.3)

 where Aam(i) := ν 1 - k2 sin2 a.

 This correlation suggested to Jacobi the possibility of determining k in (3.2) in such a

 way that the successive values οΐφ,φ',φ"... correspond to the vertices A, A', A",...

 of the polygonal line. He proceeded as follows.

 From another basic relation in the theory of elliptic integrals (Legendre 1825,

 p. 19), for φ = am(w), φ' = am(u +1) and α = am(f), one has

 cos φ cos φ' + simp sin (p'Aam(r) = cos a,

 and since equation (3.1) can be put in the form

 cos φ cos φ' + sin φ sin φ'

 ,R — a r
 R -\- a R ci

 by comparing the last two equations he obtained

 cos α =

 r

 j 1 / 2 · 2 (R ~ αΫ

 -, and 1 — k sin a — ———-,,
 R+a (R + a)2

 ι UI1U X IV 1)111 M — a ·

 which yield

 k2 =

 4 Ra

 (R+a)  2 _ r2'

 and consequently

 r(l + Aam(i)) r(\ - Aam(i)) 2/?cosce

 R = , a = , r =

 2 cos a ' 1 + Aam(f) ' 1 + Aam(i)

 Jacobi observed that the quantities k and a do not depend on φ and u. This is very

 important, as Jacobi remarked, because in this way, starting from any point A on (C)
 and LACP/2 = φ = am(«), LA'CP/2 = ψ' = am(u +1), the line AA' is tangent
 to the circle determined by a and r as above. Moreover, the line A A" is tangent to the
 circle determined by

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 38

 A. Del Centina

 1 - Δ® 2R cos α®

 α = *1 + Δ<2>' r= Γ+Δ® '

 α(2) = am(2r), Δ(2) = y/1 — k2 sin2 a®,

 where

 where

 and in general the line AA(n\ which closes the polygonal line, will be tangent to a

 circle determined by

 1 — Δ*") 27?cosa("^
 ο = R rr, r — ,

 1 + Δ(") 1 + Δ(")

 α'"' = am(nt), Δ("' = \/l — k2 sin2 a(").

 Clearly, all these circles have centers on the line CP.

 Here, Jacobi made the crucial remark: all the circles belong to the same pencil

 determined by (C) and (c), and all lead to the same modulus k:

 Wir wollen jetzt beweisen, dass diese Kreise ein System bilden, welche dieselbe

 Linie zum Orte der gleichen Tangenten haben, welche zweckmàssige Benennung

 Herr Steiner in einen geometrischen Arbeiten in diesem Journal eingfiihrt hat

 [Let us prove that all these circles form a system of circles having the same

 line as locus of equal tangents, a suitable name introduced by Mr. Steiner in a

 geometrical paper in this journal].37

 To prove this, he reasoned in the following way (see Fig. 16).
 For a point Q on the line CP let d = QC, so that its distance from c is d — a.

 Then, the tangential distances of Q from the two circles (C) and (c), are, respectively,

 \ld2 — r2 and \f{d~— a)2 — r2). Comparing these, he deduced

 {R + a)2 — r2
 d = la "■

 (R + a)2-r2 _ 2R

 2a k2 '

 , 2R
 i=-w~R·

 and, since

 he finally found

 Springer

 37 See Steiner's paper Einige geometrische Betrachtungen (J. fur die reiheund Ang. Math., 1 (1826), 161—

 184), p. 165. This line is the radical axis of the pencil. As already seen, for a system of circles to have the

 same line of equal distances or to have a common (real or imaginary) chord is the same they must belong

 to a same pencil. See the note at p. 386 in Jacobi (1828).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 39

 Fig. 16 In his construction, Jacobi found a series of circles that he proved belonging to a same pencil. To
 prove this he showed, following Steiner, that all these circles have the same line as locus of equal tangents

 Then, Jacobi wrote:

 Wir sehen dass a in dem Ausdruck filr d gar nicht vorkommt, sondern dass es
 bloss von k abhângt. Fiir aile jene Kreise aber ist dieses k dasselbe, und nur im

 a unterscheiden sie sich. Hâtten wir daher filr C [ (C) ] und irgend einen anderen
 Kreis den Ort ihrer gleichen Tangenten gesucht, se hàtten wir denselben Aus
 druck filr D \cl\ gefunden, so dass also allé jene Kreise einen gemeinschaftlichen

 Ort der gleichen Tangenten haben [We see that a does not appear in the expres
 sion for d, which depends only on k. For all these circles, k is the same, and
 it changes only for a. Thus, if we had searched the locus of equal tangents for

 (C) and another circle, we will have found the same expression for d\ hence, all
 these circles have the same locus of equal tangents].38

 The perpendicular to CP passing through the point Q, whose distance from C is

 as above, is the so-called line of "equal tangents."

 Jacobi was now in the position to prove the PGT.
 He considered a sequence (c),(c(1)),..., (c<n ") of circles, with centers

 (i)

 c,c

 c(«-') anc[ radii r, r(l\ ..., r(n~l>, all lying within (C) and all belonging to the same
 pencil together with (C). He put a{iK i = 1,— 1, the distance of c(l) from C,
 and determined the angles a's by

 r r*-1'

 cos o; = , cos a: = , i — 1,..., η — 1.

 R + a R+a^

 Jacobi remarked that k2 is the same for all inner circles, and so that the same function

 "am" occurs for each of them. Then, he found t, r(l), t(2>,... by putting a — am(i),

 One may argue as follows. It can be supposed (C), D\, D2 be given, respectively, by x^ + y^ =

 (χ — a 1)2 + y= and (χ — ct2Ϋ + y — r|- Then, the abscissas of the points of intersection are

 Xj = (rj — R — α?)/2α,·, and for circles belonging to the same pencil we must have x\ = xi = x. From
 k = —T, it follows that k = which proves the claim.

 Ο Λ D Ο 0 /?

 R-r"~lâ~a

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 40

 A. Del Centina

 α, = am(i(,)j for i = 1,..., η — 1. From a point A on (C), he drew the tangent AA^1'

 to the circle (c) (proceeding counterclockwise), then he drew the tangent A(1)A(2) to

 (c(1)), and proceeded similarly until he had drawn the tangent A(n~]>A(n) to (c("~l>).

 Putting

 he obtained

 LACP = 2<p, ÎA(i)CP = 2φ{ί\ i = 1,..., n,

 φ = am(u), φ(,) = am(« +/ + ··· + i = 1,..., n.

 Then, Jacobi observed that, with s := H Yt{n~x\the line A{n} A (which closes

 the transversal) envelops a circle, which is determined by

 2/?cosam(s) (i!) R(l — Aam(s)
 1 + Aam(s) ' 1 + Aam(s)

 being rtn) its radius and a(n) the distance of its center from C. This circle,
 being associated with the same modulus k, necessarily belongs to the same pencil
 that(C), (c), (c^),..., (c(n_1)) belong to.

 3.2 Jacobi's condition allowing inter-scribed n-gons to two circles

 By using his approach, Jacobi was able not only to prove PCT but also to find a

 necessary and sufficient condition that allows the existence of a polygon, of any number

 τι of sides, inter-scribed to two given circles(C) and (c), the second lying within the

 first. To do this, he proceeded as follows.

 Suppose that starting from Aq on (C) the transversal Ao, Aq1' Aq", con

 structed as above, closes, i.e., that Ao = Aq"\ after having turned i times around

 c. Let LPCAq = 2φο and LPCAq~X) = 2ψ, then one has

 ψ = am (u + nc) — φο + ίπ = am (κ) + in.

 one gets am(A") = π/2, am(M + 2K) = am(w) + π, and am(« + 2iK) = in + am(«)

 for any integer i. From above, it follows that

 Defined

 hence

 â Springer

 n/2 dx

 \]\ — k2 sin2 χ

 am(« + nt) = am (u + 2 iK),

 u + nt = u + 2i K,

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and denoted by /?', r', a', p', q' the analogous quantities for a 2n-gon, he found
 (Richelot 1830, p. 27):

 Poncelet's porism, I

 and then

 41

 t = — · (3.4)

 η

 This equation is clearly a necessary and sufficient condition on (C) and (c) for the
 existence of a n-gon inter-scribed to them. Since this condition does not depend on

 φο, it follows that, if satisfied, the inter-scribed polygonal line AA<y> A{2>... always

 closes after η steps (and i turns), whatever is the point A from which one starts.

 We stress that Jacobi proved PCT for a pair of circles in a particular position (one

 lying within the other), not for any pair of circles. Although he was aware of Poncelet' s

 projection methods and principle of continuity, he did not apply them to generalize

 his results to conics; possibly because he was not totally convinced of the validity of

 that principle.

 Jacobi's paper immediately attracted attention. Shortly after its publication, Legen

 dre inserted Jacobi's result as a section of the third volume of his Traité des fonctions

 elliptiques (Legendre 1828, pp. 174-180). Two years later Jacobi's pupil F.J. Riche

 lot,39 by applying Legendre's duplication law for elliptic integrals, gave a recursive

 formula for determining the relation among the radii and the distance between the

 centers of two circles, allowing the existence of an inter-scribed 2n-gon, knowing the

 analogous relation for a n-gon. Defined

 R + a R — a

 p:= , q ■=

 r r

 ri , fl fl /2 /2 , /2 /2 /2

 p' +p' q-q q +q Ρ - Ρ

 Ρ ~~ /2 /2 /2 ι ;2 ' ^ /2 ,2 /2 , /2 '

 ρ' — p q + q q' — q ρ + ρ

 At the end of his paper, feeling his work was not fully completed, Jacobi wrote:

 Es diirfte nict ohne Interesse fiir die Theoria der elliptischen Functionen
 sein, àhnliche Betrachtungen unmittelbar fiir das System zweier Kegelschnitte

 anzustellen. Das Integral diirste dann in einer complicirteren Form erscheinen,

 die sichjedoch auf jene einfachere reduciren lassen muss. Vielleicht nehme ich

 spâter Gelagenheit, hieraus wieder zuriickzukommen [It would be not without

 interest for the theory of elliptic functions, to make similar considerations directly

 for a system of two conics. The integral may appear in a more complicated form,

 which must, however, be reduced to the simplest form found above. I will return

 on this subject on another occasion]

 but, to judge by what appears in his published works, he did not do so. Jacobi's pro

 gram was carried out by Nicola Trudi and, independently, by Arthur Cayley, 25 years
 later.

 39 Friedrich Julius Richelot (1808-1875), was a student of Jacobi at Kônisberg. He graduated in 1831 with

 a thesis on the subdivision of the circle in 257 equal parts. In 1844, he succeeded to Jacobi at the University
 of Kônisberg.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42

 A. Del Centina

 4 Trudi: the forgotten work

 In 1839, Nicola Trudi,40 stimulated by his teacher Vincenzo Flauti, became interested

 in questions related to the existence of polygons inscribed in, or circumscribed about,

 a conic and satisfying given conditions. Two years later he gathered the results of his

 studies in his extended memoir (Trudi 1841). The last part of the memoir was devoted

 to finding the algebraic relation, among the coefficients of two conics, which guaran

 tees the existence of an in-and-circumscribed triangle to them. This work, published

 at Flauti's expense, remained unknown outside the borders of the Kingdom of the Two
 Sicilies.41

 In the spring of 1843, Trudi read a paper on this subject at the Royal Academy of

 Naples, but only a four-page summary, written in third person, was published in the

 Rendiconti of the Academy (Trudi 1843). This summary clearly indicates that: (1)

 he solved the question for the triangle; (2) he trusted his method in order to find the

 conditional relation for the existence of an inter-scribed polygon of any number of

 sides and that only the difficulties encountered with a problem of elimination led him

 to temporarily abandon the general question; (3) he had been induced to deal with that

 question as a continuation of the first of three Flauti's research proposals; (4) he had

 been hitherto unaware of the interest raised by this topic, because of his late discovery

 of Jacobi's paper.42

 We extract from (Trudi 1843, p. 93) what follows:

 In ultimo ei ritorna al caso generale delle sezioni coniche per mostrare come

 questo metodo si applichi alia ricerca delle relazioni pei poligoni di qualsivoglia
 numéro di lati iscrittibili tra esse: metodo che vincendo tutta la difficoltà che cir

 conda la quistione, di cui trattasi, finisce per non recare altra pena, che quella di

 scrivere le formule corrispondenti. Intanto, mosso il Trudi dalle savie indicazioni

 dell'illustre Jacobi,43 promette di ritomare su questo argomento, per guardare la

 questione sott'altro punto di vista, e propriamente in rapporto all'utile, che puo

 trarsene nella teorica delle funzioni ellittiche [Finally he returns to the general

 case of conic sections, to show how this method is applicable in order to find

 the relations for polygons of any number of sides to be inter-scribed to them:

 the method, which overcomes all the difficulty which surround the question that

 we are concerned with, gives without further effort the corresponding formu

 lae. Trudi, following the wise guidance of Jacobi,44 promises to return to this

 40 Nicola Trudi (1811-1884), was born in Campobasso and studied in the University of Naples. In 1851, he

 became professor of infinitesimal calculus in that University and then member of the local Royal Academy

 of Sciences. He contributed to the theory of elliptic functions, and to the theory of determinants with the

 publication of the treatise Teoria dei determinanti e loro applicazioni, Napoli 1862. For a biographical note

 and information on his scientific production (see Amodeo 1924, part two, pp. 190-213).

 41 This memoir of Trudi, with three others by him, appeared at the end of Part II of (Flauti 1840-1844).

 42 This is to say that Trudi read (Jacobi 1828) with great delate.

 43 At page 90, Trudi explicitly refer to the phrase " Es diirfte nicht onhe Intéressé..." that we have transcribed
 from (Jacobi 1828) at the end of the previous section.

 44 Idem.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 43

 argument, looking at the question from another point of view, and properly in

 relation to the advantage which may result to the theory of elliptic functions.]

 Years later, having overcome all these difficulties, Trudi published the paper (Trudi

 1853) answering to the general question, and completing Jacobi's program. Unfortu

 nately, this work also remained almost unknown outside the Neapolitan milieu.

 4.1 Trudi's first approach of 1841

 In section 59 of his paper, Trudi raised the question of the construction of a triangle
 which is inscribed in a conic C and circumscribed about another conic C'. He observed

 that, if one takes as axis χ a diameter of C, and for axis y the tangent to C at one

 of its intersection points with the chosen diameter, then C can be represented by the
 equation

 y2 = m2x2 + 2nx.

 Moreover, he put

 Ay2 + 2 Bxy + 2 Cy + Dx2 + 2 Ex + F = 0,

 the equation of C'. For (z, v) and (zr, v') (general) points on C, he set r := v/z and

 r' := v'/z'· With respect to these parameters, the chord of C joining the two points
 has equation

 y{r + r') — x(rr' + m) = In.

 He also observed that the line y = ax + b is tangent to C", if and only if,

 A' + a2 B' + 2 bC + 2 abD' + 2 aE' + b2F' = 0 (4.1)

 where

 A' = E2-DF, B' = C2-AF, C' = BE -CD
 D' = AE — BC, E' — CE - BF, Ff = B2 - AD.

 If RR'R" is a triangle inscribed in C and circumscribed about C', then the three sides

 RR', R'R" and R"R have, respectively, equation

 y(r + r') - x(rr' + m) = 2n,

 y{r' + r") - x(r'r" + m) = 2n,

 y(r" + r) - x(r"r + m) = 2n.

 So, taking into account (4.1), Trudi was led to the following equations, which link the
 parameters r, r',r" and the coefficients of C and C':

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44

 A. Del Centina

 A\r + r')2 + B\rr' + m)2 + AmC\r + r') + 4 nD\rr' + m)

 + 2 E\r + r'){rr + m) + 4nV = 0,

 A'(r' + r")2 + B'(r'r" + m)2 + 4mC'(r' + r') + 4 nD\r'r" + m)

 + 2 E\r' + r")(r'r" + m) + 4n2F' = 0,

 A\r" + r)2 + B'(r"r + m)2 + 4mC V + r) + 4nD'(r"r + m)

 + 2E'(r" + r)(rr' + m)+ 4 n2F' = 0.

 By eliminating r, r' and r" among them, he got the equation

 A'1 + ImB'A' + 4nA'D' - 8nC'E' - AmE'2 + 4mnD'B'
 +4n2B'F'+ m2B'2 =0 (,)

 which expresses a necessary condition for the existence of an inter-scribed triangle to
 C and C'.

 Trudi remarked that, as this equation does not depend on the parameter of the initial

 point, if such a triangle exists, then infinitely many others exist. In case C and C' are
 circles, he also observed that his result leads to formula (1.1), that he attributed to
 Lhuilier.

 At this point, Trudi tried to apply his method to the case of an inter-scribed quad

 rangle, but the exceedingly long computation forced him to limit himself to the case

 of circles, that he represented by the equations

 y2 + x2 — 2 nx = 0, y2 + x2 — 2 ax + a2 — n'2 = 0,

 the first with center in (n, 0) and radius n, the second with center in (a, 0) and radius

 n'. In this case, he found that for the existence of an inter-scribed quadrangle to the

 two given circles the equation

 n'4 = (n'2 — a2)\n'2 — (2 η — a)2]

 must hold. Trudi unaware of Fuss (1797) did not compare his formula with that of Fuss.

 Nevertheless, an easy computation shows that the two formulae are in fact identical.

 From a footnote on page 97, we learn that Trudi tried to apply his method to polygons

 with η > 3 sides, but that he was unable, using standard procedures, to eliminate the

 η parameters among the η equations that can be deduced in this case. He expressed

 the desire to return on this subject as being of great importance.

 Trudi kept his promise. In the spring of 1843 at the Royal Academy of Naples,
 he read the new memoir Delle relazioni fra i determinanti di due sezioni coniche

 Γ una iscritta l'altra circoscritta ad un poligono irregolare [On the relations between

 the determinants (coefficients) of two conic sections, one inscribed and the other

 circumscribed to an irregular polygon]. As we have already said, a four-page summary

 of it was published in the reports of the Academy (Trudi 1843). Here, besides relation

 4.2, the conditional equations for the existence of inter-scribed polygons to two circles,

 of 3,6,12,24 sides and of 4,8,16,32 sides are published. Moreover, since the volume

 of Crelle's Journal for the year 1828, containing Jacobi's famous paper, had recently

 arrived in Naples, Trudi was able to compare his formulae with those of Fuss (Trudi

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 45

 1843, p. 90).45 Finally, he returned to the general case of two conics and showed how

 his method could be applied to any polygons.

 As we will see below, it was through the relation 4.2 that Trudi perceived a link

 between the existence of inter-scribed polygons and the complete integral of Euler's

 differential equation

 dx d_y

 -/α*4 + βχ3 + yx2 +Sx + ε \/ay4 + β)>3 + yy2 + Sy + ε

 Later in 1843, Jacobi went to Italy. He joined Steiner in Rome, and in April of

 1844 they both visited Naples. Trudi had the opportunity to meet them and to talk

 with Jacobi about his studies on Poncelet's theorem.46 According to Trudi, Jacobi

 manifested real interest in his results and encouraged him to pursue research in this

 field (Trudi 1863a, p. 4).47

 In 1845, the seventh Congress of the Italian Scientists was held in Naples. On this

 occasion, Trudi read a paper titled Sull'eliminazione fra le equazioni algebriche ese

 guita per mezzo della differenziazione e della integrazione [On the elimination among

 algebraic equations by means of differentiation and integration].48 In particular, Trudi

 announced to have easily deduced many theorems of Poncelet and got the relations

 among the coefficients of the two conics as requested by Jacobi. Trudi felt to be on

 the right path, and he wanted to further pursue his studies.

 In 1853, at the Academy of Naples he presented his most important paper Su una

 rappresentazione geometrica immediata dell'equazione fondamentale nella teorica

 delle equazioni ellittiche [On an immediate geometrical representation of the funda

 mental equation in the theory of elliptic functions] (Trudi 1853), printed only in 1856.49

 In a footnote on page 65, added when the paper went to press, Trudi wrote that he had

 just been informed by Joseph Sylvester that, in 1853, Arthur Cayley had published

 some notes on the same subject.50 Trudi specified that he had not yet had the opportu

 nity to read them, because the Philosophical Magazine—the journal in which Cayley

 published his notes—was not among those available in the Royal Library of Naples.

 4.2 The important paper of 1853

 In (1853) Trudi solved, through geometrical constructions, the question of addition

 and multiplication of elliptic integrals of the form

 45 Probably Trudi knew of the formulae given by Fuss only through the paper of Jacobi.

 46 As recorded in the Rendiconto delle adunanze e dei lavori della reale Accademia delle Scienze di Napoli,

 3 ( 1844) pp. 196-197, Jacobi and Steiner attended at the meeting of this Academy for the 23 and 30 of April

 1844. At the first meeting, Trudi read a memoir on a problem of elimination among algebraic equations in

 several variables by means of differentiation and integration.

 47 Here Trudi confused the year in which Jacobi visited Naples: he wrote "1845" instead of "1844."

 48 The proceedings of the Congress were published in 1846, we refer to as (Congresso Scienziati 1845).

 4^ The first volume of the Memorie della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Napoli includes all papers
 presented to the Academy during the years 1852-1854.

 50 Sylvester visited Naples in February of 1856 (see Hunger 2006b, p. 110).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 46

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 17 Description of how Trudi proceeded in order to prove his Theorem T1

 du

 VWM'

 where ψ(ιι) is a polynomial of degree four. Then, he applied the derived theorems
 and formulae to find the necessary and sufficient conditions under which two conics

 admit an inter-scribed n-gon.

 First of all, Trudi proved the following (pp. 66-67).

 Theorem T1 Let S, S' be two conics and U U\ any chord of S tangent to Sf. Let χ be

 a diameter of S and Ο one its intersection points with S, and define u := tan U Ox,

 u ι := tan U\ Ox. Then, u and u \ satisfy an equation of the form

 Au~u2 4- 2B(u -I- u\)uu\ -{- C(w -h u\-(- 2D(u -j- wi) 2Euu] -(- F — 0

 where A, B,C, D, E, F are constants depending on the minors of order 2 of the

 matrices of the two conics.51

 Trudi chose as x-axis the line χ and as y-axis the tangent to S at Ο (Fig. 17), so

 that he represented the two conics S, 5", respectively, by

 y1 = 2 rx + mx2,

 ay2 + 2 bxy + cx2 + 2dy + 2ex + f = 0.

 Under this assumption, if U — (x, y) and U\ = (x\, _yi), is u = x/y and u\ =x\/y\,
 and, since both U, Uj are on S, it follows

 > x\ — 7Î

 2 r

 y =

 (4.3)

 51 Trudi's statement says "costanti dipendenti dai determinanti delle due coniche" [constants depending
 on the determinants of the two conics].

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 47

 He chose X, Y for the coordinates on the line UU\ and wrote its equation in the form

 (Y - y)(x - x\) = (X- x)(y - yi),

 or, what is the same,

 (u — u\)Y = (uu\ + m)X + 2 r.

 Then, a line Y = pX + q will touch S' if (and only if)

 holds true. Since

 uu\ + m 2 r

 P = : 1 = —,

 U + U1 U + U1

 (d2—af)p2+2(de—bf)p + (e2+cf)+2(ae—bd)pq+(b2—ac)q2+2(be—cd)q =0

 by substituting these expressions into the above relation, and setting

 A = d2 — af, D = m((dc — bf) + 2r(bc — cd),
 Β = de — bf, Ε = m(d2 — af) + 2r(ae — bd), (4.4)
 C = e2 — cf, F = m2(d2 — af) + 4 mr(ae — bd) + 4 r2{b2 — ac),

 he obtained the result.

 the form

 Trudi also proved the converse of the above theorem (pp. 70-71), precisely:

 Theorem T2 Suppose that between two variables u and u \ there exists a relation of

 Au2u\ + 2B(u + u\)uu\ + C(u + mi)2 + 2D(u + u\) + 2Euu\ + F — 0, (4.5)

 and that a conic S of equation y2 = 2rx + mx2 is given. Then, a unique conic S'
 can be found such that, for any chord U U ι of the first conic that touch the second, the

 trigonometric tangents tan U Ox and tan U\ Ox always satisfy the relation (4.5).

 In order to prove the theorem, Trudi proceeded as follows. He observed that, if such

 a conic S' with equation ay2 + 2bxy + cx2 + 2dy + 2ex + / = 0 exists, then, setting

 u : = tan U Ox and u\ : = tan U\ Ox as above, from theorem Τ1 it follows that a relation

 similar to the (4.5), and whose coefficients are expressed by (4.3), holds true. There

 fore, by comparing the coefficients of this relation with the given one, he expressed

 b, c, d, e, f in terms of A, B, C, D. E, F and a, so getting for S' the equation

 (AF - E)2y2 + 2 [(BF - DE) + m(AD - BE)]xy

 + [(CF - D2) + 2m(BD - CE) + m2(AC - fi2)] x2

 + 4r(AD - BE)y + 4r [(BD - CE) + m(AC - β2)] χ
 + 4r2(AC- B2) = 0. (4.6)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Jau4 + /Jm3 + yu2 + Su + ε yjau\ + /Jw3 + y + δκ ι + ε

 where α, β, γ, 8, ε are constants depending solely on the coefficients in the equations

 To prove this, he differentiated relation (4.5) with respect to u and u ι, and squared

 the two members so obtained, and setting C + Ε — G he obtained the equation

 48

 A. Del Centina

 He also remarked that S' is the envelope of all chords of S whose elements u,u\

 satisfy the relation of theorem Tl.

 Then, Trudi proved the following (pp. 72-73):

 Theorem T3 The differentials du and du ι satisfy a relation of the form

 du du\

 of S and S'.

 du2 du2

 ψ(ύ) V(«i)'

 where

 \j/(u) — [(Au\ + 2 Bu] + c)u + Bu\ + Gu + D]2,

 \jr(u) = [(Au2 + 2 Bu + c)u\ + Bu2 + Gu + D]2.

 Taking the square roots, he wrote the two differential equations

 du ^ du ι
 VVK") V>("i)

 From here, with some computation, and setting

 a = B2 — AC

 β = 2(BE-AD)
 γ = E2 - AF + 2(CE - BD) (4.7)
 8 = 2(DE - BF)
 ε = D2-CF

 he finally derived the theorem.

 that the
 Trudi knew [see his note at p. 74, where he referred to Euler (1794)]

 differential equation

 dx _ dy

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 y/axA + βχ3 + yx2 + Sx + ε Jay4 + βγ3 + yy2 + 8y + ε

 always admits a complete integral of the form

 Ax2y2 + 2 B{x + y)xy + C(x + y)2 + 2D(x + y) + 2 Exy + F = 0

 (4.8)

 (4.9)

 Poncelet's porism, I

 where

 49

 A = 4a(K + y) — β2
 Β = 2αδ + Κβ
 C = 4αε - Κ2

 D = 2 βε+δΚ
 Ε = β8+2(Κ + γ)Κ
 F = 4ε(Κ + y) - δ2

 and Κ is an arbitrary constant. This means, Trudi remarked, that in theorem T2 instead

 of the relation (4.4) one can consider the differential equation (4.8), and so the equation

 (4.5) of S' can be put in the form

 (K + y)y2 + (ηιβ-\-δ)χ)/ + (ηι2οι— m Κ -\-ε)χ2-\-2Γβγ-\-2Γ(Ιηια — K)x+4ra2 = 0.

 Next, from his theorem 4 (p. 77), Trudi showed that the conic S, and all the conics

 described by the previous equations, belong to the same pencil (theorem 5, p. 78).52

 He also brought to light a remarkable property of the relation (4.5), precisely he

 proved (see theorem 6, pp. 79-81):

 Theorem T4 By eliminating the variables u\, «2, · · · » "n-i in the following system
 of equations inn + 1 variables

 Au2u2 + 2 B(u + u\)uu\ + C(u + «ι)2

 +2 D(u + mi) + 2Euu\ + F = 0,

 Auju2 + 2B(m + ui)u\u2 + C{u\ + M2)2

 +2D(u\ + ui) + 2Eu\U2 + F = 0, (4 10)

 Am2_jM2 + 2B(un-i + un)u„-iu2 + C(m„_i + Ufi)2

 +2£)(m„_i + un) + 2Eun-\un + F = 0

 the resulting equation in u, un is still of the form (4.5).

 He used Euler's differential equation to perform the elimination. By applying to

 each equation the procedure used in the proof of theorem T3, he obtained

 dM2 dM2 d«2 du2

 1jr(u) yj/(u\) f(u2) f{un)

 where

 ψ (ui ) = auf + β^ + yuj + 5m,· + ε

 with α, β, y, δ, ε given by (4.7). Hence, one has

 dM2 d«2

 f(u) f{un)'

 Trudi wrote "hanno le stesse secanti comuni, reali ο ideali (secondo la denominazione dell'illustre

 Poncelet" [they have the same real or ideal chords (according the definition of the illustrious Poncelet).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Then, by integrating, he obtained an equation in u and un (necessarily) of the (required)
 form

 A u2u2 -f- 2Β (u -f· un)uun -f* C (m H(- un)2 -I- 2D\u -|- un) -1- 2Ε uun F — 0,

 A. Del Centina

 (4.11)

 50

 with

 ' A' = 4α(£ + γ) - β2
 Β' = 2α<5 + ΑΓ/3
 C' = 4αε - Α'2
 £>' = 2βε + δΚ (4'12)
 Ε' = βδ + 2{Κ + γ)Κ
 F' = Αε(Κ + γ) - δ2,

 and where Κ, no longer an arbitrary constant, depends on the number of equations

 and their coefficients. Trudi remarked that the value of Κ can be found by equating

 the two values of u„ obtained, from one side, by setting u = 0 (or u = oo) in the
 equations (4.10), and from the other, by setting u = 0 (or u = oo) in the (4.11).

 The coefficients of (4.11), Trudi also noticed, are in general different from the

 coefficients of the equations (4.10), but he proved (pp. 81-82) that:

 (*) if Κ = —2{CE — BD), then the coefficients A', B', C', D', E', F' are,

 respectively, equal (up to a constant) to the coefficients A, B, C, D, E, F.

 In the last part of his memoir, Trudi gave geometrical and analytical applications of

 his results; among the first he proved Poncelet's theorem and for the second, he only

 considered the addition and multiplication of elliptic functions.

 He started by solving the following problem (p. 83): Let S and S' be two non
 singular conics, and inscribed in S any polygon whose sides, but one, are tangent to

 S\ find the curve enveloped by the free side.

 He considered a polygon U, U\, U2, ■.., Un inscribed in a conic S and whose sides

 are all tangent to another conic S', except UnU. He observed that there is no loss of
 generality in supposing the two conics have equations as in theorem T4. Then, if

 u, u\, U2, ■ ■ ■, un, defined as above, correspond to the vertices of the polygon, the

 conditions of tangency of the first η sides give η equations like (4.10), whose coeffi

 cients are expressed by means of (4.3). So, by eliminating the intermediate variables

 u 1, U2,. ■., un-1, he got, via theorem 4, that the equation satisfied by the parameters

 of the extremities of the free side of the polygon will be of the form

 A'm2m2 + IB'{u + un)uun + C (u -f- un)2 + 2D (u + un) + 2E uun -f F =0.

 Hence, he applied the corollary to theorem T2, in order to get the conic envelop of
 U„U, and found

 (K + Y)y2 + {mfi+S)xy + (m2a+e—mK)x2+2rfiy+2r(2ma — K)x+4r2a=0,

 where Κ is determined as prescribed in theorem T4.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porisra, I

 51

 Then, the previous results, and in particular the formulae (4.7) and (4.4), together

 with some computation, allowed Trudi to write the equation of the enveloped conic in
 terms of the coefficients of S and S', which resulted in

 (a + μ)γ2 + 2 bxy + (c — >ημ)χ2 + 2 dy + 2(e — τμ)χ + / = 0 (4.13)

 where

 Κ + 2{CE - BD)
 μ~ 4Λ\ '

 and Δ = — det(5')·

 Trudi remarked that from equation (4.13) it follows that the enveloped conic of the

 free side meets the conics S and S' exactly in their common points (p. 85), that is,

 he added, "le due coniche date e la conica inviluppo hanno le stesse secanti comuni

 (reali, ο ideali)"[the two given conics and the conic envelop have the same common
 chords (real, or ideal)].

 He had proved:

 The envelop of the free side of any polygon inscribed in a conic S, whose side are

 all but one tangent to another conicS', is a conic I, belonging to the pencil determined

 by S and S', whose equation is given by (4.13).

 Moreover, from the same equation, it follows that U, U\, Ui,..., Un, U is circum

 scribed about S', if μ = 0, i.e., if Κ = -2(CE - BD), and, since he showed that the

 reciprocal also holds true, he had proved that Κ = -2(CΕ - BD) is a necessary and

 sufficient condition for the existence of a polygon of η sides which is inscribed in S
 and circumscribed about S'.

 This, Trudi stressed (p. 86), gives a proof of the closure theorem of Poncelet,53 and

 provides the condition on the coefficients of S and Sf that allows the existence of a

 polygon of η + 1 sides inter-scribed to the two conics.

 When the condition above is satisfied, by virtue of the remark (★), (4.10) becomes

 Cmj + 2Du\ + F = 0

 ΛΜ|«2 + 2B(ui + U2)U\U2 + C(u ι + U2)2

 + 2D(u\ + U2) + 2EU\U2 + F = 0,

 Au^u2 + 2B(u2 + ui)u\u2 + C(u2 + W3)2 (4.14)

 4" 2D(u2 Ύ uy) -f~ 2Eu2u3 F — 0,

 Cu2 ~1~ 2Dun + F = 0

 so the condition on the two conics S and S' that allowing the existence of a n-gon

 inter-scribed to them, is the equation obtained by eliminating the η variables from the

 above system of η + 1 equations.

 53 In fact, the condition he found does not depend on any of the vertices of the inscribed polygon.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 52

 A. Del Cenlina

 Summing up, Trudi had succeeded in completing Jacobi's program.

 At this point, in order to illustrate his method, Trudi considered in detail the cases

 « = 3,4 and 5, for which he obtained explicit formulae.

 In case η = 3, the system above reduces to

 Cu\ + 2 Du\ + F = 0,

 ÂU]«2 + 2B(U] + U2)U\U2 + C(U\ + W2)2

 + 2 D(u\ + U2) + 2Eu\U2 + F = 0,

 Cu„ + 2 Dun + F = 0.

 From the first and the third equation, it follows that U\U2 = F/C and u\ + «2 =

 -2D/C, so substituting these values in the second one gets

 AF + C2 + 2EC-4BD = 0 (4.15)

 which, by the (4.3), gives (4.1): a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence

 of an inter-scribed triangle expressed in terms of the 2 χ 2 minors of the matrices of
 S and S'.

 When the two conics are circles, then Β = D = 0, and (4.15) reduces to A F +

 C2 + 2EC = 0, that is readily seen to be equivalent to condition (1.1).

 For the sake of space, we omit here the other two cases. Suffice to say that Trudi's

 formulae for circles are equivalent to those found by Fuss.

 Ten years later, shortly after Poncelet had published the first volume of Applications

 d'analyse et de géométrie, Trudi returned to the subject with two memoirs that we
 will comment in section seven.

 5 Cayley's explicit conditions

 Arthur Cayley54 had become interested in elliptic functions early in the 1840s. He

 approached that theory through Jacobi's Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum

 Ellipticarum (1829), that he had mastered immediately after his degree (Cayley 1895,

 pp. xi-xii).55

 The celebrated Mémoire sur une propriété générale d'une classe très étendue de

 fonctions transcendantes authored by Abel was published posthumously in 1841.

 Here, he proved the so-called addition theorem for Abelian integrals that provided the

 basis for the development of the modern algebraic geometry. This memoir attracted

 Cayley's attention quite early in his scientific career.

 For a comprehensive biography of Arthur Cayley, we refer to Crilly (2006).

 55 The prominent position occupied in the Fundamenta by the theory of transformation naturally attracted

 his interest. As early as 1844, he wrote short notes on the subject. Cayley always maintained Jacobi's point

 of view, and he particularly appreciated the algebraic approach. When he published the treatise on elliptic

 functions (Cayley 1876), where the theory of transformation is discussed at considerable length, it was

 already an old-fashioned work (Crilly 2006, p. 337).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 53

 An Abelian integral is an integral of type

 where R(x,y) is a rational function ofx, y, being y(x) the algebraic function defined

 by χ(χ, y) = 0 with χ (χ, y) an irreducible polynomial.

 Abel's addition theorem affirms that, if θ(χ, y; t) = 0 is a family of plane curves,

 depending rationally upon the parameter t, and (χ,·(ί), yi(t)), i = 1,..., Ν, are the

 intersection points of the curves of the family with the curve x(x,y) = 0, then

 ^ /■*/(/)
 £ / R(x, y(x))dx = V(t) + log W(i),

 where V(t) and W(t) are rational functions of the parameter t. In particular, if the

 integral is of the first kind, i.e., if its value remains finite when integration is carried out

 along any path from the initial point xo to the final point χι, the above sum reduces to a

 constant [see for instance (Markushevich 1992; Del Centina 2003 ; Bottazzini and Gray

 2013), and for a very careful analysis (Kleiman 2004)]. Since any elliptic integral is

 an Abelian integral, this theorem clearly generalizes Euler's addition theorem, which,

 as well known, holds for elliptic integrals

 where X is a polynomial of degree 3 and 4 without multiple roots, i.e., the integral is
 an elliptic integral of the first kind (Euler 1768).

 The geometrical significance of the theorem of Abel extends to that of Euler: for

 instance, if X has degree 3, then one has

 for any triple (je,·, y,■(*,·)), i = 1, 2, 3, of collinear points on the cubic curve y2 = X.

 Less general version of Abel's addition theorem had already appeared in Abel ( 1828,

 1829), where he considered the particular case of hyperelliptic functions (χ (χ, y) =
 y2 - X, with X a polynomial of degree >5).

 Some years later Jacobi explained the theorem for hyperelliptic functions in his

 paper (Jacobi 1832) and reformulated it as follows (p. 396): let X be a polynomial in
 χ of degree 2m or 2m — 1, and set

 then, given m values χο,χι, xm-i of the variable, m — 1 quantities ao,a\,,
 am-2 can be algebraically determined from these (they are roots of an algebraic

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 54

 A. Del Centina

 equation of degree m — 1, whose coefficients are rationally expressed in terms of

 xo, x\,..., xm-\ and */X(x0), · · ·, y/X(xm-\)), such that

 Π(*ο) + Π(χι) Η h n(*m_i) — Π(αο) + Π(αι) + · · · + n(am_2).

 This geometrical feature of the addition theorem represented a powerful inspiration

 for Cayley in developing the program that Jacobi had drawn in 1828, i.e., to find the

 conditions on two conics U and V for the existence of an inter-scribed n-gon. In
 a series of notes, published in 1853 and in 1854, by using Abel's theorem and the

 development in power series of Vdet(£ί/ + V) as main tools, he proved the closure

 theorem of Poncelet and found the required conditions on U and V. At the end of the

 first note (Cayley 1853a), referring to Jacobi (1828), he wrote:

 The preceding investigations were, it is hardly necessary to remark, suggested

 by a well-known memoir of the late illustrious Jacobi,56 and contain, I think, the

 extension which he remarks it would be interesting to make of the principles in

 such memoir to a system of two conics.

 Cayley proved PCT for triangles in the first two notes. In the third one, he extended

 the results to polygons of η > 3 sides, and in the fourth he gave explicit conditions
 when η — 4, 5.

 A few year later he returned to the subject with two papers concerning the porism

 of an in-and-circumscribed triangle (Cayley 1857, 1858). The aim of the first was to
 extend what we called "main lemma," from the case of three circles, to the case of a

 conic and two curves of higher degree, while the aim of the second was to give new

 proofs of Poncelet's propositions 1-3 (here stated in subsection 2.4). We will comment

 these papers, which are of pure geometrical character, at the end of this section.

 In (1861), Cayley republished the results that he had already achieved on polygons

 inter-scribed to two conics in the years 1853-1854, in a more organized and complete

 form. This paper (Cayley 1861) became the standard reference forCayley's discoveries
 in this field.

 Four years later, in a short note, he considered the problem of a triangle inscribed

 in and circumscribed about a (real) quartic curve (Cayley 1865).

 At the meeting of the Royal Society in Liverpool in 1870, Cayley reconsidered the

 problem of the in-and-circumscribed polygons. It was one of his favorite problems, and

 he picked it up at the same point he had left it years before. He published two papers

 on this topic (Cayley 1871a, b). In the first, he introduced the (2, 2)-correspondences

 in the study of that problem; in the second, he raised, and solved, the question of

 the number of triangles which can be inscribed in and circumscribed about curves of

 degree higher than two.

 We will discuss the two last-mentioned papers in section eight.

 56 Jacobi died in 1851.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 55

 5.1 Cayley's first notes (1853-1854)

 In the first note, Cayley considered two non-singular conics U and V, in the projective

 complex plane, meeting in four distinct points. It was known that, in this case, U and V

 admit a unique common self-polar triangle, i.e., a triangle ABC such that each vertex

 is the pole of the opposite side of the triangle, with respect to both U and V.57 Then,
 by choosing projective coordinates x,y, ζ so that A — (1,0, 0), Β = (0, 1,0) and
 C = (0,0, 1), Cayley was able to represent U and V, respectively, by the equations:58

 x2 + y1 + z2 = 0, ax2 + by2 + cz2 = 0.

 Let Τ to denote the pencil of conics mU + V = 0. He observed that for any tangent

 tk to the conic

 Uk:=kU + V = (a + k)2x2 + (b + k)2y2 + (c + k)2z2 = 0

 there is another conic from Τ which is tangent to tk, say pU + V = 0 (Fig. 18a).

 Then, ρ can be taken as parameter for the tangent tk as well as for its point of contact

 Tk with Uk · A general point Tk on Uk has coordinates

 (~Jb — Cy/a + ρ \Jc — ci ~Jb + ρ ~Ja — b^Jc + ρ \

 •s/o+T y/b + k y/F+k J

 and tk is represented by the equation

 xVb — Cy/a + py/a + k+yjc - a^Jb + pVb + k+zVa — b^c + py/c + & = 0.

 If tk meets U in the points Ρ and P' corresponding to the parameters θ, οο and

 θ', oo, respectively, one has

 Ρ = (Vb — Cy/a + Θ, y/c — ay/b + Θ, y/a — by/c + .

 By substituting these values in the equation of tk, Cayley got the equation

 (b - c)y/a + kja + py/a + θ + (c - a)y/b + ky/b + py/b + Θ+ (e. ) ^
 (a - b)y/c + ky/c + py/c + θ = 0,

 connecting ρ and θ. He rationalized this equation by putting

 y(a + k)(a + p)(a +Θ) = λ + μα,

 y/(b + k)(b + p)(b + 0) = λ + pb,

 yj{c + k){c + p)(c + 0) = λ + pc,

 57 This result appears for instance in Poncelet (1822, p. 193).

 We can only say that this was Cayley's reasoning behind the choice of these equations; in fact, he did

 not at all justify it. See also next subsection, where we will comment on (Cayley 1861).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Vk,

 Ue

 ,.--~pb+V = Ο

 (a)

 (b)

 Fig. 18 Cayley's procedure for his proof of PCT in case η = 3. b if a triangle PP'P" exists, which is

 inscribed in V and whose sides are respectively tangent to the conics {/£_ and U^t in the pencil, then
 Π(*) + Π(Α') + Π(*") = 0

 values which, evidently, satisfy the equation in question. Squaring and eliminating λ
 and μ, he obtained

 [be + ca +ab - (ρθ + kp + k9)]2+ ,
 —4 (a + b + c + k + ρ + 6)(abc + kp6) — 0

 which is the rational form of (5.1).

 Cayley made the important observation that, due to the symmetry of (5.1) the same

 equation would have been obtained by eliminating L, M from the equations

 V (ζ + α)(ζ + ^)(ζ + c) — L + Μζ,

 for ζ — k, ρ, θ. Then, invoking Abel's theorem,59 that if

 dx

 VC* +a)(x +b)(x +c)'

 then the algebraic relation (5.1) is equivalent to

 There is of course a similar equation for Θ' with Π (k) taken with opposite sign:

 Π(0) = Π(,ρ)-Π(*:).

 Π(0') = Π(Ρ) + Π(ί).

 59 He also noticed that the result might be verified by means of Euler's addition theorem for elliptic integrals.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 57

 The elimination of Π (ρ) between the two equations gives

 Π(6>') - Π(θ) = 2Π(Α:).

 This means, remarked Cayley, that if the points Ρ, P' on V are such that their para

 meters θ, Θ' satisfy this equation, then the line Ρ Ρ' will always be tangent to the conic

 Uk.

 If a triangle PP'P" exists, which is inscribed in V and whose sides PP', P'P"
 and Ρ"Ρ are, respectively, tangent to the conics Uk, Up and Uk" in the pencil Τ (see

 Fig. 18b), one must have:

 Π(6»') - Π (θ) = 2n(Jk),

 Π(0")-Π(0') = 2Π (k'),

 Π(θ) - Π (θ") = 2U(k"),

 hence, by adding, one gets

 Π(£) + Π(*:') + Π(Γ) = 0. (5.3)

 Cayley observed that when (5.3) holds true, there are infinitely many triangles

 inscribed in U, the sides of which touch the three conics. So one has

 Proposition C Equation (5.3) is a necessary and sufficient condition, on the para

 meters k, k!, k" of three conics Uk, Uk', Uk" in J7, for the existence of a triangle, and

 therefore of infinitely many, which is inscribed in V and whose sides are, respectively,

 tangent to Uk,Uk', Uk".

 number of sides.

 pretation of (5.3).60

 Cayley, without explanation, also added that the same holds for a polygon of any

 In the subsequent paper (Cayley 1853b), he went further, giving an algebraic inter

 He let □£ denote the determinant (ξ +a) (ξ +b) (ξ +c) of the conic ξϋ+V = 0, and

 noticed that according to Abel's theorem k, k', k" are the abscissae of the intersection

 points of the curve y2 — \Jx with a line y + βοχ + β\ = 0. Substituting λ/Πχ in the

 last equation he obtained

 VBx + βοχ + βι = 0.

 From here, it is clear that there exists a triangle inscribed U whose sides are, respec

 tively, tangent to Uk, Uk1, Uk" if and only if

 1 k VHk
 1 k' VOF =0. (5.4)
 1 k" VBF

 60 When Cayley returned to London from his summer's travels in the Wales, he wrote to W.R. Hamilton

 thanking him for sending the compendious Lecture on Quaternions and enthusiastically describing his work

 (Cayley 1853b), that he had submitted to the Philosophical Transactions in July (Crilly 2006, p. 184—185).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 58

 A. Del Centina

 In order to get an explicit condition on the coefficients of the two conics, Cayley
 considered the development in power series of the square root of the determinant
 □f : -/□? = A + Βξ + Cl·;2 + Ι) ξ0' + Εξ4 Η .He substituted the corresponding
 expressions for VÔîc, VBF, λ/Ξk", and wrote equation (5.4) in the form

 1 k k2
 1 k' k'2
 1 k" k"2

 (C + terms multiplied by k, k', k").

 Then, if k, k', k" are all different, the above equation is equivalent to (C +
 terms multiplied by k, k', k") = 0. This implies, when k = k' = k" = 0, i.e.,
 Uk = Uk' — £/jt" = U > that

 C = 0,

 is the necessary, and sufficient, condition for the existence of a triangle inscribed in V
 and circumscribed about U.

 At this point of the paper (p. 101), Cayley claimed that the same reasoning applies

 to polygons of any number of sides, and he stated the erroneous (see below) theorem:
 (*) the vanishing of the coefficient of ξη~], in the development of is the

 condition for the existence of a n-gons inscribed in V and circumscribed about U.

 Cayley applied his result in order to write explicit conditions for η = 3 and η = 4,

 and he found, respectively61 :

 a2 + b2 + c2 — 2 be — 2 ca — 2 ab = 0,

 (b + c — a)(c + a — b)(a + b — c) — 0.

 He also claimed that similar relations hold for the pentagon, the hexagon, etc. Finally,
 he considered the case of two circles,62 that he wrote

 x2 + y2 - R2 = 0, (x - a)2 + y2 - r2 = 0,

 where a denotes the distance between their centers. He reformulated the above theorem

 in this case and verified that for a triangle his condition leads to equation (1.1).

 Cayley corrected theorem (*) in the two pages note (1853c). He began by writing:

 The two theorems in my "Note on the Porism of the in-and-circumscribed Poly

 gon" are erroneous,63 the mistake arising from my having inadvertently assumed

 a wrong formula for the addition of elliptic integrals. The first of two theorems

 (which, in fact, includes the other as particular case) should be as follows.

 61 We observe that Cayley in finding these conditions, inverted the role of U and V, and consequently their

 equations, see his footnote at p. 101.

 62 The second inside the first.

 63 Cayley was referring to theorem (*) and to the equivalent form of it in case of circles.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 After having stated the corrected version, Cayley remarked that the two examples

 (n = 3,4) he had given in the previous paper were correct, being, respectively, equal
 to C = 0 and D = 0.

 Poncelet's porism, I

 59

 Theorem C The condition that there may be an infinity ofn-gons, which are inscribed
 in the conic U = 0 and circumscribed about the conic V = 0, depends upon the
 development of

 ys? = A + Βξ + C|2 + Df 3 + Εξ4 + Ft5 + Gf6 + Ηξ7 Η ,

 precisely for η = 3, 5, 7,..., respectively, the conditions are:

 and for η = 4,6, 8,..respectively, the conditions are:

 C = 0,

 = 0,

 D Ε F

 = 0,...

 C D

 D Ε

 D Ε

 Ε F

 C D Ε

 Ε F G

 D Ε F

 F G H

 D= 0,

 = 0,

 Ε F G

 = 0,,

 In the second page, he worked out the case of two concentric circles (a = 0), along

 the line of his new theorem. In particular, putting for brevity a = R2/r2, he verified

 that the condition CE — D2 = 0 for the pentagon is equivalent to a2 - 12a + 16 = 0,

 i.e., the well known r/R = cos j = (V5 + l)/4.

 In the note (Cayley 1854), he explicitly computed the conditional equations when

 the conics are circles up to η = 8 and compared them with those of Fuss and Steiner for

 η = 4, 5. He also considered the case oftwo concentric circles, and setting M = R2/r2
 he established the following conditional equations: M — 2 = Ο,64 M — 4 = 0,
 M2 — 12M + 16 = 0, respectively, for η = 3,4, 5. Cayley also remarked that the

 geometrical properties of the polygons inter-scribed to two conics having a double
 contact are obtained from the case of concentric circles.65

 The papers on the in-and-circumscribed triangle (1857-1858)

 In the paper (Cayley 1857), he considered a triangle abc inscribed in a conic S,

 whose sides ac and be are tangent to fixed curves A, B, and sought to find the curve

 C that is enveloped by the free side ab, when c moves on S. He recognized that ab,

 and its contact point γ with C, could be constructed in the same way that Poncelet had

 done in his proof of the "main lemma" (see Fig. 19, and also Fig. 13), but he preferred

 to follows another route "which it may be modified so as to be applicable to curves S
 of any order," as he wrote at p. 344.

 He first computed that the class of C, i.e., the degree of the dual C*, is 2mn where

 m and η are, respectively, the class of Λ and B. Then, via an ingenious geometrical

 construction, he computed the number of bitangents to C, i.e., the number of ordinary

 64 In a misprint, see p. 343, M - 2 is written M + 2 = 0.

 65 Since Poncelet it was known that two concentric circles are the projective image of two bitangent conics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 60

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 19 In his paper (1857) Cayley considered a more general situation: a triangle inscribed in a conic
 S having two sides tangent to other two fixed curves A and B. which are not necessarily conics. Cayley
 showed that, when the triangle abc moves remaining inscribed in S and whose sides ac and be remain
 tangents to curves A and B. respectively, the third side envelops a third curve C

 double points of C*, which turned ut to be mn(2mn — m — η + 1). He also proved

 that, in general, C does not have stationary tangents, i.e., that C* does not have cusps.
 Then, through the Pliicker formula,66 he found that C has degree

 2mn(2mn — 1) — 2mn(2mn — m — η + 1) = 2 mn(m + η — 1).

 Since Cayley had already examined, through a number of lemmas, the cases in
 which the curves and .A, Β S are in particular positions, at p. 352 he stated the following:

 Theorem CI If a triangle abc is inscribed in a conic S, and the sides ac and be are
 tangent to fixed curves A, Β of class m and n, respectively, the side ab will envelope
 a curve C of the class 2mn, with in general mn(2m n — m — η) double tangents, but

 not stationary tangents ( i.e., not tangent at inflexion points), and therefore of the order
 2mn(m + η — 1). If the curve A touch the conic S, each point of contact will give
 rise to η double tangents of the curve S, and so if the curve Β touch the conic S,
 each point of contact will give rise to m double tangents of the curve C. Moreover, if
 A and Β intersect on the conic S, each such intersection will give rise to a double
 tangent of the cun>e C. The curve C in general touches the conic S in the points in
 which it is intersected by any common tangent of the curves A and B; but if the points

 of contact be harmonically situated with respect to the conic S, then C does not pass

 through the points of intersection, but the tangents to S at the points of intersection

 are stationary tangents ofC. There is of course in the above-mentioned special cases
 a corresponding reduction in the order ofC.

 Cayley applied the theorem above to the particular case in which the curves A and
 Β are conics. In this case, the envelope C is of class 8 and, in general, of degree 24.
 Moreover, he considered two special cases of great interest (p. 353-354): first, A and
 Β both have a double contact with the conic S; second, A, Β and S all pass through

 the same four points.

 66 For a curve C of degree d and class d', with δ nodes and κ cusps, one has d' = d(d — 1) — 2S — 3κ.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 61

 In the first case, Cayley showed that the curve € has degree 8 and splits into four
 conics, each having a double contact with the conic S. Attending only to one of
 these four conics, he obtained what he called "porism (homographie) of the in-and

 circumscribed triangle":

 If a triangle abc is inscribed in a conic, and two of the sides touch conics having
 double contact with the circumscribed conic to abc, then will the third side touch a

 conic having double contact with the circumscribed conic.

 We observe that this is an extension of proposition 1 of subsection 2.4 above (Pon

 celet 1822, Art. 433), in which two of the sides of the triangle pass through fixed
 points, and the remaining side envelops a conic having a double contact with the
 circumscribed conic.

 In the second case, he showed that the curve C has order 4 and splits into two

 conics, each passing through the point of intersection of A, Β and S. Attending only

 to one of these two conics, Cayley obtained what he called "porism (allographic) of

 the in-and-circumscribed triangle":

 If a triangle abc is inscribed in a conic, and two of the sides touch conics meeting

 the circumscribed conic to abc in the same four points, the remaining side will touch

 a conic meeting the circumscribed conic in the four points.

 In case of circles, the last claim is the "main lemma" of subsection 2.4.67

 The following year Cayley published another paper on the subject, here he wrote

 (Cayley 1858, p. 31):

 In my former paper "On the Porism of the In-and-Circumscribed Triangle"

 [(Cayley 1857)], the two porisms (the homographie and the allographic) were

 established a priori, i.e., by means of an investigation of the order of the curve

 enveloped by the third side of a triangle. I propose in the present paper to give

 the a posteriori demonstration of these two porisms; first according to Poncelet,

 and then in a form not involving (as do his demonstration) the principle of pro

 jections.68 My objection to the employment of the principle may be stated as

 follows: viz. that in a systematic development of the subject, the theorems relat

 ing to a particular case and which are by the principle in question extended to the

 general case, are not in anywise more simple or easier to demonstrate than are

 the theorems for the general case; consequently, that the circuity of the method

 can and ought to be avoided.

 Likely these words were not appreciated by Poncelet.

 Cayley gave two proofs of both the porisms, one according to Poncelet and one

 independent from the principle of continuity, that for sake of space we will not com
 ment.

 The memoir of 1861

 Cayley published a complete proof of Theorem C years later in Cayley (1861). We

 present this proof here below, developing some details.

 67 In section eight of Bos et al. (1987), where the infinitesimal argument that Poncelet used in the proof

 of the main lemma is developed according to the modern theory of deformations, the authors showed that

 Poncelet's argument applies not only to conics but to algebraic curves in general.

 68 That is the principle of continuity.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 62

 A. Del Centina

 He considered the conics U = ax2 + by2 + cz2 = 0, V = x2 + j2 + z2 = 0,
 the pencil U + Ç V = 0, and for η = 3 he proceeded as in the first notes (proposition

 C above). We remark that, at p. 229, he felt the need of justify the choice of these

 equations for U and V, by saying:

 The foregoing demonstration relates to the particular forms U — ax2+by2+cz2,
 V — x2 + y2 + z2; but observing that the function + α)(ξ + b)(^ + c),
 which enters under the integral sign in the transcendental function Π£ is the

 square root of the discriminant of U + ξ V, the theory of covariants shows at

 once that the conclusions apply to any form whatever of U, V.69

 For an n-gon which is inscribed in V, and whose sides touch in the order the conics

 Uh,...,Ukn, Cayley directly wrote the condition

 Π(*ι) + Π(*2) + ··· + Π(^) = 0. (5.5)

 "By Abel's theorem," Cayley noticed (p. 230), "this transcendental equation is
 equivalent to an algebraical one." In fact, the k\, &2> · · ·, Κ are the abscissae of the

 intersection points of the curve y2 — Ox with some algebraic curve 6(x,y) = 0.

 Then, extracting Cayley's paper, "if φ(χ) and χ (χ) are polynomial in λ with arbitrary
 coefficients, and if

 φ(χ)2 + Χ 002Πχ = A(x - k])(x -k2)---{x- kn),

 which implies that for η even the degrees of φ(χ) and φ(χ) are, respectively, η/2 and

 (n — 4)/2, and for η odd are, respectively, (n - l)/2 and (n — 3)/2, the algebraical

 equation is that obtaining b the elimination of the arbitrary coefficients from the system
 of equations

 <Ρ(&ι) + Χ(*ι)Π£ι =0
 <P(k2) + χ (k2)Ok2 = 0

 <P(kn) + x(kn)Dk„ = 0

 or, what is the same, for η = 2ρ — 1 it is

 {1, Θ,..., ΘΡ~Χ, y/ΰθ,..., 0P-2V0e} = ο,

 and for η = 2ρ it is

 {i,0,..., θ», νϋθ,..., θρ~2νάθ} = ο,

 where the expressions in { } denote, respectively, the determinants formed by sub

 stituting for θ the values k\,k2,.. ■ ,kn, respectively. Thus, for η = 3 the equation is

 69 It seems to us that this amount to say: given two (non-singular) conics in general position, by a suitable

 projective transformation of the plane, their equations always can be put that form. A remark that he missed

 to do in his early notes.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 63

 1 k\ Vd^T

 1 k2 JUk~2 =0

 1 k3 ^/Πkï

 1 ki k\ VŒT

 1 k2 ^2 V®2
 1 k$ k2 Vn^3

 = 0

 1 ki, k\

 and for η = 4 it is

 and so on.

 Suppose

 y/Πξ = A + Bi- + Cf2 + Όξ3 + Εξ4 + ■ ■ ■ ,

 then substituting the corresponding expressions for VŒT. λ/Πkî, etc., the determinant
 will divide by {1,θ,θ2,, θη~1}, and it may be seen without difficulty that the
 resulting equation, on putting therein k\ = kz = ■ · ■ = kn = 0, will, according as
 η = 3,4, 5, 6 etc., be

 C = 0, D = 0, £ ° =0, L] \: =0, D Ε F = 0, etc.,

 Ε F G

 which is the theorem above referred to."

 Let us remark that, there exists a H-gon inscribed in V and circumscribed about U,

 if, and only, it is possible to find coefficients of the polynomial φ(χ) and χ (x) so that

 φ(χ) + χ (x)Dx has 0 as a root of multiplicity n.

 In the remaining of the paper, Cayley applied his result to get the condition in

 polynomial form up to η = 9.

 It is convenient here to change Cayley's notation. If vOc = A + Bx+Cj+C3X2 +

 ■ ■·, then, for η = 2m the condition above is equivalent to

 for η — 2m, and for η = 2m + 1 to the condition

 C3 C4
 C4 C5

 Cm +1 Cm+2 ' ' ' (--2m—1

 C2 C3 · · · Cm+1
 C3 C4 ■■· Cm+2

 Cm+\ Cm+2 ' '' C2m

 = 0,

 (5.6)

 = 0.

 (5.7)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 64

 A. Del Centina

 It is worth calling attention to the fact that Cayley did not try to explain the geo

 metrical meaning of the above equations, nowadays called Cay ley's conditions. This

 was done more than lOOyears later by Griffiths and Harris.

 In the following of the paper, Cayley applied his result to find explicit formulae for

 the existence of an in-and-circumscribed n-gon to U and V up to « — 9. Moreover,

 he considered the particular case of two circles, determining the required conditional

 equations that he compared with those found by J. Mention the year before (see section
 seven).

 In his paper of (1861), Cayley did not quote Trudi. Could it be that Sylvester had

 not informed him of Trudi's results?

 6 An algebraic approach through invariants

 If two conics U and V are such that a n-gon inter-scribed to them there exists, it is

 obvious that a certain relation must hold among the invariants (and covariants) of the

 two conics. This remark induced George Salmon to produce an "elementary" proof of

 Cayley's result. What he had in mind was a proof built on the basics of the theory of

 invariants of a pair of conics, such as he had developed in his treatise (Salmon 1855),

 that avoids the use of the elliptic functions.

 An invariant of an algebraic form / (x), in two or more variables, is a polynomial

 /(a) of the coefficients of /(x), that, under a linear transformation of the variables
 of determinant Δ, remains unaltered up to a power of Δ, i.e., /(a') = AkI (a). If
 k — 0, the invariant is said absolute. A covariant of /(x), is a polynomial /(a, x)

 of the coefficients and the variables of /(x), which, under a linear transformation as

 above is such that 7(a', χ') = Δ*/(a, x). The theory of invariants and covariants of

 algebraic forms, which began to be developed in the early 1840s, with the pioneering

 work of George Boole, Cayley, James J. Sylvester, and Salmon, who formulated the

 basic concepts and developed the key techniques. Salmon also codified the theory in

 high-level textbooks. For the early history of the theory of invariants, we refer to Crilly
 (1986) and Hunger (1989, 2006a, b).

 Salmon realized his program with the paper (Salmon 1857), that was published,

 divided into three distinct parts, in a single issue of the Philosophical Magazine. Here

 below we illustrate the content of this paper, extracting directly from it in the hope

 of keeping its original flavor, but also inserting some detail from Salmon's treatise on
 conic sections (Salmon 1855).

 Let λΙΙ + V =0 be the general conic of the pencil generated by the pair of conics

 U, V. Its determinant, as a polynomial in λ, can be written

 det (kU + V) = Δλ3 + Θλ2 + Θ'λ + Δ',

 where Δ and Δ' are, respectively, the determinant of U and V, Θ and Θ' are, respec

 tively, tr([/ · adj(V)) andtr(V · adj(t/)). We explicitly remark that Δ, Θ, Θ', Δ are of

 degree 3 in the coefficients of U and V. For a general theorem of the theory of invari

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 65

 ants, all the projective invariants of the pair of conics U, V, are rational functions of
 Δ, Θ, Θ' and Δ'.70

 In the first part of the paper (pp. 190-191), Salmon posed the following problem

 (a simplified version of Poncelet's main lemma): find the envelop of the third side of

 the triangle inscribed in the conic U, and two of whose sides touch the conic V.

 To this end he argued as follows. The condition that XU + V = 0 represents a

 pair of line is expressed by the condition Δλ3 + Θλ2 + Θλ + Δ' = 0. Salmon
 wrote:

 Since the value of λ plainly cannot depend on the particular axes to which the

 equations are referred, it follows that no matter how the equations are trans

 formed, the ratios of the coefficients of the powers of λ in the equation just

 written remain unaltered. Let now the sides of the triangle in any position be

 x,y,z, then the equations of the conics admit of being transformed into:

 U — 2 xy + 2 y ζ + 2 xz = 0,

 V = l2x2 + m2y2 + n2z2 — 2 Imxy — 2 Inxz — 2 mnyz — 2 Axy = 0;

 and it is plain that the equation

 AU + V = 0

 represents a conic that the third side ζ touches.

 But in this case we find, if ρ : / + m + η and r := Imn,

 A =2, ® = —p2—2A, Θ' = 2p(2r + An), A' = — (2r + Ar)2,

 whence

 4ΘΔ' - Θ'2 = 8A(2r + An)2,

 and the equation AU + V = 0 can be written

 (4ΘΔ' - ®'2)U - 4ΔΔ'ν = 0.

 The coefficients in this equation being invariants, it follows that the conic

 which we have proved is touched by the third side is a fixed conic, which is an

 equation depending on the coefficients of the two given conics.

 Let us remark that, if the condition 4ΘΔ' - Θ'2 = 0 is satisfied, is clear that the

 envelope of the third side of the triangle coincides with the conic V.

 Next Salmon asked the question: find the locus of the third vertex of a triangle

 circumscribed about V when the other two vertices move along U.

 He continued by observing:

 70 For a modern approach to the theory of invariants of a pair of conics (see Sommerville 1933; Todd 1947
 or Dolgachev 2012).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where Σ and Σ' are, respectively, the reciprocal conics of S and Sf, and Φ is the
 polynomial

 66

 A. Del Centina

 In this case, the equations of the conics U and V can be transformed into

 U = 2 xy + 2 yz + 2xz + Az2 — 0,

 V = l2x2 + m2y2 + n2z2 — 2 Imxy — 2 Inxz — 2 mnyz = 0,

 and we have

 Δ = 2 -A, 0 = —p2 + 2lmA, Θ'= 4 pr, Δ'=-4; r2.

 Again, let F = 0 be the equation of the covariant conic which passes through

 the points of contact of the common tangents to U and V (see my "Conics," pp.

 268, 288),71 the coefficient of z2 in its equation will be —4rn(l — A).

 It is useful here to recall some facts pertaining to the theory of reciprocal (dual)

 conics. Let S and S' be two general conics of equation

 S = ax2 + ay2 + a"z2 + 2 bzy + 2 b'yx + 2b" xz = 0,

 S' = Ax2 + A'y2 + A V + 2 Bzy + 2 B'yx + 2 B"xz = 0,

 then, the reciprocal conic of the conic S + λ5' has equation

 Σ + λΦ + λ2Σ' — 0, (6.1)

 (a A" + a" A' - 2 bB)x2 + (a" A + a A" - 2 b'B')y2 + (a A' + a'A - 2b" B")z2

 +2(b'B" + b"B' -aB- bA)yz + 2(b"B + bB" - a B' - b'A')xz

 +2(bB' + b'B - a"B" - b"A")xy.

 Since the conics of the original system pass through four fixed points, the conics

 of the reciprocal system always touch four fixed lines.

 The form of equation (6.1) shows that the reciprocal always touches 4ΣΣ' — Φ2 =

 0. This means that this last equation is the equation of the four common tangents to

 Σ and Σ' and to the other conics of the reciprocal system. The form of 4ΣΣ' = Φ2

 also shows that Σ is touched by those four lines and that Φ passes through the points

 of contact. Since the same holds for Σ', it follows that the eight point of contact of the

 four common tangents to the two conics Σ and Σ', all lie on the conic Φ = 0.

 The reciprocal of the system Σ + λΣ' = 0 is the system

 AS + λΡ + k2A'S' = 0,

 where F is what Φ becomes when the coefficients of Φ are written in terms of the

 elements of the polynomials Σ and Σ', a, a',..., b", and 21, 21',..., 03":

 71 Salmon was referring to Salmon (1855).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 67

 Fig. 20 The conic of equation F = 0 passing through the eight points of contact of the four common
 tangents to two conics S and S'

 (α'21" + α"21' - 2bQ3)x2 + (a"21 + a2l" - 2b'<8')>'2 + (a2l' + a'21 - 2b',(8")z2

 +2(b'Q3" + b"<8' - a» - b2l))>z + 2(b',(B + b<B" - a'®' - b'2l')jcz

 +2(b(B' + b'S - a"Q3" - b"2l")x;y.

 From the above, it follows that the conic F = 0 passes through the eight points of

 contact of the four common tangents to S and S' (see Fig. 20).

 Moreover, it is easy to check that a2t' + a'2l — 2b"©" is equal to —4r«(l — A)

 when S = U and S' = V.

 At this point, Salmon wrote:

 it can be seen that the coefficient of z2 vanishes identically in the equation

 16A'2 AU - 4(4ΘΔ' - Θ'2) A'F + (4ΘΔ' - Θ'2)2 V = 0,

 which is therefore the equation of the locus required. Its form shows that this

 conic is tangent to the four common tangents to U and V.

 If 4Θ Δ' — Θ'2 = 0, the envelope reduces to V, and the locus to U, in conformity

 to Mr. Cayley's theorem. It does not seem impracticable to obtain the equation

 of the locus by the same method when the two sides touch different conics.

 In the second part of his paper (pp. 267-269), Salmon considered the problem of
 finding the locus of the fourth vertex of a quadrilateral, whose other three vertices
 move on V, and whose sides touch U. He put for brevity

 a := 4ΔΔ', /6:=Θ2-4Δ©', γ:=2Αα + Θβ,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 21 Salmon's question for η = 4

 and reduced the problem to finding the locus of the third vertex of a triangle two
 of whose vertices move on V, two of whose sides touch U, and the third touches

 aU + βν. Proceeding as in the first part of his paper, he obtained for the required
 locus the following equation

 a2y2U + αγβ2 F + ΑΑ'β4ν = 0,

 which clearly reduces to V if γ — 0.

 Finally, in the third part (pp. 337-338), Salmon considered the question: find the
 locus of the free vertex of a polygon, whose sides all touch U, and whose vertices all
 but one move on V.72

 On p. 337, he wrote:

 This [the question above] is immediately reduced to the last question, since the

 line joining the two vertices of the polygon adjacent to that whose locus is sought,
 touches a conic whose equation is of the form aU + bV — 0 [see Fig. 21J. The
 locus will therefore always be of the form

 ΔΔ'λ2 V + λμ-F + μ2υ = 0,

 So Salmon proceeded by induction, similarly to Poncelet in his proof of the general

 theorem.

 The procedure allowed him to find a recursive procedure for determining the condi

 tion that should make it possible to describe a polygon inscribed in V and circumscribed
 about U. Precisely: if λ', μ' are the values for a polygon of η — 1 sides, and λ", μ"
 those for a polygon of η sides, then the values for a polygon of η + 1 sides are

 λ'" - μ'μ'2, μ'" = Δ'λ'λ>μ" - Α'βλ").

 Since for a triangle one has λ' — α, μ' — Α'β, for quadrilateral one has λ" = β2,

 μ" — αγ, the required conditions are:

 72 Let us recall that Landen had determined this locus when U and V are real circles.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 69

 triangle, β = 0,
 quadrilateral, y = 0,
 pentagon, δ = 0, <5 := α2γ - Δ'β3,
 hexagon, e = 0, e := S - A'y2,
 heptagon, φ = 0, φ := a2ye — S2,
 octagon, ψ — 0, ψ δφ - Α'β3€2,

 Salmon concluded by stating: "I suppose these values will be found to coincide

 with those found by a different way by Mr. Cayley in a former Number of this Journal,
 but I have not verified this."

 Two years after Salmon's paper was printed, Francesco Brioschi proved that the

 formulae of Cayley and Salmon were equivalent, by showing that both descend from

 a common principle (Brioschi 1857).

 To show this, he supposed the conic U is circumscribed to the triangle abc whose

 sides are given by χ = 0, y = 0, ζ = 0. This allowed him to put the equation of U in
 the form

 U = ayz + βζχ + yxy = 0.

 Then, he considered another conic

 V — l2x2 + m2y2 + n2z2 - ayz — bzx - cxy — 0,

 and observed that the lines x = 0, y = 0, z = 0 will be, respectively, tangents to the

 conics k\U — V = 0, kiU — V = 0 and kjU — V = 0 if and only if

 a = 2 mn — ak\, b = 2 In — βk2, c = 2 Im — yk3.

 Brioschi denoted

 A2(k) = aok3 + a\k2 + ai k + a3

 the discriminant of the "function" kU — V. Setting

 ρ = 1α+ηιβ+ηγ, q — Ar — lak\ — mβk2 — nyki, r = lmn,

 he got

 αο = αβγ, a\ = ρ2 - αβγ(]ί\ + ki + £3),

 02 = 2pq+afiy(k\k2 + hk\ -\-k2h), aj = q2 -aβγk 1^3·

 Hence, if the equation

 k3 + Ak2 + Bk + C = 0

 has solutions k\,k2,k^, it will be

 a\-aoA = p2, a2~aoB=2pq, ai-aoC = q2. (6.2)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 70

 A. Del Centina

 Multiplying these equations, respectively, for k\, k\, 1, adding up, and taking into
 account the previous equation, he got

 αφ] + a\x\ + <22*1 + «3 = (pk\ + q)2 ■

 Proceeding similarly for k2 and £3, he finally found that

 aok3 + a\k2 + a2k + <23 - (pk + q)2 = ao(k - k\)(k - k2)(k - £3), (6.3)

 and therefore, if ψ(χ) := Jdk/A(k), by Abel's theorem, as in Cayley (1853a), he
 got that k\,k2, k·} must satisfy the transcendental equation

 + e2^(k2) + 63^(^3) = C,

 which is equivalent to the following (irrational) algebraic equation

 1 *1 Δ(*ι)
 1 k2 A(k2)
 1 k3 Δ(*3)

 = 0. (6.4)

 then, setting A(k) = Aq + A\k + A2k2 Η the development in power series of the
 discriminant, he obtained

 q = Ao - k\k2P,

 where

 Ô Springer

 Ρ = A2 + A3(k] + k2) + A^{k2 + k]k2 + k\) Η

 From the relations above, it follows that kj = a^](k\k2P2 — 2AqP), which, if k\ =
 k2 = 0, i.e., the first two sides of the triangle are tangent to V, gives

 2AqA2 a2—4a 103

 £ _ _ Ζλ

 ao 4a0«3

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Brioschi noticed that (6.2) also leads to

 4(a\ — αοΑ)(ατ, — aoC) — (a2 - aoB)2 — 0. (6.5)

 Now, relation (6.4) constitutes the result of Cayley (η — 3), while relation (6.5)

 constitutes the result of Salmon in = 3). From (6.3), it follows that

 _ Δ(*ι) - A(k2) _ fciA(*2)-*2A(fci)

 ^ k\ — k2 ^ k\ — k2

 Poncelet's porism, I

 71

 This means, remarked Brioschi, that the triangle abc is circumscribed to V if and

 only if

 αΙ-4α\ατ, = 0,

 conditions equivalent, respectively, to (Cayley's) C = 0 and to (Salmon's) 4ΘΔ' —
 Θ'2 = 0.

 By considering diagonals and intermediate triangles, as Poncelet and Jacobi had

 done in the case of a pencil of circles (recall Fig. 1 lb), Brioschi showed that the same

 holds true first for quadrilateral, and then for a polygon of any number of sides.

 Almost 100years after the publication of Salmon's paper, John A. Todd revisited

 the same subject in Todd (1948). We will return on this argument in section thirteen.

 7 Other contributions from 1850 to 1875

 In the third quarter of the nineteenth century, many papers related to Poncelet's theorem

 and its generalizations appeared. In this section, we present and discuss only those

 which, in our opinion, are the most interesting both per se and from a historical

 point of view. We have divided them into two major branches along which the theory

 developed: (1) find new proofs of PCT and simplify those already known; (2) extend

 the theorems in higher dimension and prove other "closure theorems."

 In this section, we also aim to introduce the reader to the topics discussed in the

 subsequent sections.73

 7.1 New proofs of PCT

 In 1849, a new paper by Jacobi's pupil Richelot was printed. In his (1849) he obtained,

 in the case of two nested circles, an algebraic condition for the existence of an in-and

 circumscribed p-gon, ρ being a prime. He also gave a method for solving the problem

 in case of a polygon of η sides knowing the solution for polygons of η - 1 and η + 1
 sides.

 In 1860, J. Mention published Essai sur le problème de Fuss (Mention I860).74

 He called "problem of Fuss," the problem of determining the relation between the

 data R,r,S, η for the existence of a «-gon inter-scribed to two circles, respectively, of

 radii R, r, being S the distance between their centers. To solve the problem, Mention

 argued, very ingeniously, as follows.

 Let AB be a chord of the circle C of radius R and center Ο, which is tangent to the

 circle c of center I and radius r. Denote by A, and Β, the angle between the chord and

 73 For a more extended review of the literature of this period, we refer to Loria (1889a, b, 1896), but alert

 the reader that many references therein are incorrectly dated or have page numbering wrong, or even present

 a misleading indiction of the journal that should contain the quoted paper.

 74 The memoir was read at the Academy of Saint Petersburg the 13th of Mai 1859. Very little is known

 about J. Mention ( 1821-?), probably a Russian mathematician. In the years 1845-1865, he published several
 short notes in Nouvelles Annales de Mathématique.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 72

 A. Del Centina

 Then, considering the triangles I AO, I BO and by using some trigonometry one has

 Fig. 22 Illustration of how Mention proceeded in order to determine the relation among R,r, 8, η for the
 existence of a H-gon inter-scribed to two circles of radii R and r, being 8 the distance between their centers

 the other tangent to c drawn, respectively, from A, and Β (Fig. 22). We have that

 r r

 OA = OB =

 A R

 sin j sin f

 ο , r2 2/?r .
 δ = — cos Ι Β AO

 .94 4 1 ^

 _ cm _

 (SÂo-f),

 Δ L

 9 9 r2 2 Rr /-—
 δ2 = R2 -\ — — cos ( ABO
 sin2 ■? sin γ

 .OR R 1

 )■

 By subtracting the two equations above, and using some trigonometry, Mention got

 the following equation

 r ( A B\
 2R l°0t 2 + COt 2 ) = cosBAO·

 one, he got

 Ô Springer

 R2 + r2 - S2 r A Β

 cot — cot — = sin BAO.

 2Rr 2R 2 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Now, by adding the same two equations above, and taking into account the previous

 Poncelet's porisra, I

 73

 By squaring and adding, he finally obtained

 ι Â τ ΰ ^ Â τ β

 = cot h cot h cot — cot h

 2 2 2 2

 Setting

 ν —  2R2r2 + 2R282 + 2r2S2 - R4 - r4 - S4 . _ R2 - 82

 r4 r2

 ν = x\x\ + x\ + x2 — 2ix\x2

 V = X^X2 + x\ + X2 — 2ΪΧ2Χ3

 ν = x2x2 + x2 + x2 - 2ixix\,

 from the first and the last equations one gets

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and xi = cot A/2, χι = cot B/2, Mention wrote the equation above in the form

 If a polygon of η sides is inscribed in C and circumscribed about c, denoting

 X1,X2,X3, ...,xn the cotangents of the half of the angles at the respective vertices,

 ν — x2x2 + x\ + χι — 2ix\x2.

 one has the following system:

 ν = xfx2 + x2 + x\ — 2ix\xi

 ν = x\x2 + x2 + x2 — 2ix2X3

 ν = +*n~ 2ixn-\Xn

 v = x2x2 + x2 + x2 — 2ixnx\.

 (7.1)

 These equations, Mention affirmed, will be compatible only if a certain relation among

 v, i and η holds true, and, vice versa, if such a relation is satisfied it will be possible to

 give to any initial angle an arbitrary value. Therefore, if a polygon of η-sides can be

 inscribed in C and circumscribed about c, then there are infinitely many such polygons.

 For a triangle, one has

 By substituting these values into the second, after some computation, one is lead to

 ν + 2i + 1 = 0,

 which is readily seen to be equivalent to S2 = R2 ± 2Rr, which includes (1.1).

 74

 A. Del Centina

 Proceeding similarly, Mention found the conditional equation that allows the exis

 tence of an inter-scribed n-gon for η up to 11, but for higher value of n, the difficulties

 in the elimination become insurmountable, and he was able to give only some recursive
 formula.

 Let us remark that the system (7.1) can be deduced from the more general (4.10)

 found by Trudi.

 In 1862, Poncelet published the first volume of Applications d'analyse et de
 géométrie. In the Note historique, inserted at the end of the book, he described the

 development of the theory until then.75 Recalling (Jacobi 1828), he expressed his

 disagreement with the term "géométrie élémentaire" that Jacobi used in the title in

 connection with PCT. Then, Poncelet quoted the results of Fuss, Steiner, Richelot, Cay

 ley, Brioschi and Mention. This latter, according to him, had the great merit of having

 tackled the question directly and geometrically, and, although he had only solved the

 problem for η < 11, he had highlighted the scale of relation between the polygons of

 η, η — 1 and η — 2 sides (see Poncelet 1862, p. 483). He continued by saying:

 C'est d'ailleurs une question de savoir si le problème, si mal résolut par Fuss

 en 1792, l'a été mieux depuis par d'autre, notamment en Angleterre par M.

 Cayley, qui, ignorant sans doute mes publications de 1817 et 1822 citées plus

 haut, a attribué gratuitement à cet ancien et estimable géomètre, sous le nome de

 porisme, le théorème de la p. 364 sur les cercles. Parmi les nombreux Mémoire de

 M, Cayley, écrits dans une langue mathématique pour moi doublement étrangère,

 j'entrevois bien, en effet, de belles méthodes algébriques pour passer d'un terme

 à un autre de la série des polygones, mais non pour franchir, sans calculs intermé

 diaires, l'intervalle qui sépare entre eux deux termes de rang quelconque. Ainsi,

 par exemple, dans son dernier Mémoire résumé, de mars 1861, il n' arrive à la for

 mule de l'ennéagone, obtenue par M. Mention et relative au cas simple de deux

 cercles, qu'après avoir laborieusement calculé toutes celles qui appartiennent

 aux polygones d'ordre inférieur [This is also a question of whether the problem,

 so badly solved by Fuss in 1792, has been better solved by others later, as in

 England by M. Cayley, who, undoubtedly ignorant of my publications of 1817

 and 1822 quoted above, assigned gratuitously to this estimated geometer, under

 the name of porism, the theorem at p. 364 on the circles. Among the memoirs

 of M. Cayley, which are written in a mathematical language doubly extraneous

 to me, I see, indeed, beautiful algebraic methods for passing from one term to

 another of the series of polygons, but which do not cross, without intermedi

 ate calculations, the interval between two of any rank. So, for example, in his

 latest and concluding memoir of March 1861, he arrives at the formula for the

 enneagon, obtained by M. Mention and relative to the simple case of two circles,

 only after having painstakingly calculated all those belonging to polygons of a

 lesser number of sides],

 Cayley replied to Poncelet's remarks with a letter in which, after having denied

 wish to attribute the theorem in question to Fuss, he dealt with the criticism levelled

 75 This note makes for very interesting reading in many ways.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 75

 at his paper of 1861. He briefly reviewed his method, displayed the formulae for η up

 to 8 and stressed that the condition was actually and explicitly found for a polygon

 of any number of sides, underlying, "sans passer par celles qui appartiennent aux

 polygones d'ordre inférieur" [without passing through those belonging to polygons
 of a less number of sides], Cayley's letter to Poncelet ended with this meaningful
 statement:

 Comme j'attache, je l'avoue, un peu d'importance à cette solution (laquelle
 selon l'explication que je viens de donner ne parait pas mériter la critique que

 vous en faites) je serais bien aise si vous voulez bien communiquer cette lettre

 à l'Académie [As I attach, I confess, some importance to this solution (which,

 according to the explanation I have just given, does not seem to deserve your

 criticism) I will be glad if you could communicate this letter to the Academy].

 The letter was quickly published in the Comptes rendus (Cayley 1862).

 In his historical note, Poncelet failed to quote Trudi, whose memoir of 1853 he had

 probably not read. This lack of recognition somewhat annoyed Trudi, who regarded

 his results as being more general and deeper than those of Mention.

 The following year Trudi published the long memoir (Trudi 1863a), on which,

 returning to the question related to the existence of inter-scribed polygons to two
 conics, he claimed priority for the complete analytical proof of Poncelet's closure

 theorem. In the Notizie storiche, that he inserted at the beginning of his work, Trudi

 suggested that he had not been mentioned because the title of his memoir of 1853,

 Rappresentazione geometrica immediata dell'equazione fondamentale nella teorica

 delle funzioni ellittiche [Immediate geometrical representation of the fundamental

 equation in the theory of elliptic functions], had not alluded at all to Poncelet's theorem

 and related questions. To endorse his priority, he also mentioned the first studies of

 1841, the memoir of 1843 he had read at the Congresso degli Scienziati held in Naples

 in 1845, and the encouragements he had received from Jacobi that led him to write
 the memoir of 1853.76 Then, he added:

 Risulta da questi fatti che noi possiamo pretendere alia piccola gloria di aver dato

 i primi una dimostrazione analitica compiuta e diretta dei teoremi di Poncelet,

 e di aver dato anche i primi un metodo per la ricerca délia relazione, affiché un

 poligono di qualsivoglia numéro di lati possa esser iscritto e circoscritto a due

 coniche [From these facts, it appears that we can expect little glory for being the

 first to give a direct and complete analytical proof of the theorems of Poncelet,

 and for being also the first to give a method to obtain the relation under which a

 polygon of any number of sides can be inscribed in and circumscribed about to

 two conics].

 The same year, Trudi published another paper on the same subject, that he entitled,

 more explicitly, Su ' teoremi di Poncelet relativi a ' poligoni iscritti e circoscritti allé

 76 In passing we note that Trudi's memoir of 1853 was cited by Angelo Genocchi in his paper on a
 construction of the theorem of Abel, in relation to the addition of elliptic functions, published in the first

 volume of the just founded Annali di Matematica Pura e Applicata (Genocchi 1858, p. 36).

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 76

 A. Del Centina

 coniche [On Poncelet's theorems related to inscribed and circumscribed polygons to
 conics] (Trudi 1863b).

 These two memoirs do not add much to the previous one of 1853, so for sake
 of space we avoid comments. Suffice to say that Trudi (1853) and Trudi (1863a)
 were mentioned by Loria (1889b, 1896), while Dingeldey only quoted the second
 (Dingeldey 1903, p. 47). These memoirs and (Trudi 1863b) were cited in Gerbaldi

 (1919, p. 97), where Trudi's method was shortly presented (see our section eleven).

 Since then it seems that Trudi's work on the theorem of Poncelet has been forgotten
 until very recently (see Dragovic 2011, p. 105).

 Poncelet's book quoted above contained, as an appendix, a memoir by Théodore
 Moutard,77 titled Recherhes analytiques sur les polygones simultanément inscrits

 et circonscrits a deaux coniques (Moutard 1862). By means of algebraic methods,

 Moutard wrote an equation of the curve enveloped by the last side of a n-gon inscribed

 in a conic 2lo, and whose first η - 1 sides are tangent to another conic 21, when its

 vertices move along 2lo. By means of elegant geometrical considerations, he found a

 simple recursive law for the formation of the conditional equations relative to the cases

 3,4,..., n. The study of this law comes down to the study of certain functional equa

 tions, whose solution leads directly to the transcendental functions Θ, Η of Jacobi,

 of which the elliptic functions sn(w), cn(w) and dn(M) are simple rational expressions.

 Moutard observed how many of the properties of these functions were related to the
 theorem of Poncelet.

 Jakob Rosanes and Moritz Pasch, with their joint work (Rosanes and Pash 1865),

 also completed Jacobi's project. Generalizing the method used by Jacobi, they were

 able to write the relation that the coefficients of two conics, A and Β, must satisfy

 for the existence of a polygon of η sides inter-scribed to them. In the introduction

 to their paper, after having recalled Euler, Fuss, Steiner, Jacobi, they quoted (Cayley

 1853a,b), (Moutard 1862), briefly summarized the results therein, and added:

 Die gegenwàrtige Abhandlung, deren Verfasser von den letztgenannten beiden
 Arbeiten bis vor kurzer Zeit keine Kenntniss hatten, scheint von diesen sowohl

 in Bezug auf den eingeschlagenen Weg, als die Form der Resultate, welche
 grosse Àchnlichkeit mit den von Jacobi gefundenen Formeln aufweist, sosehr

 verschieden, dass die Verôffentlichung derselben wohl gerechtfertigt erscheinen

 durfe [the present memoir, whose authors until recently had no knowledge of the

 last works mentioned, which seem to have great resemblance, both in terms of

 path as in the shape of the results, with the formulae found by Jacobi, are indeed

 rather different, so that the publication of it probably could be justified.]

 By performing a projective change of coordinates, Rosanes and Pasch put the equa

 tions of A and Β in the simple form

 x2 + y2 + z2 = 0, ax2 + fiy2 + γζ2 = 0,

 77 Théodore Florentin Moutard (1827-1901), engineer. His mathematical work was primarily in the theory

 of algebraic surfaces, differential geometry and differential equations. He taught mechanics at the École
 des mines.

 <£i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 77

 and considered separately four cases, according to the behavior of the intersections

 and the common tangents of the two conics are real or imaginary, and for each of these

 cases they obtained the relative condition allowing the existence of an inter-scribed

 polygon. Finally, they computed these relations in terms of the coefficients of the cubic
 polynomial

 <5o^ + <5ιλ2 + <$2λ + ^3 = det(5 — λΑ)

 for η = 3, 4, getting, respectively

 <Sq = 4<5i<52, <5| + 8<5o<52 = 4<$i($2<$3.

 As we know, these relations were already obtained by Salmon years before.

 Four years later, in their paper (Rosanes and Pash 1869), Rosanes and Pasch recog

 nized that the above question (and in fact an entire class of geometrical problems)

 could be put in the following form.

 Let there be given a symmetric doubly quadratic equation

 /(ίο» il) = + 2btoti(îq 4- ί2) + c(?o + ίι)2 + 2dtf)t\ + 2e(to + t\) + f.

 For a fixed value of t\, there are two values of the first variable satisfying the equation,

 say to and another value tj- Fixed ?2, there is another value other than t\, say Î3, satis

 fying the same equation. Proceeding in this way one gets a sequence ίο, t\, ti, ■ ■ ·, t„,

 such that /(ίο, ίι) = /(ίι, h) — ■ · ■ — /(in-i> tn) = 0. The question is: for a given

 η > 2 is to = tn and at the same time tn+\ = t\, and in general tn+h = ift?

 At this point (p. 169), the two authors affirmed that ίο and tn satisfy an equation of

 the same form as above, that is, by eliminating the intermediate variables t\,..., i„_i
 one obtains

 an-\ioi« + 2&n-iioin(io + i«)+c/i-i(io + tn)2+2dn-\totn + 2e(to + tn)+fn-\.

 Let us remark that this does not appear completely justified, and in fact, Trudi felt the

 need to prove it by means Euler's differential equation.

 Rosanes and Pasch asked for the condition under which ίο = tn for a certain η > 2.

 By means of an elaborate algebraic computation, they proved that a necessary and

 sufficient condition is given by the vanishing of the function qn, defined recursively
 as follows:

 qo = Q>,q\ =q2 = \,qi=o

 (In—2Ç[n+2 Ι" in—1<?η+1 =

 qn-iql+\ + Rn+ml-i = qn (λ^2 + 28qn-.iqn+\),

 qn-iqn+2 + ^-qn—iqn+l =

 Λ

 qn-2qn+\ "f" in+2<7n-l = Qniln 28qn-\qn+\),

 if η is even, or

 if η is odd.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 78

 A. Del Centina

 Clearly, qn is an entire function of the coefficients of /(ίο, ?i), of degree n2/A — 1

 or (n2 — l)/4 according if η is even or odd.

 Here (p. 173) Rosanes and Pasch, without further explanation, claimed that: if
 Pq, P\,..., Pn is a polygonal line inscribed in A and circumscribed about B, the

 corresponding parameters ίο, t\ of these points satisfy, in pairs (ίο, t\ ), (t\, ti),

 etc., to a symmetric biquadratic equation of the previous type, whose coefficients

 depend on those of A and Β. Hence, the condition for the closure of the polygonal

 line, i.e, for the existence of a n-gon inter-scribed to A and B, is given by q„ = 0. Then,

 expressing λ, σ and 8 in terms of the coefficients of the discriminant det(B — a A) —

 Sqo/3 + 8\ot2 + + <$3 [as in Rosanes and Pash (1865), section 9], they wrote down,

 respectively, for a triangle a quadrangle and a pentagon, the following conditions:

 <73 = - 45, S3 =0, q4 = 2[8M32 + (if ~ 4Ms)] = 0,

 q5=q2- 16<50i$3<74 = 0,

 which are readily seen to be equivalent to that given by Salmon.

 Hence, on the base of induction, Rosanes and Pasch claimed: qn is an entire function

 of the coefficients of the two conics, which is of degree

 (7.2)

 according if η is even or odd.

 The question of determining the degree of the invariant whose vanishing guaranties

 the existence of an inter-scribed n-gon to the two given conics, was to be studied in

 depth by Gerbaldi 50 years later.

 In a footnote, Rosanes and Pasch gave notice of dissertation (Simon 1867) by Max

 Simon.78 In his thesis, Simon presented a new proof of PCT by means of the emerging

 theory of the Weierstrass p-function, instead of the classical elliptic functions of

 Jacobi, and expressed the conditional equation in terms of the invariant of the pencil

 of conics. He also noticed the relation between PCT and biquadratic binary equations

 (Simon 1867, pp. 8-12). It is worth to say that in 1864-1865, while still student in

 Berlin, Simon participated in a seminar dealing with these topics. An enlarged version

 of the thesis was published years later (Simon 1876). This approach to PCT was later

 codified by Halphen, in the second volume of his treatise on elliptic functions (Halphen

 1888). We will return on this in section ten.

 7.2 New closure theorems

 Several closure theorems were proposed by Steiner after 1832 [see the appendix of
 Steiner (1832)]. In one of these, he considered two (real) circles Cι and C2, the

 second lying inside the interior of the first, and a sequence of circles c\, C2,..., c„

 78 After graduating, Max Simon (1844-1918) moved in Strasburg where he taught from 1871 until 1912.

 His research dealt mainly with the history of mathematics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) (b)
 (a) (b)

 Fig. 23 Steiner's closure theorem for circles (1832)

 such that each of them is tangent to both C\ and C2, and c,· is tangent to c,_i for every
 i =2(see Fig. 23a).

 Poncelet's porism, I

 79

 Steiner claimed that either the chain never closes whatever η is, i.e., cn is never

 tangent to c\ for any n, or the chain closes, i.e., c„ is tangent to c\ for some n. In this

 case, the same happens for any similar chain of η circles whatever is the first circle c 1
 one considers (see Fig. 23b).

 Denoting R\, R2 the radii of the two given circles, A the distance between their
 centers, and m the number of times the chain wraps around C2, Steiner gave the
 following conditional equation, Bedingungsgleichung (Steiner 1832, pp. 318-320),
 allowing the existence of the relative closed chain:

 To prove the claim when C\ and C2 are concentric poses no difficulty. Since in
 this case the figure is completely symmetric, it is enough to apply some elementary
 geometries (Fig. 24a), and it follows that all circles in the chain have the same diameter.

 It is also clear that does not matter from which position one starts: if one chain closes,
 then all chains close.

 A suitable circular inversion allows us to pass from the case of concentric circles to

 the general case proposed by Steiner. In fact, such a transformation map circles into
 circles, lines into circles, and preserve tangency and angles (Fig. 24b).

 Steiner proposed a new closure problem in Steiner (1846). Let Ε be a non-singular
 plane cubic and Ρ, Q be two fixed point of it. Chosen a point A\ φ Ρ, Q on Ε, the line
 PA1 meets £ in a third point A2· The line QA2 meets E, other then in Aj and Q, in

 another point A3. Similarly, the line Ρ A3 meets E, other than in Ρ and A3, in another
 point A4. Continuing on this way one gets a transversal A\A2A3A4 ... A2„A2n+i
 inscribed in E. Then, he stated: there are two possibilities, either the polygonal line
 never closes, or it closes, i.e., A2n+i = Aforming a polygon of2n sides inscribed
 in the cubic; in this case, the same holds true whatever is the initial point A1.

 ® Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 24 a The case of concentric circles is easy to solve, b By circular inversion one pass to the general
 case

 80

 A. Del Centina

 The theorem was proved by Clebsch as follows (see Clebsch, 1864, p. 106). If the
 polygonal line closes, argued Clebsch, then, according to Abel's addition theorem,
 one has the following equivalences (in the group law on the cubic Ε):

 (b)
 (a) (b)
 (a)

 A\ + A2 + Ρ + wo = 0
 A2 + A3 + Q + "0 = 0

 ^2n-l + Αϊη + Ρ + MO = 0

 [ A 2η + Α] + (2 + Μο = 0

 n(P-Q) = 0,

 where mo is a constant. Adding the first, third, fifth, ...and penultimate equation, and

 subtracting from this sum the sum of the second, fourth, sixth,.. .and last equation, one

 gets

 which expresses the condition on the points P, Q which allows the existence of an
 inscribed 2rc-gon.

 Since this condition does not depend on the choice of the initial point A], it follows

 that if P, Q satisfy it, then the transversal closes in 2η steps whatever is the initial

 point. Let us observe that if η = 3, then the above condition means that P. Q are both
 flexes of E.

 A second proof of Steiner's theorem was given by the Czech Eduard Weyr in his

 paper (Weyr 1870). In the same paper, Weyr also proved a similar theorem for a plane
 curve C of degree four with two ordinary double points P, Q (see Fig. 25). Precisely:
 given A] eC\ {P. Q] the line PA1 meets C in a point B\, the line QB\ meets C in a

 point A 2, and keep going on this way one has a sequence of points A\, A2, ■ ■ ■ A2„+i .

 Then, Weyr proved that, if /bn+i — A \ for some n, then the sequence always closes,

 after 2η steps, for any choice of A] on C. This problem, as we will see later on, was
 revisited in Griffiths (1976, pp. 346-347).

 Ç\ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 25 Closure theorem that Steiner proposed in ( 1846) for a plane quartic curve with two nodes

 The first attempt to extend Poncelet's theorem from conics to quadrics was made
 by Cayley. In his paper (Cayley 1853d), he tried to extend the reasoning of Cayley
 (1853a) to the case of two quadrics Q) x2 + y2 + z2 + u>2 = 0 and Q') ax2 +
 by2 + bz2 + dw2 = 0, by taking chords of Q touching Q' in order to construct an
 inter-scribed polygonal line to the two quadrics. He was lead to consider hyperelliptic

 integrals of type

 Π( = [ ^ =,

 J <J(x + a ) (x + b) (x + c) (x + d) (x — k) (x — k')

 where k, k' are two values of the parameter λ in XQ + Q' = 0. After having developed

 some transcendental equations, Cayley soon realized that the theory of Poncelet poly

 gons for conics could not be extended to quadrics in the simple way that one might be
 led to suppose.

 Michel Chasles investigated the properties of n-gons which are inscribed in a given

 (real) ellipse (Chasles 1865). He found that among all such n-gons, there are infinitely
 many having maximum perimeter, and these all have their sides tangent to a second
 ellipse confocal to the first. Similarly, he proved that among all the n-gons circum
 scribed about a given ellipse, there are infinitely many having minimum perimeter,
 and all these are inscribed in a second ellipse confocal to the first. These results were
 generalized to (real) ellipsoids by Darboux.

 In the short note of 1870, Darboux stated three theorems regarding polygons

 inscribed in an ellipsoid and circumscribed about another, which extend to ellipsoids

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 82

 A. Del Centina

 the results of Chasles. A polygonal line P\, P2, ..., Pn+1 is said inscribed in an ellip
 soid A, if all its vertices are on A; is said circumscribed about an ellipsoid B, if all

 its sides are tangent to B. If P\ = Pn+\, the polygonal line closes in a polygon of

 η-sides, which may be inscribed in A or/and circumscribed about B. The first and the
 third are:

 There are infinitely many polygons of η sides inscribed in an ellipsoid A having

 maximum perimeter, and all them are circumscribed to two ellipsoids B, B\ confocal
 to A;

 There are infinitely many polygons of η sides circumscribed about an ellipsoid Β

 having minimum perimeter, and all them are inscribed in an ellipsoid A and (simulta

 neously) circumscribed to another ellipsoids B\ confocal to Β and A.

 The second, and more important, theorem, can be stated as follows:
 Let Β, Βι and A1, A2,..., An be confocal ellipsoids. In general, there are no n

 gons having their vertices on A\, Ai,..., An, whose sides are tangent to Β and B\. If

 one such polygon exists, then infinitely many others exist enjoining the same property.

 Darboux remarked that to prove the theorems was necessary the use of hyper-elliptic

 functions with four periods. The proofs were actually given by means of Abel's addition

 theorem for hyperelliptic integrals in the second volume of his treatise Leçons sur la

 théorie générale des surfaces (Darboux 1889, pp. 303-307).79

 More than 100 years later, these theorems, especially the second, became of great

 interest for physicists [see for instance (Dragovic 2011) and the references therein]. In

 his note, perhaps foreshadowing the future, Darboux had written:"Un rayon lumineux

 qui se réfléchirait à l'intérieur de l'ellipsoide décrira ces polygones s'il est d'abord

 dirigé suivant le premier côté" [a ray of light that is reflected within an ellipsoid, will

 describe one of these polygons if is first directed along the first side].

 In the years following Darboux continued to work on Poncelet's theorem, producing

 the very interesting results that we will present in section nine.

 A new type of Poncelet theorem for quadrics was proved by Weyr. He considered

 the smooth curve Ε intersection of two quadric Q and Q' of rank > 3 in P3. He fixed

 a ruling S on Q and a ruling Σ on Q'. If A\ is any point of E, the line in S from A1

 intersects Ε in another point Αι, and the line in Σ from A 2 intersects Ε in another

 point A3. By proceeding in this manner, one gets a skew polygonal line connecting

 the points A\, A2,. ·. A2,2+1 on E. Weyr stated that if for some η the polygonal line

 closes, i.e., A2,1+1 = A\, then also the polygonal line constructed starting from any

 other point of Ε closes after 2η steps (Weyr 1870, p. 28). He obtained the result as

 a corollary of the analogous theorem for plane quartics with two nodes that we have
 recalled above.

 This last theorem can be seen as the historical origin of the Poncelet theorem in

 space of Griffiths and Harris that will be discussed in section fourteen of this paper.

 79 At p. 307, Darboux quoted O. Staude, who in 1883 had proved the theorems by the use of the theta
 function with four periods (Staude 1883).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 83

 8 (2,2)-Correspondences and closure problems

 From what we have seen above it is clear that Trudi and Cayley must be credited

 for having pursued Jacobi's plan ahead of others, and for investigating the difficult
 determination of the relation between the coefficients of two conics when they admit

 an in-and-circumscribed n-gon. If Cayley had the great merit of having given this

 relation in explicit form, Trudi had that, as we will be clear shortly, of having brought

 to light the role that biquadratic binary equations play in the study of the Poncelet

 polygons and related questions.

 The theory of algebraic correspondences, that arose in the 1850s in the school of

 Chasles, developed gradually in the second half of the nineteenth century in Chasles
 (1864), De Morgan (1865), Cayley (1866), Cremona (1867), Zeuthen (1871), Brill
 (1873) and others.80 Here, we shortly recall some basic facts of this theory that will
 be useful later.

 Let f(x,y) be a polynomial of degree minx and of degree η in y. The equation

 /(x, y) = 0,

 determines an (m, n)-correspondence between the variables χ and y, in the sense

 that, to any value of χ correspond η values y\,... ,yn of y, while to any values of

 y correspond m values x\,..., xm of x. We may think of jc, y as parameters fixing

 two points P, Q, respectively, on a line / and on a line /', or, more generally, on two
 unicursal (i.e., rational) curves C and C'.81

 A coincidence of a point Ρ with one of its correspondent points Qu ■ ■ ■, Qn, occurs

 when one of the y,· is equal to the χ from which it arises. Therefore, such coincidences

 are given by the equation

 f(x, x) = 0,

 which is of degree m + η. The principle of correspondence (Chasles 1864) affirms

 that there are, in general, m + η coincidences.82

 A branch point is a point such that two (or more) of its η corresponding points

 coincide. If we write /(x,y) = Xoyn + X\yn~l H h Xn, where the Xj have degree
 minx, this equation in y has two coincident roots if = nXoyn~l -1 \-Xn-l = 0.
 Therefore, in general a (m, ^-correspondence has 2m(n — I) branch points.

 A correspondence is said symmetric, if for any pair of corresponding points Ρ, Q

 also Q, Ρ is a pair of corresponding points. This means that the two polynomials

 /(je, >') and f(y, x) are identical.

 80 For a historical study of this concept (see Segre 1892; Coolidge 1940).

 81 The term unicursal was coined by Cayley, who also derived the fundamental properties of these curves
 (see Cayley 1866).

 82 This principle is also referred as Chasles ' principle of correspondence, or even as the Chasles-Cayley
 Brill principle of correspondence.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 84

 A. Del Centina

 Symmetric (2, 2)-correspondences are associated with biquadratic (sometime also

 called doubly quadratic) equations of the following type

 f(x, y) = ax2y2 + bxy(x + y) + c(x2 + y2) + dxy + e(x + y) + / = 0.

 From above it follows that, a general symmetric (2, 2)-correspondence has four

 coincidence (or fixed points), corresponding to the roots of

 ax4 + 2 bx3 + (2c + d)x2 + lex + f — 0, (8.1)

 and four branch points corresponding to the roots of

 D(x) = Q(x)2 - 4P(x)R(x) = 0,

 where D(x) is the discriminant of the polynomial /(x,y) = P(x)y2 + Q(x)y + R(x)

 (as polynomial in y).

 8.1 Cayley's papers of 1871

 As we have seen, the relation between Poncelet's closure theorem and symmetric

 (2, 2)-correspondences emerged in part through the works of Trudi (1853, 1863a,b),
 and of Rosanes and Pash (1869).

 Cayley at the beginning of his paper (1871a) wrote:

 The porism of the in-and-circumscribed polygon has its foundation in the theory
 of the symmetrical (2,2) correspondence of points on a conic; viz. a (2, 2)

 correspondence is such that to any given position of either point there correspond

 two positions of the other point; in a symmetrical (2, 2) correspondence either

 point indifferently may be considered as a first point and the other of them will

 be the second point of the correspondence. Or, what is the same thing, if x, y are

 the parameters which serve to determine the two points, then x, y are connected

 by an equation of the form83

 (*) (x,l)2(y,l)2 = 0,

 which is symmetrical with respect to the parameters x, y.

 It seems it is here that, for the first time, symmetrical (2, 2)-correspondences are

 explicitly associated with the construction of Poncelet's polygons.

 Before continuing with the exposition of Cayley's paper, we explain what he meant

 by the above.

 Let C and D be two non-singular conics in a plane π. One may suppose C rationally

 parameterized by a parameter s, so that to any point on C corresponds a value of s and

 vice versa. Let Ρ be a point on C corresponding to the value χ of the parameter. In

 83 This is the symbolic form that Cayley used to write a doubly quadratic equation.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 85

 the construction of Poncelet, to the point Ρ correspond two points Q and Q' on C, of

 parameter value, respectively, y and y', such that the lines Ρ Q and Ρ Q' are tangent to

 D. This construction gives a (2, 2)-correspondence on C, which is clearly symmetric,
 since any one of Q and Q' can be chosen as first correspondent of P. Hence, the

 parameter values of corresponding points are connected by an equation of the form

 ax1 y2 + bxy(x + y) + c(x2 + y1) + dry + e(x + y) + f = 0.

 Cayley showed that any symmetric (2, 2)-correspondence on a conic is defined in

 this way. One may suppose C to be given, in parametric equations, by (1, s, s2), so if

 Χ, Υ, Ζ are the coordinates in the plane, the line lxy joining two points (1, x, x2) and
 (1, y, y ) on C is expressed by the equation

 lxy.

 Χ Υ Ζ
 1 χ χ2
 1 y /

 = 0,

 that is xyX — (x + y)Y + Ζ = 0. In the dual plane π*, this line is represented by the

 point (xy, —(.*+>·), 1). Let D be any non-singular conic, represented by its tangential

 equation (i.e., by the dual conic) of equation

 Aa2 + Ββ2 + Cy2 + Ωβγ + Εαγ + Ραβ = 0.

 The line lxy will be tangent to D if and only if

 Ax2y2 + B(x + y)2 + C - D(x + y) + Exy - Fxy(x + y) = 0,

 and this represents a general symmetric (2, 2)-correspondence.

 Cayley showed that, whether symmetric or not, a (2, 2)-correspondence always

 leads to a differential equation of the form

 — ±^=0.
 Vx Vr

 where X, F are polynomials of degree 4, respectively, in χ and y, having the same

 coefficients if the correspondence is symmetric. In this case, he also noticed that (p. 85):

 if A and Β are corresponding points, the corresponding points of β are A and a

 new point C; those of C are Β and a new pointD, and so on; so that the points

 form a series A, B, C, D, E, F,...; and the porismatic property is that, if for a
 given position of A this series closes at a certain term, for instance, if F = A;

 then it will always thus close, whatever be the position of A.

 This follows at once, observed Cayley, from the consideration of the differential
 equation and its complete integral of the form (*).84 In fact, since this

 differential equation is integrable in the form

 84 It is useful to recall (4.8) and (4.9).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 86

 A. Del Centina

 by forming the equations for the corresponding points B,C,C, D\... and, assuming

 that the series closes after η steps, one has

 where Π (χ) in the last equation must differ by a period Ω of the integral from that in

 the first. Hence, by adding, Cay ley got Ω = «Π(£), or

 ποο-ποο = π(*),

 Π(ζ)-ΠΟΟ = Π(*),

 Π (χ) - Π (β) = Π (*),

 Π (it) = -Ω,

 η

 which gives the condition on the coefficients of the equation (*) for the series to close

 after η steps. This condition is independent of x, i.e., from the position of A.

 We have to say that, although Cay ley had showed how (2, 2)-correspondences come

 into play, in Cayley (1871a) he did not use the principle of correspondence in order

 to prove PCT. Nevertheless, this principle was used in another paper, which appeared

 in the same year 1871, to solve the following problem: compute the number of the

 in-and-circumscribed triangles to given curves. In that paper, he wrote (Cayley 187lb,
 p. 369):

 The problem of the in-and-circumscribed triangle is a particular case of that

 of the in-and-circumscribed polygon: the last-mentioned problem may be thus

 stated—to find a polygon such that the angles [vertices] are situate in and the

 sides touch a given curve or curves. And we may in the first instance inquire as to

 the number of such polygons. In the case where the curves containing the angle

 [vertices] and touched by the sides, respectively, are all of them distinct curves,

 the number of polygons is obtained very easily and has a simple expression .. .But
 when several of the curves become one and the same curve, and in particular

 when the angles [vertices] are all of them situate in and the sides all touch one

 and the same curve, it is a much more difficult problem to find the number of

 polygons.

 Cayley considered a triangle of vertices a,c,e, respectively, on the three curves

 a, c,e, whose sides B, D, F are tangent, respectively, to the three curves B, D, F

 (see Fig. 26a). He computed, for 52 possible cases of coincidence among the six
 curves involved, the number of in-and-circumscribed triangles to them (the results

 were listed in a table, eight pages long, inserted in the paper), by using the theory

 of correspondences.85 He applied the principle of correspondence as follows (art. 1):
 consider the unclosed trilateral aBcDeFg (see Fig. 26b), where the points a and g

 85 We have not verified these results except for conics, and only in the following cases: a = c — e and
 Β = D; a = c = e\ no conditions. In these cases, the number of triangles showed in the table seems to be

 correct. It would be of interest to reinterpret Cayley's results in light of the modern algebraic geometry.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 87

 a
 a

 9

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 26 In his paper (1871b) Cayley used the principle of correspondence in order to prove Poncelet's
 general theorem. The figures illustrate his procedure in order to get the proof

 are on the same curve a. Starting from an arbitrary point a on the curve a, let ac be
 any one of the tangents to the curve B, touching this curve, say at the point B, and
 intersecting the curve c in the point c. The same for the tangents ce and eg. Suppose
 that for a position of the point a there correspond χ positions g, g', etc.. Similarly,
 suppose that starting from a position of g there correspond χ ' positions of a. Then,
 the points a, g, over the curve a, are in a (χ, x')-correspondence. When one of the
 points g coincides with one of the points a, the point a = g is a coincidence point of
 the correspondence, and the trilateral in question becomes an in-and-circumscribed
 triangle. Thus, the numbers of triangles are equal to that of coincidence points. By
 the general theory of correspondences this numbers is, in several of the cases but
 not in all, equal to χ + χ'. Cayley was able to express χ and χ' in terms of the
 order, and of the class of the curves a, c, e and B, D, F, that he denoted, respectively,

 a, c, e, b, d, /, and A, C, Ε, Β, D, F. Then, via the principle of correspondence and
 an accurate analysis of the possible situations of tangency (flexes, double tangents,
 etc.), he computed the required number.

 8.2 Hurwitz's general view

 Adolf Hurwitz, referring to the closure theorems, began his note (Hurwitz 1879) with

 the following words:

 Es giebt in der Geometrie eine grosse Anzahl von Sâtzen, die aussagen, dass ein
 gewisses Ereiguiss unendlich oft Statt hat, sobald es nur ein Mai oder endlich
 oft eintritt [There is a large number of theorems in Geometry, affirming that if a

 certain event happens once then it happens an infinite number of times].

 Hurwitz recognized that all these theorems (as those recalled in the previous sec
 tion) have the common feature of being linked to (2, 2)-correspondences, and saw in

 the principle of correspondence the explanation for the existence of infinitely many

 solutions of the problem, when at least one solution exists.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (b)
 (a) (b)
 (a)

 Fig. 27 Hurwitz's second example in (1879): a the case η = 6, b the case η = 5

 To illustrate his thinking, Hurwitz examined various examples, and the first he

 considered it was that of Steiner's chain of circles (Fig. 23a, b).

 Let c\, C2,..., cn+\ be such a chain and denote by t\, ti,. ■■, in+i the respec

 tive points of tangency with the circle C. The law that associates t\ to tn+\ is a
 (2, 2)-correspondence on C, which in general has 4 coincidences. If the chain closes,
 remarked Hurwitz, i.e., for some η is tn+\ = t\, each point i,· is a coincidence point.
 Hence, if η >2, the correspondence has more than 4 coincidence points, and then,
 equation (8.1) is an identity, i.e., every point on C is a coincidence point. This means

 that any chain of tangent circles closes in the same way, whatever is the starting point
 /] on C.

 88

 A. Del Centina

 The subsequent example was Poncelet's closure theorem. As it is known, the con

 struction of an inter-scribed transversal P\, Λ,.... Pn+\ to two conics K\ and Kj
 leads to a symmetric (2, 2)-correspondence on i;. Hurwitz observed that, for any
 even number η = 2m and any point A e ί] Π Κι, one can construct a polygon of η
 sides, which is inscribed in K\ and circumscribed about Ki- He proceeded as follows

 (Fig. 27a, illustrates the case η — 6). Let Pm+\ = A, the tangent from Pm+\ to AT 2
 meets K\ in Pm+\ and another point Pm, then the tangent to Ki from this last point

 meets K\ in Pm and another point Pm~\, and continuing in this way one gets a point

 P\ on Κ ι. It is clear that taking P\ as starting point of Poncelet's construction, one
 gets a closed polygon of η sides inter-scribed to K\ and Kj. Similarly, for any odd

 number η = 2m + 1 and for any of the four contact points on A" 1 of the four common

 tangents to the two conics, one can construct a polygon of η sides inter-scribed to them
 (Fig. 27b illustrates the procedure for η = 5). Hence, for any η there are always 4
 coincidences of the correspondence. If there exists a proper polygon of η sides which
 is inter-scribed to K\ and Κ2, then, since each vertex is a coincidence point of the
 correspondence (which must be counted twice), there are in total 4 + 2η coincidences,

 and then, as above, it follows that every point of A'] is a coincidence point. This brief

 but conclusive reasoning gave Poncelet's problem its true setting.

 Hurwitz also examined the problem of Steiner polygons (Fig. 28a, b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 89

 Ρϋ = Ρβ

 ρ, = ρ7

 p3 = p?

 Ρα = Ρο

 (a)
 (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 28 Hurwitz's third example in ( 1879): a the case η = 4, b the case η = 3

 Let £ be a non-singular plane cubic, and P, Q be two points on it. Starting from
 any point P\ on E, one can draw a polygonal line of vertices P\. P2, P3,, Pm+1,
 which is inscribed in Ε and whose sides alternatively pass through Ρ and Q. The
 map Ρ P\ η* Ρ Pin +1 defines a (2, 2)-correspondence among the lines of the pencil
 through P. Hurwitz noticed that if η is even, and the line ΡPn+\ is tangent to Ε at
 f„+i,then P\ and P2n+i coincide, i.e., one has a coincidence point (Fig. 27a illustrates
 the case η = 4)). The same happens if η is odd and the line QP„+1 is tangent to Ε
 at Pn+\ (Fig. 27b illustrates the case η = 3). Then, Hurwitz remarked, whatever the

 parity of η may be, the correspondence always has 4 coincidences, being 4 the tangents
 than can be drawn from each of the points P, Q. If another (proper) polygonal line
 closes forming an inscribed 2n-gon to E, then every edge of it is a coincidence point,
 and therefore, there are 4 + 2η >4 coincidence points. This means that every point
 of Ε is vertex of a similar inscribed 2«-gon.

 Finally, Hurwitz considered the problem proposed in Weyr (1870, p. 28). Let C4 be

 a quartic of first species, i.e., the smooth intersection of two quadrics surfaces Q \. Qi

 in P3. Let s and a be two secants of C4. The plane through 5 containing a point 1 of
 C4 (not on s) intersects C4 in another point 2 (we are using Hurwitz notation); the
 plane through σ containing 2 intersects C4 in another point 3; the plane through s

 containing 3 intersects C4 in another point 4, and so on. In this way, it is determined a
 polygonal line 1,2, 3,4,..., 2n + 1 of 2«-sides which is inscribed in C4 and whose
 sides alternatively meet 5 and σ (the "odd numbered" meet s, and the "even numbered"
 meet σ). By associating with the plane s, 1 the plane .v, 2η + 1, one gets a symmetric
 (2, 2)-correspondence among the planes of the pencil through 5. This correspondence
 always have 4 coincidences. They come, similarly to the case of the Steiner polygons,

 from the contact points of the 4 planes through s, or σ, that are tangent to C4. If the

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 90

 A. Del Centina

 polygonal line closes, i.e., the point 2n + 1 coincides with 1, the point 1, and then,

 every vertex of the constructed polygon is a new coincidence point. Therefore, by the

 principle of correspondence, every point of C4 enjoys this property, and so every point

 of C4 is vertex of a 2n-gon inscribed in C4, whose sides alternatively meet s and σ.

 It is evident that, by projecting C4 from one of its points into a plane, one has the

 Steiner theorem for a smooth cubic. Moreover, C4 projects doubly on a conic from the

 vertex S of one of the four cones in the pencil Q \ + λ Qi = 0, and since the two rulings

 of a non-singular quadric are projected from S onto the tangents to another conic, it is

 clear that any Poncelet 2n-gon inter-scribed to these two conics is the projection from

 S of a 2«-gon inscribed in C4 of the type above.

 Hurwitz concluded by saying (Hurwitz 1879, p. 15):

 Scliesslich sei noch darauf hingrwiesen, dass unser Kriterium immer nur das

 Résultat ergiebt, dass gewisse Aufgaben unendlich Losungen haben, wenn sie

 Eiene oder eine endliche Anzahl von Losungen haben besitzen; nicht aber auch

 die Moglich-keit, dass dieser Umstand wirklich eintreiten kann, was in vielen

 Fallen nicht selbstverstândlich ist [Finally, we call attention on the fact that our

 criterion always only gives the certitude that if a problem admits a solution, or

 a finite number of solutions, then the problem admits infinitely many solutions,

 but it does not give the possibility to verify that at least one solution actually

 exists; this in many cases is not obvious at all].

 If Cayley was the first to explicitly recognize the link between Poncelet's polygons

 and symmetric (2,2)-correspondences, Hurwitz was the first to complete the algebraic

 explanation of the "porismatic character" of certain questions. Loria in his remark

 able work (Loria 1896), reporting on Hurwitz's paper, at the end of the paragraph

 concerning the closure theorems, wrote:

 Non sappiamo se più ammirare la vastità di vedute ο la perfezione della forma, e

 colla quale poniamo termine a questa digressione, alia quale invano cercheremo

 chiusa più degna [we do not know whether to wonder more at the breadth of

 views or at the perfection of the form, and so with this we bring to an end this

 digression, for which we should seek in vain a close more worthy.]

 8.3 Geometric interpretation of (2,2)-correspondences

 We end this section by introducing a geometrical interpretation of the (2, 2)

 correspondences, suggested by the examples above, and that will be useful to have at

 hand in the sequel.

 Any non-singular quadric is projectively equivalent to the Segre quadric S, embed
 ding of Ρ1 χ P1 into P3 via the Segre map: (Ι,μ) χ (1, υ) m>- (1, «, v,uv). If
 (z0, Z\■ Z2- 23) are homogeneous coordinates in P3, then S is defined by

 A (2, 2)-correspondence

 Z0Z3 - Z\Z2 = 0.

 au2v2 + bu2v + b'uv2 + cuv + du2 + d'v2 + eu + e'v + f = 0,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 91

 is obtained intersecting S with the quadric Q defined by the equation

 az\ + bz3Z\ + b'ziZ2 + CZ3Z0 + dz\ + d'zj + ezizo + e'zizo + fz0 — 0.

 Conversely, the intersection of any quadric Q with the Segre quadric defines a (2, 2)

 correspondence.

 Any pair of corresponding points (Ρ, Q) under a (2, 2)-correspondence is then

 associated with the intersection point of the x-line corresponding to Ρ and the y-line

 corresponding to Q. So, to any (2, 2)-correspondence is associated a curve Ε = SnQ

 of bi-degree (2, 2) and vice versa. Generally, the curve Ε is non-singular, hence has
 genus 1, i.e., is an elliptic curve. In fact, the projection of £ c S ~ Ρ1 χ Ρ1, on

 the first factor is a 2 to 1 morphism, ramified at the four points of the intersection of

 Ε with the plane z\ — zi = 0 (corresponding to the condition u = υ), and by the

 Riemann-Hurwitz formula it follows that Ε has genus 1.86

 We remark that the branch points of the (2, 2)-correspondence are associated with

 the lines of the two rulings of <5 which are tangent to Ε.

 9 The theorems of Darboux

 Gaston Darboux likely started to work on Poncelet's theorems and related questions

 in 1868. At the end of that year, he presented a memoir to the Académie des Sciences

 on an important class of curves (and surfaces) of degree four. These curves were those

 resulting from the intersection of a sphere with a quadric, which he proposed to call

 cycliques (Darboux 1869, p. 1311 ). He had extended to these curves many of the more

 important properties of the circle, and, as a consequence, he had found a new proof of
 the Poncelet closure theorem:

 On obtient, comme conséquence de ces propriétés, une demonstration, nouvelle

 et indépendente de la théorie de fonctions elliptiques, du théorème del Poncelet

 sur les polygones inscrits et circonscrits. On démontre de même un théorème qui

 est un peu plus général que le théorème de Poncelet [We obtain, as a consequence

 of these properties, a new proof, independent of the theory of elliptic functions,

 of the theorem of Poncelet on inscribed and circumscribed polygons. We also

 prove a theorem which is somewhat more general than the theorem of Poncelet],

 For some reason,87 the printing of this memoir was delayed, and Darboux decided

 to publish it elsewhere. The first part appeared in 1870, in the Memoirs of the Academy

 of Bordeaux (Darboux 1870b). In 1872, Darboux published the paper Sur un nouveau

 86 See for instance (Griffiths and Harris 1978b). This formula was stated by Riemann and proved by Hurwitz

 in (1891). For the present case: if / : X -* y is a map of degree two from the curve X, of genus g, onto

 the curve Y, of genus g, then 2g - 2 = 2(2g - 2) + N, where Ν is the number of branch points, i.e., of
 those points ρ € Y such that f~](p) contains only one point of X. Here, since g = 0 and Ν = 4, one has
 g = 1

 87 See the foreword of Darboux (1873a).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 92

 A. Del Centina

 système de coordonnées et sur les polygones circonscrits aux conique. Here, he wrote
 (Darboux 1872, p. 100)88:

 Dans un mémoire présenté en 1868 à l'Académie des sciences, j'ai été conduit à
 une démonstration indirecte des théorèmes de Poncelet... Cette démonstration

 m'avait paru mériter d'être développée parce qu'elle donnait, sans l'emploi des

 coordonnées elliptiques, et au moyen d'une transformation analytique des plus
 simples, la proposition fondamentale de Poncelet... Depuis en examinant la

 méthode employée, j'ai reconnu qu'elle était susceptible d'extension, et que, par

 sa nature même, elle conduisait à des théorèmes ayant la plus grande analogie

 avec ceux de Poncelet, et qu'on peut considérer comme des généralisations des

 propositions de l'illustre géomètre. Si, après tant de belles démonstrations, soit

 analytiques, soit géométriques de ces propositions, je me permets d'en proposer

 une nouvelle, c'est que cell-ci me parait réellement se distinguer par quelques

 principes qui n'ont pas encore été employés dans l'étude de cette question [In
 a memoir presented in 1868 to the Academy of Sciences, I have been lead to

 an indirect proof of the Poncelet theorems ...This proof seemed to me worthy

 of being developed, because it gives, without the use of elliptic functions, and

 by means of very simple analytical transformations, Poncelet's fundamental

 proposition of.. .After having examined the method used, I have recognized that

 it was capable of extension, and that, by its own nature, it led to theorems having a

 great analogy with those of Poncelet and that can be considered as generalizations

 of the propositions of the illustrious geometer. If, after the many beautiful proofs,

 both analytic and geometric, of these propositions I allow myself to present here

 a new one, it is because it actually seems to me to be distinguished for some

 principles that have not yet being used in the study of that question].

 The second part of the memoir that he had presented to the Paris Academy of

 Sciences followed in 1873, published in the same journal where the first part had

 appeared. The same year, a new redaction of the whole memoir was printed, in the

 form of a book, by Gauthier-Villars (Darboux 1873a). Here, in the Notes et Additions,

 several in-depth studies were included. Note II, titled Sur une démonstration analytique

 des théorèmes de Poncelet, et sur un nouveaux système de coordonnées dans le plane,

 which we refer to as (Darboux 1873b), contained in its first five sections the paper Sur

 un nouveau système de coordonnées etc., published the year before.

 The new proofs of Poncelet's theorems were based on the properties of certain

 curves, today known as "Poncelet curves"or "Poncelet-Darboux curves": curves of

 degree η passing through the intersection points of η+1 tangents to a given conic.89 The

 key point in Darboux's approach was the introduction of a new system of coordinates,

 by which every point of the plane is seen as the point of intersection of two tangents to a

 fixed conic. This new system of coordinates, today called "Darboux coordinates" [see

 88 Darboux was referring to the proof in art. 38 of his memoir (see Darboux 1873a, p. 99).

 89 These curves were called "Poncelet curves" in Bôhmer (1985). but recently the name of "Poncelet

 Darboux curves" seems to be preferred, see for instance (Dragovic 2011). We will adopt the second name,
 in honor of Darboux who introduced them.

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 93

 for instance (Dragovic 2011 )], was suggested to Darboux by the Chasles representation

 of a quadric as a double plane (see Darboux 1917, pp. 236-237).90

 9.1 Darboux coordinates and Poncelet-Darboux curves

 All tangents to a non-singular conic (Κ) can be obtained by varying the parameter m

 in the equation

 am2 + βτη + γ = 0, (9.1)

 where α, β, γ are linear functions of the coordinates in the plane.91 Then, since from

 any point on (Κ) only one tangent can be drawn to it, the conic (K) can be represented

 by the equation

 β1 — 4ay = 0. (9.2)

 If a tangent to (K) passes through a point (a', β', γ'), then m must satisfy the

 equation a'm2 + β'm + γ' = 0. So, putting ρ, ρ' its roots, one has

 a ' = = L·. (9.3)

 β' γ'

 Ρ + Ρ PP

 Vice versa if p, p' are given, the equations (9.3) determine the point (a', β', γ').

 Darboux considered (p, p') as new coordinates in the plane (Darboux 1873, p.
 184). These are called Darboux coordinates. Clearly, with respect to them, the conic
 (Κ) has equation

 (Ρ - Ρ'Ϋ = 0. (9.4)

 Moreover, any conic having two double contacts with (K), i.e., given by Κ — L2 = 0,
 where L is a linear form, can be written

 dip - p') = app' + b(p + p') + c,

 where a, b, c, d are constants and that is of the form

 App -f- Bp -(- Cp + D — 0.

 An algebraic equation, of degree m in ρ and of degree m' in p',

 f(p,p') = 0

 defines an algebraic curve in the plane. It is easy to see that this curve is of degree m or

 m+m', according as / is symmetric or not with respect to ρ and p'. Moreover, a count

 90 The projection of a non-singular quadric Q on a plane π from a point A Q, not passing through A,
 gives a birational map of degree two, from Q onto π, which is branched along the conic (Κ) := β Π jr.

 Under this map, all the lines of the two rulings of Q are mapped into the tangents to the conic (Κ).

 91 The tangent to the conic Γ : f(x, y, ζ) = 0 at Ρ e Γ is given by (dxf)px + (dyf)py + (dzf)pz = 0.

 If the conic Γ is given by y2 — χ ζ, and Ρ is (m2, m, 1), the tangent at Ρ has equation m2x 4- my + ζ = 0.

 Since (K) can be mapped onto Γ by a suitable projective transformation of the plane, it is clear that by
 applying the inverse map the claim follows.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 94

 A. Del Centina

 of constants shows that any curve of degree m is represented by an equation of this

 type, which is symmetric with respect to ρ and p', and depends on (m + \ )(m + 2)/2

 arbitrary constants (p. 185-186).

 Here, Darboux wrote:"Nous pouvons, à l'aide de ces seules remarques, démontrer

 plusieurs théorèmes généraux sur les polygones inscrits et circonscrits" [By means of

 only these remarks, we can prove several general theorems on inscribed and circum

 scribed polygons].

 We will focus only on some of these theorems, the first of which is the following:

 Theorem D1 If a curve of degree η passes through the n2 points of intersection of

 two systems of η tangents to the conic (Κ ), then it contains infinitely many sets ofn2

 points, each of them constituting the intersection locus of two systems ofn tangents
 to (K).

 Let A\, A2, ■ ■ ■, A„ and B\, B2,..., B„ be two system of η lines in the plane. The

 intersection points Α; Π Bj, i, j — 1,..., n, constitute a set of n2 points. Any curve
 of degree η passing through these n2 points is given by

 Α\Α2···Αη -kB\B2 -Bn = 0. (9.5)

 If all the lines are tangent to the conic (Κ), and then

 Αι = aa2 + βαί + γ = α(α; - ρ)(α; - ρ1)

 Bi = abf + Α· + γ = a(bi - ρ)ψι - ρ'),

 for / = 1,..., η, by setting

 φ(ρ) = (ρ- α\)(ρ -02)··-(ρ- α„)

 ψ (ρ) = Vk(p - b\)(p - è2) · · · (Ρ - bn),

 then the equation of the curve becomes

 φ(ρ)φ(ρ') = ψ(ρ)ψ(ρ'),

 φ(ρ) _ Ψ (β')
 Ψ (ρ) ψ(ρ') '

 Φ(ρ) = Ψ(ρ')
 ψ(ρ) φ (ρ'Υ

 Darboux observed (as he had already done in section η

 . 28 of his book), that this

 equation can be written

 (9.6)

 (9.7)

 (9.8)

 (9.9)

 or

 where

 Ô Springer

 Φ(μ) = τηφ(μ) + nf(u), Ψ(μ) = ηφ(μ) + mf(u),

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where ao,a\, ...,an denote arbitrary constants.92 Each line A,·, being tangent to (K),

 Poncelet's porism, I

 95

 which is of the same form as (9.8), but the roots of the polynomials are different.

 Since equation (9.9) contains a new parameter that can assume any arbitrary value,

 Darboux declared the theorem proved (p. 187).

 As example he observed that, if a conic contains the four vertices of a quadrangle

 circumscribed to another conic, then it contains the vertices of infinitely many other

 quadrangles circumscribed to the same conic.

 The second theorem is the following

 Theorem D2 If a curve of degree η contains the vertices of a (n + 1 )-gon, whose

 sides are tangent to a given conic (K), then it contains the vertices of infinitely many

 (η + 1 )-gons whose sides are tangent to (K).

 Let Ao, A\, Â2,..., A„ be η + 1 tangents to (Κ). Darboux observed that every

 curve C of degree n, which passes through the n(n + 1)/2 points of intersection of the

 tangents, is represented by an equation of the form

 an CI1 CI η

 -Γ + Ύ- + ··· + ^=0- (9-10)
 Ao Λ ι An

 has equation

 Ai : a(bi - p)(bi - ρ) = 0,

 and then (9.10) can be written

 Σ _,Γ»,»»>

 or, multiplying by ρ — ρ',

 ai _ V ai

 (9.12)
 ^(bi-p) - ^ (bi-p'Y

 and this equation is readily seen to be of the form

 f{p) _ f(p')
 φ (ρ) φ(ρ') '

 (9-13)

 Vice versa, all equations of this type can be reduced to the form (9.12), which

 represents a curve of degree n, containing all vertices of the polygon circumscribed
 to (K), and whose sides are defined by φ(ρ) = 0.

 Darboux concluded that, since equation (9.13) can be put in the form

 m f(p')

 ψ(β) + kf (β) φ(ρ') + kf(p') '

 (9.14)

 where k is an arbitrary constant, the theorem is proved.

 92 This can be easily proved by induction on η (see Darboux 1873a, pp. 191-192).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 96

 A. Del Centina

 The curves that satisfy the conditions of theorem D2 are called Poncelet-Darboux

 curves of degree η related to the conic (Κ).

 Darboux deduced the PCT as a corollary of theorem D2, by arguing as follows.

 Suppose that a conic (C) contains the η + 1 vertices of a polygon of η + 1 sides

 Ao, A\,..., A„, which is circumscribed to the conic (K). One may fix the coefficients

 ao,a\,... ,an in the equation (9.10) so that the curve C intersects (C) in other η points,

 besides the η + 1 vertices of the inscribed polygon. Then, by Bezout's theorem, the

 curve C having at least 2n + 1 points in common with C decomposes in the conic

 (C) and another curve (C') of degree η — 2. Therefore, from theorem D2, the curve

 C = (C) U (CO contains the vertices of oo1 polygons circumscribed to (K). It follows

 that the conic (C) is circumscribed to every such polygons, and the Poncelet closure

 theorem is proved.

 Actually Darboux went further, and he showed that the curve (C") completely

 decomposes into conics, or in conics and a line, according to the parity of n. The conic

 (C) has an equation of the form

 A(p2 + p'2) + Bpp' + Cpp\p + p') + D(p + p') + Ep2 pa + F = 0, (9.15)

 a tangent ρ — a intersects (C) in two points, determined by the values p\, P2 of p.

 These two values are the coordinates of another vertex of the polygon, and since these

 two must satisfy an equation of the form above, the new vertex will move along a

 conic. Continuing in this way, it became clear that (C) decomposes in k conics, or in
 k — 1 conics and a line, according as η — 2(k + 1) or η = 2k + 1.

 Up to this point, we have discussed the first five sections of Darboux (1873b),

 i.e Darboux (1872). In the remaining sections of his paper, Darboux proved others

 interesting results, such as those on hyperelliptic integrals or quartic curves with two

 nodes. He also gave a new proof of Chasles's theorem on confocal conics and showed

 a connection between Euler's differential equation and equations of type (9.15).

 In his paper (Darboux 1880), he exhibited the connection between the existence of

 a Poncelet n-gons, and the rational transformations of elliptic integrals.

 In 1917, Darboux published his last treatise Principes de géométrie analytique.93.

 In the third part of the book, titled Les théorèmes de Poncelet, he gathered the many

 results on Poncelet's theorems and related questions that he had obtained over the

 years. Probably, apart from some improvements or new proofs that he could have

 obtained later, Darboux achieved many of these results before 1880. So we think that

 it is not too long a chronological leap to present them here, before commenting on the

 contributions to the theory that were made in the twentieth century.

 9.2 Biquadratic equations and a new proof of PGT

 Darboux divided part III into three chapters and devoted the first section of the first

 chapter to the definition of his new system of coordinates. In doing so, he introduced

 a few changes with respect to Darboux (1872) that it will be convenient to state here.

 93 In it Darboux presented, in coordinated form, the lectures he had delivered at intervals since 1872, either
 at the Sorbonne and at the École Normale.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 97

 He considered the conic (Κ) given by

 so that any tangent to (K) is represented by the equation

 y1 -xz = 0,

 m2x — 2 my + ζ = 0,

 where m is a parameter. Then, if (jc, y, z) are the homogeneous coordinates of a point

 Ρ determined by the roots p, p\ of the equation above, it follows that

 2y = x(p + p\), ζ = χρρι,

 and the equation of (Κ) becomes (p — p')2 = 0. Since the above formulae are

 symmetric with respect to ρ and p\, a curve F (x, y, z) = 0 of degree m is represented

 in the new system of coordinates by the equation

 which is symmetric and of degree m in p, p\. Vice versa, any such equation in p, p\

 represents a curve of degree m. For instance

 p/, P + Pl \ „
 Mi.——. pi J =0·

 App\ + B{p + p\) + C = 0

 Az + 2 By + Cx = 0,

 represents the line

 and

 represents the conic

 Ap1 P\ + Bppi(p + Pi)) + C(p + p\Y + 1Dpp\ + E{p + p\) + F = 0

 Az2 + 2 Byz + 4 Cy2 + 2 Dzx + 2 Exy + Fx2 = 0.

 In the subsequent sections of the first chapter, Darboux gave theorems Dl, D2 and

 other theorems already published in Darboux (1873a), also giving them alternative
 proofs.

 In the second chapter, he proved the following:

 Theorem D3 Let (C) and (K) be two conics. Suppose that from a point M on the

 conic (C) are drawn the two tangents to the conic (Κ) and that from the two new points

 Μι, Μ-1 of intersection of these tangents with the first conic, new tangents to (K)

 are drawn, and so on. It results from this construction a polygonal line inter-scribed
 to the two conics ... M-h ... which can be prolonged in two
 directions, such that the parameters pi of Mi and pi+k of Mi (i >0), satisfy a
 symmetric biquadratic equation fk-i(pi, Pi+k) — 0.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 98

 A. Del Centina

 To prove this theorem, he proceeded by induction on k (Darboux 1917, n. 160). He

 observed that any pair of consecutive parameters ρ,, pl+\ satisfies an equation of the
 form:

 /(A·, a+i) = Api2p}+ J + Bpipi+]()pj + pi+i) + C(p,·2 + pf+l)

 +Dpi2pf+l+ E(pi2 + p?+1) + F = 0.

 By eliminating ft from /(p,·, p;+]) = Oand/(p,·, p,_i) = 0, he obtained an equation

 ofbidegree 4 containing the factor (ρ,·_ ι — p,+i)2. Dividing the resultant by this factor,

 he obtained a biquadratic equation fi(pi-x, Pi+\) = 0, symmetric with respect the

 two variables. Since by replacing / by i +1, it follows that p, p,+2 satisfy the equation

 fx (p, Pi+2) = 0, he had proved the theorem for k = 2. Then, he supposed that for a

 certain value of k the following holds

 f(Pi,Pi+1) = 0, /i(p, ft+2) = 0,..., /*-i(ft, Pi+k) = 0.

 The resultant of the elimination of ρ,·+* between

 fk-\(Pi, Pi+k) = 0, f(pi+k, Pi+k+x) = 0, (9.17)

 is an equation Φ(ρ,·, Pi+k+x) = 0 of degree 4 with respect to both the variables.
 Since the second of the equations (9.17) is verified when pi+k+x is replaced by
 Pi+k-1, Darboux affirmed that the same holds true for the previous equation. From
 this, he deduced that the first member must contain a factor fk-iiPi, Pi+k-\),
 which equated to zero gives the relation between ρχ and ft+t-l· Hence, Φ =
 fk-2(Pi, pi+k+x)fk(pi, Pi+k+x), Where fk(p,· Pi+k+\) is a biquadratic polyno
 mial with respect to the two variables p,·, Pi+k+x ■ Then, the required relation is

 fk(Pi, Pi+k+x) — 0. Since fk is of the same form of fk-χ, fk-2» · · · the second step

 of the induction holds true, and the theorem is completely proved.

 Darboux observed that together with fk-χ (Pi, Pi+k) — 0, also holds

 fk—l (P—i t P-i-k) = 0,

 and, since / is any integer, by changing i with -i-k it follows that fk-x{pi+k, Pi) = 0,

 i.e., the primitive relation is symmetric.

 From this, he deduced the following (n. 161):

 Corollary All equations fk-\(Pi, pi+k) = 0 have equal roots for the same values
 of Pi

 Then, he gave a geometrical interpretation of the above results. Since the equa

 tions fk—x (ρ;, Pi+k) — 0 are symmetric with respect to the variables, the point of
 coordinates p,·, pl+k will describe a conic (C^_i).

 On the other hand, the points of this conic for which the two values of pi+k coincide

 are those where it is touched by one of the common tangents with (Κ). Since these

 points always correspond to equal values of p,·, he could claim (Fig. 29a):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 99

 Fig. 29 a Theorem D4. b Darboux applied Theorem D4 in order to prove the Poncelet closure theorem
 for η > 5. The figure illustrates the case η = 7

 Theorem D4 If a polygonal line moves while remaining inscribed in (C) and cir
 cumscribed about ( Κ ), the intersection point of any two sides whose indexes differ
 by k, for instance the ith and (i + k)th, always describes a conic inscribed into the

 quadrilateral of their common tangents.

 In light of this theorem, Darboux gave the following new proof of PCT.
 Since he had already proved the theorem for η — 3,4 (η. 86, 150), he supposed
 η > 5. He let Αι A2... A„ be an inter-scribed polygon to (C) and (Κ), and let

 A\A'2 ... A'n+X be a transversal constructed as above, starting from any point A\ on
 (C) (see Fig. 29b). In view of the above theorem, the intersection point of the two

 sides A'j A'2, A'nA'n+{ describes a conic (C) which must pass through all the vertices
 of the inter-scribed polygon, and, there being at least five of, these the conic (C) must
 coincide with (C).

 Darboux stressed that this proof, although less simple than the one that could be
 achieved directly from the previous theorem, had the advantage of highlighting the
 following corollary (Fig. 30):

 Corollary If a polygon moves remaining inter-scribed to the conics (C) and (Κ), the
 conic (Q_i), described by the intersection point of two sides indexed by i and i + k,
 is inscribed in the quadrilateral of the common tangents to (C) and (Κ ). Moreover,
 the diagonals of the polygon envelop conics belonging to the pencil defined by (C)
 and (Κ).

 Darboux devoted chapter three to discuss the general Poncelet theorem. He pre
 sented essentially two proofs of it, the first based on the theory of conic envelopes

 (n. 167-169), the second on the properties of Euler's differential equation (n. 170-171).

 Here, for brevity, we will comment only the second, as it is of greater interest from

 a historical point of view.

 He considered two conic (/) and (φ), represented by their tangential equations:

 / = aou2 + Û2V2 + «4 w2 + 2a^vw + 2a2uw + 2a\uv = 0,

 φ = υ2 — 4 uw = 0.

 (9.18)

 (9.19)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 100

 A. Del Centina

 \(Ci)
 \(Ci)

 Fig. 30 An illustration of the corollary to Theorem D4 for η = 5

 Then, the equation of the tangential pencil / + ηιφ = 0 is

 Ρ _ _ χ «ο a\

 <32 — 2 m

 = 0.

 (9.20)

 Ox y

 y a\ ci2 + m
 1 02 — 2 m <23

 Ζ

 «3

 ai

 He put this equation in the form

 F = H + Km + Lm2 = 0, (9.21)

 where H, K, L are polynomials of degree 2 in the variables x, y, z. By adopting the
 coordinates ρ, p\, he expressed Η, Κ, L in terms of p, p\ and observed that equation
 (9.21) becomes of degree 2 with respect to both the new variables. Putting f(p) =
 aoP4 + 4αιρ3 + 6a2P2 + 4a^p + <14, the discriminant of (9.21) is of the form

 K2 — 4 H L — f(p)f(p\). (9.22)

 Considering (9.20) as an equation in p\, that is F = Ρ ρ2 + Qp\+R = 0, he computed
 its discriminant, getting

 Q2 — 4 PR = f(p)[4m2 — im — j\, (9.23)

 where i — a0a\ — 4α\α·$ + 3a2 and j = <2002^4 + 2αΐΩ2Ω3 — aoa2 — a^a2 — α|·

 For F = P\p2 + Q\p + R\ =0, it follows

 Q2-4P]R\ - f(p\)[4m2-im-j], (9.24)

 •2) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 101

 After setting A(m) := 4m2 — im — j, he differentiated equation (9.21) with respect

 to m, p, p\, obtaining

 (2 Lot + K)dm + (2PPl + Q)dp\ + (2P\p + Q\)dp = 0. (9.25)

 Since

 equation (9.25) gives

 which reduces to

 2 Lot + A: = ±V/(P)/(Pi)
 2Fpi + β = ±V/(p)A(ot) (9.26)
 2P\P + βι= ±ν/(Ρι)Δ(ιη)

 ■*" * ±^, (9.27)
 VA(ot) VTXp) V/(pi)'

 ^P dpi
 V7(p) vTTpI)

 ^ = 0, (9.28)

 if one moves on one of the two conics of the pencil which pass through the point

 (p, pi).94 Darboux showed that the converse also holds true; hence, he had proved the

 following theorem:

 Theorem D5 If ρ and p\ vary so that they satisfy one or the other (according the

 sign) of the above differential equations, the point (p, p\) describes one of the conics

 of the pencil, and vice versa.

 This established, Darboux proceed to give a new proof of the PGT.

 His reasoning was as follows. Let A1A2 ... An be a n-gon circumscribed about the

 base conic of the tangential pencil, and suppose that it moves so that all its vertices
 but one describe other conics of the pencil. He put p, p\,pn be the parameters

 of the different sides, and supposed, without loss of generality, that the η — 1 vertices

 (Pi. Pi), (P2t P3),...,(Pn-i, Pn) describe conics of the pencil. Hence, by the theorem

 above, the following relations must hold:

 dp I ^ dp2 dpn-\ ^ dpn
 Vfïpî) V7ÎP2)' '77(p^ô ^ίΤΪΡη)

 Then, by eliminating the intermediate variables p2, ■ ■., p«-i, he obtained

 dpi dpn
 νΤΪΡύ sfTÏPn)

 which shows that the free vertex {p\, pn) of the polygon also moves along a conic of

 the pencil. Thus, he had proved (see Fig. 31):

 Theorem D6 If a polygon moves while remaining circumscribed about a conic (Κ )

 in such a way that all its vertices except one, describe the conics (K\ ),..., (Kn-\)

 94 We recall that the pencil considered is a tangential pencil.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 102

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 31 An illustration of Theorem D6 for η = 6

 all inscribed in a quadrangle circumscribed about (Κ), i.e., belonging to the same
 tangential pencil as (Κ ), then also the last vertex of the polygon describes a conic
 belonging to this pencil.

 Finally, Darboux observed that by a transformation by reciprocal polars (i.e., by

 duality), this amounts to Poncelet's general theorem.

 We stress the similarity with the proof given by Trudi. Darboux never quoted Trudi,

 whose papers he had probably not read.

 10 Poncelet polygons in Halphen's treatise

 Georges Henri Halphen became interested in Poncelet polygons in the late 1870s
 (Halphen 1878, 1879a,b). In Halphen (1878), as an application of the results devel
 oped therein, he computed the number of conics, from a given system whose first
 characteristic is μ,95 containing the vertices of a triangle, or of a quadrangle, which
 in turn is circumscribed about a fixed conic from the same system. Halphen used
 Salmon's conditions β = 0, γ — 0 (see section 6 above),96 to show that in the first
 case a = 2, β = 0, and in the second a = 3, β = 0. So he found, respectively, 2μ
 and 3μ, and then for a pencil these numbers are 2 and 3.

 One year later, in the short note (Halphen 1879a), he wrote:

 On sait,... pour que deux coniques A, Β soient ainsi, la première inscrite, la
 seconde circonscrite à un polygone de m côtés, il faut et il suffit que leurs éléments

 satisfassent à une seule relations. Cette relation a été explicitement formée par
 divers géomètres pour les nombres m les plus simples, sans qu'on ait jusqu'à

 95 A system of conics S is given by an equation of second degree £ aij (X)xixj = 0, whose coefficients
 depend on a parameter. Chasles defined^™/ characteristic of the system the number μ of conics in 5 which
 pass through a point, and second characteristic of the system the number ν of conics in S which are tangent
 to a line. Perfecting Chasles' theory (see Halphen 1878, pp. 27-31), Halphen proved that the number of
 conics in a system of characteristics (μ, υ) which satisfy a projective condition, is, under certain hypothesis,
 αμ + βν, where a and β are positive integers depending on the condition. In particular, if the system is a
 pencil μ = 1 and ν = 2.

 96 Halphen quoted Salmon, Higher Algebra, in the French translation by Bazin, p. 203.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 103

 présent découvert quelle en est la loi. Cette loi est certaiment fot compliquée et,

 comme on le sait d'après Jacobi, n'est autre que la loi des polyno[m]es naissant

 de la multiplication des fonctions elliptiques.. .Si l'on suppose donnée la conique

 B et que l'on astreigne la conique A à faire partie d'un système S, il y a parmi
 les coniques de ce système plusieurs solutions A. On demande le nombre. [It is
 known,.. .for two conics A and Β such that the first is inscribed in, and the second

 circumscribed about, a polygon of m sides, it is necessary and sufficient that their

 coefficients satisfy only one condition. This relation has been explicitly found

 by several geometers for the more simple [the first] numbers m, without having

 yet discovered what the [general] law is. This law is certainly very complicated,

 and after Jacobi as is well known, it is nothing but the law of polynomials arising

 from the multiplication of the elliptic functions.. .If one supposes that the conic

 Β be given and the conic A is forced to belong to a system S, then among the

 conics of this system there are several solutions A. One asks for the number.]

 His claim".. .without having yet discovered what the law is" sounds rather strange.

 Since Halphen was well aware of Cayley's result, it could be that he was only referring

 to the conditional equations expressed in terms of invariants, as in Salmon's Conics.

 Anyway, Halphen was here looking for the number of conics A, in a same system as

 a given conic B, such that there is n-gon which is inscribed in Β and circumscribed
 about A.

 According to modern literature (see Barth and Michel 1993), the conics A will

 be said n-inscribed in the conic B, and, reversing the situation, the conic Β is said

 η-circumscribed about the conic A. So Halphen wanted to find the number of conics

 in a pencil which are n-inscribed in a given one from the same pencil. The question

 he was considering was an essentially new, and difficult, problem in the landscape of
 Poncelet's polygons.

 After having recalled the result for triangles and quadrilaterals as above, Halphen

 continued by saying:

 Des considérations tirées de la théorie des caractéristiques conduisent aisément

 à conclure que, pour le cas général, le nombre cherché est toujours de la forme
 M μ, M étant un nombre qui ne dépend que de m. Mais la détermination de
 ce nombre M n'est pas sans difficulté. Il ma fallu de faire une étude assez

 approfondie de la rélation générale, dont la loi n'est pas explicitement connue,

 pour lever cette difficulté. J'y suis parvenu, et je peux actuellement donner le

 théorème suivant [Considerations deduced from the theory of characteristics

 easily lead to the conclusion that, for the general case, the required number is

 always of the form Μ μ, M being a number depending only on m.97 But the

 determination of this number M is not at all without difficulty. It took me an

 in-depth study of the general relation, whose law is not yet known explicitly,

 to overcome this difficulty. I succeeded and now I can formulate the following
 theorem]

 97 Here M has the meaning of the previous a. In particular, Halphen asserted that, in these cases, one has
 always β = 0.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 104

 A. Del Centina

 then Halphen stated that the number M is given by the following formula

 M = ïm2('-?)(1-?)(1-?)'·' <101)

 where p, q, r,... are the primes in the prime factorization of η = paq^rY

 He neither proved nor explained this formula, which fits well in the cases m = 3,4

 seen above. However, since 4M equals the number of the primitive m-th part of the

 periods of an elliptic function (with additive group of periods Λ), i.e., of those w such

 that mw = 0(mod A) but kw φ 0(mod Λ) for any k which divides m, precisely:

 Tim) = (ρ2 - 1 )p1(a~X\q2 - 1 )q2{i>'l)(r2 - 1 )r2(y~]) ■■■ , (10.2)

 we may think that Halphen used the multiplication of the argument to write down
 (10.2) and (10.1). In fact, this was so, as we will see in a while.

 The first of the three volumes constituting Halphen's Traité des fonctions elliptiques

 et de leurs applicationsv/as printed in 1886. With this fundamental work, Halphen pre

 sented the theory of elliptic functions, in terms of the new functions introduced by

 Weierstrass, mainly the ρ (m) and the σ(μ), that he found more suitable, especially in

 dealing with applications, than Jacobi's sn(«) and cn(u). The second volume, devoted

 to the applications to mechanics, physics, geodesy, geometry and integral calculus,

 followed in Halphen (1888). The third was printed posthumously in 1891. This last

 volume, instead of the theories of the modular equation and of the complex multi

 plication together with a historical survey, as Halphen had projected, contained only

 some unpublished manuscripts on the division of periods, an article already published

 on the complex multiplication, and some fragments (Halphen 1891).

 In the treatise, Poncelet polygons make their first entry at the end of chapter I of

 the first volume, where, in discussing the geometrical interpretation of the addition

 formulae for the Jacobian elliptic functions, Halphen forwarded again Jacobi's proofs
 of the theorems of Poncelet for circles.

 Halphen devoted the whole chapter X of the second volume to the same subject.

 In fact, he entitled it "Les polygones de Poncelet." Here, he presented the numerous

 results on this topic that he had probably been collecting since 1878. Among other

 things, he proved Poncelet's theorems by means of symmetric (2, 2)-correspondences,

 determined the closure conditions and re-obtained Cayley's formulae. Then, he intro

 duced the "elliptic representation" of points of the plane to study the problem of

 finding the number of conics from a pencil that are η-circumscribed about a given one

 belonging to the same pencil: the question he had considered 10 years before.

 Halphen returned on Poncelet's theorems in chapter XIV, where he gave new proofs

 based on the development in continued fractions of \/X, with X is a polynomial in

 one variable of degree 3 or 4.

 Gino Loria, in his historical account, did not comment on the results on Poncelet

 polygons contained in Halphen's treatise, published the year before, partly because, as

 he wrote, "facendo parte di un'opera voluminosa, non si puô fotografare in poche frasi

 con sufficiente chiarezza" [being part of a voluminous work, it cannot be photographed

 in a few sentences with sufficient clarity] (Loria 1889a, p. 20).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where ω and ω' are half-periods, and 0 < ρ, ρ' < η — 1 are integers such that
 ρ2 + ρ'2 Φ 0. Their number is η2 — 1, and they form a group, partitioned in η + 1

 cyclic group of η — 1 elements. Halphen observed that, when η is any positive integer,

 the formula above gives a nth part of period if and only if p, p' and η are relatively

 prime (i.e., (p, p', n) = 1). Moreover, a cyclic group if formed by multiplying an

 element wn by the integers less than η and relatively prime to n.

 Then, Halphen supposed η = a01, with a a prime number. In this case, wn is a n-part

 of a period if and only if one—at least—of p, p' is prime with a. So the number of
 wn is

 Poncelet's porism, I

 105

 As we have said above, the third volume of Halphen's treatise contained some

 unpublished fragments. Among these, we can find the proof of formula (10.2) that we

 summarize here below (Halphen 1891, pp. 194-201).

 He denoted by wn a (nonzero) nth part of a period of the Weierstrass's function
 p, with η a prime number. In this case, modulo periods, all wn, are defined by the
 formula

 2 ρω + 2 ρ'ω1 .
 = = (Ρ, Ρ ),

 η

 "2-'-[©2-FK)·

 Now, mwn is a nth part of a period if m is not divisible by a. Then, taking m in the
 sequence 1, 2,..., η — 1, the numbers a, 2a, 3a,..., (aa~] - l)a must be excluded,
 and so only a01 — 1 — (αα_1 - 1) numbers m remain. He set

 φ{ή) = a" - aa~X = η ^1 - .

 Reasoning as above, he concluded that the number of groups is

 Tin) = η ^1 + ^ .

 η — aab^cy ·· · ,

 Finally, Halphen supposed that

 and he put

 P = Pi + P2 P3 . E^-PÎ,EÎ + EÏ + ...
 n ah bk é 'η ah' bk' c1'

 ρ\ω ρ\ω' Ρ2ω ρ'2ω\
 ah ah' ' bk bk' '

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In this way, observed Halphen, the wn are given as sum of elements of the form

 106

 A. Del Centina

 Then, wn will be a n-part of a period if and only if one of the exponents h,h' is

 equal to a, one of k, k is equal to β, and so on. Hence, wn is the sum of elements
 wni, w„2,..., with n\ = a", «2 = b&, «3 = cY, etc. Moreover, there will also
 be elements w„ belonging to different groups, because the condition pr' — rp' =

 O(modn) decomposes in p\r[ — r\p\ ξ O(modni), p2r'2 — r^p'^ = 0(modn2),
 one of which, at least, does not hold by the hypothesis. Therefore, it follows that the

 number of groups is

 T{n) = Γ(«ι)Γ(Β2) · · · = η (i + (ί + · · · ,

 the number of elements in each group is

 <p(n) = φ(η\)φ(η2) ■ · · = η ^1 - ■■ ■ ,

 and then the number of wn is

 ψ(η)Τ (η)  -"2(' „ΐ)(' ι-2) "·

 where φ(η), he concluded, "est bien connue en Arithmétique, comme dénom-brant les

 nombres premiers à η et inférieurs à n" [is well known in Arithmetic, as the number

 counting those numbers which are less than η and prime to η ] : the Euler totient function.

 10.1 Doubly quadratic equations and closure conditions

 Before entering these questions, we briefly recall the content of chapter IX, titled

 "Equation d'Euler." Here, Halphen introduced doubly quadratic equations (i.e., (2, 2)

 correspondences), that he represented in the form

 F = ^m,n)xmyn = 0,

 where m, η € {0, 1,2} and (m, n) denote the coefficient of the monomial xmyn. He
 also wrote

 F = Ay2 + 2By + C = A'x2 + 2 B'x + C',

 with A, B,C and Α', Β', C' polynomials of degree 2, respectively, in χ and y, and

 put X = B2 — AC, Υ = B'2 - A'C'. The equation F — 0 implies the differential

 equation

 — ±^=0
 Vx Vf

 If F is symmetric, i.e., (0, 1) = (1, 0), (1, 2) = (2, 1) and (0, 2) = (2,0), the two

 polynomials X,Y, of degree four, are the same except for the variable, i.e., xk and yk

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 107

 have the same coefficient for any k = 4,..., 0. In this case, the above differential

 equation is Euler's differential equation (Euler 1768, 1794), previously considered by
 Trudi.

 To any polynomial X of degree 4, there is an associated elliptic function f(u ) having

 (only) two simple poles (i.e., of degree two), such that putting χ = f(u) one has

 The same holds for y = /(mi), so that the above differential equation becomes
 du ± du\ =0 and gives u = ±«i + c where c is a constant. Hence, observed
 Halphen, every symmetric doubly quadratic equation expresses the relation between

 f(u) and f(u + U), where / is an elliptic function of degree two of the variable u
 and U is a constant.

 In the preamble of chapter X, he wrote:

 Dès le début du Tome I, on a vu (p. 13) l'addition des arguments réprésentée

 par une construction géométrique au moyen de deux cercles. A chaque point

 de l'un des cercles, on fait correspondre un argument elliptique: la corde qui

 joit deux points, dont la différence des arguments est constante, enveloppe le
 seconde cercle.

 Cette construction de l'addition peut être modifiée de façon que, au lieu de
 deux cercles, on ait à considérer deux coniques quelconques. On n'en surait
 douter, d'après les enseignements de la Géométrie projective. Mai il convient

 de présenter directement cette construction sous sa forme générale. C'est à quoi

 se prête merveileusement la considération des équations doublement quadra
 tiques, object principal du Chapitre précédent [At the beginning of volume I,

 we have seen (p. 13) the addition of the arguments represented geometrically by

 means of two circles. To each point of one of these circles, there corresponds

 an elliptic argument: the chord joining two points, whose arguments differ by
 a constant, envelops the second circle. This construction of the addition can

 be modified in such a way that, instead of the two circles, one has two conics

 whatever. This is indubitable by the principles of the projective geometry. But

 it is convenient to present this construction in a more general form. For doing

 this, the doubly quadratic equations, the main object of the previous chapter, fit
 wonderfully].

 Let F(x,y) = 0 be a symmetric doubly quadratic equation. Fixing any value for

 x, the equation gives two values for y, say x\ one of these. For χ = x\, the equation

 gives other two values, one of which is χ and the other X2- To the latter correspond x\

 and a new one *3, and so on. Denoting x-\ the second correspondent of x, x_2 the

 second correspondent of x-\, keep doing this way it is established a sequence

 ...,X-2,X-l,X,X\,X2,X3·.·

 Halphen fixed a non-singular conic C and denoted χ a parameter that rationally

 determines the points on C.98 He observed that, if in the above sequence two con

 98 Halphen referred to C as "unicursal curve," see also back in section five.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 108

 A. Del Centina

 Fig.32 Every symmetric doubly-quadratic equation F(x, y) = 0, once fixed a value for*, gives a sequence
 ...x-2, X-i, x, X\,X2, ■ ■ ■ which determines an inter-scribed polygon to two conics. The figure illustrates
 this situation

 secutive values represent the end points of a chord of C, then the envelope of these

 chords is another conic £>: in fact, for any point of C there are exactly two tangents

 to the enveloped curve, which is necessarily of the second class, i.e., a conic. Hence,
 Halphen claimed: every symmetric doubly quadratic equation translates the relation
 among the ending points of a variable chord inscribed in a conic C and enveloping
 another conic D.

 In particular, any sequence as above determined a polygonal line, represented
 ..., x_2, x~\, χ, x\, X2, *3 · · ·, which is inscribed in the conic C and, at the same,

 time circumscribed about D (see Fig. 32).

 There are four particular values ao, ct\, <*2, «3 of the parameter x, to each of them

 corresponds a double root of y; say βο, β\, β2, βι these double roots. The tangents to
 D from the point (of parameter) ao coincide, so «ο 6 D. Hence, αο, «1, «2, «3 are the
 parameters on C of the four points C Π D, and βο, β\, ft, ft are the parameters of
 the same points on D. Then, he proved (Halphen 1888, pp. 340, 374) that symmetric
 doubly quadratic equations are characterized by the two invariants:

 a _ (ao - Q?i)(a3 - «2) _ (βο ~ βι)(βΐ - βι)
 (a0-«2)(a3-«ι)' Y (βο - βί)(β3 -β\)'

 corresponding to the cross-ratios of the four points CDD, taken in the same order,
 on C and on D.

 Among the polygonal lines..., χ-2, x~\, x, x\, *2> *3 · · ·» there are those obtained

 starting from a point (of parameter) α belonging toCDD, or from a point of C where
 a common tangent to C and D touch C. These polygonal lines, Halphen observed,
 can be prolonged only in one direction. If a\, U2, ■ ■ ■ are the other vertices of the
 transversal, then, by taking χ as initial point of the polygonal line, the points a„ and

 α„_ι, a„_2, etc. are such that the polygonal line folds up on itself, and

 Xn — Xn+\ — Xn—1> Xn+2 = Xn—2·> · · · X2n = &n·

 In general, this does not occur drawing the polygonal line in the other direction. The

 same holds when a' is a point of contact of a common tangent to the two conics. To

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (b)
 (a) (b)
 (a)

 is χ — xm ■

 Fig. 33 Folded polygons inter-scribed to the conics C and D: a of the first kind, b of the second kind

 these, Halphen gave the names of folded polygonal lines, respectively, of first and
 second kind (see Fig. 33a, b).

 The closure condition for a polygonal line, in order to give a polygon of m sides,

 In chapter IX, Halphen had shown that the two roots χ, x\ of F = 0, corresponding

 to a certain value of y, can be considered, respectively, equal to ρ (u) and p(u + U).
 In this way, the vertices ..., x_2, x~\, x, x\, *2> *3 · ■ ■ of a polygonal line have para
 meters given by the values of ρ for..., u — 2U, u — U,u,u + U,u + 2U, u + 3U,
 Then, according to what he had already proved, the parameters y corresponding to
 x = p(u) are ρ (u ± U/2). With this "elliptic representation of the polygonal line,"
 the closure condition is translated into the condition that mU must be a period.

 By means of the theory of the function ρ (u) developed in the first volume of his

 treatise, Halphen was able to express the condition above through the invariants a and

 y. Precisely, he found that the condition for mil to be a period can be expressed by

 the vanishing of a polynomial involving the invariants

 _ [a2 - 2y(2y2 — 3y + 2)α + γ4]2

 2 8a2(a — 1 )2y4(y — l)4

 (y2 — a)(y2 — 2 y + a)(y2 — 2 ay + a)

 2 3a(a — 1 )y2(y — l)2

 (to be not confused with the variables x, y of the doubly quadratic equation F = 0).
 Then, he wrote these equations explicitly for m — 3,..., 11 (p. 377):

 Poncelet's porism, I

 109

 m = 3 ... χ = 0,

 m = 4... y = 0,
 m = 5 ... y — χ = 0,
 m = 6 . .. y — χ — y2 = 0,
 m =7 ... (y — x)x — y3 = 0,
 m = 8 ... {y - x)(2x - y) - xy2 = 0,
 m = 9 ... y3(y — χ — y2) — (y — χΫ) = 0,
 m = 10... y2(xy — x2 — y3) — χ (y — χ — y2)2 = 0,
 m = 11... (xy — x2 — y3)(y — x)3 — xy(y — χ — y2)2 = 0.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 110

 A. Del Centina

 10.2 On the Cayley conditions

 At page 387 of the second volume of his treatise, Halphen commented:

 Le calcul de la condition pour l'existence des polygones à m côtés se fait, au
 moyen des invariants y, comme il a été indiqué précédemment. C'est ce qu'on

 a de plus simple sur ce suject. On ne surait némmoins omettre un autre moyen

 de faire le calcul, infiniment moins commode, mais extêmement élégant. Il à

 été trouvé par M. Cayley [The computation of the condition for the existence of

 polygons of m sides is carried out by means of the invariants x, y, as previously

 shown. This is the simplest one we have on the subject. But we cannot omit

 another method of doing this computation, which is infinitely less handy to deal

 with, but very much more elegant. It was found by Mr. Cayley].

 Halphen, recognizing the elegance of Cayley's method, also expressed the convic

 tion that it was more difficult to handle than that he had just expounded. The reason

 for his opinion is not clear, but probably it was because Cayley called upon the theory

 of Abelian integrals, while he preferred to treat the question algebraically.

 The condition for which m U is a period, observed Halphen, is equivalent to the

 existence of a polynomial function M(p (u)) + N(p (u))p'(u ) having a zero of order

 m for u = U. He had already noticed (p. 344) that the discriminant F(s) of the pencil

 sX + Y has roots proportional to p(U + e\), p(U + ej), p(U + 63), where <?i, <?2, ej,
 are such that p'(u)2 = 4(p (u) — e\)(p (u) - β2)(ρ (u) - e^), and this allowed him to

 put the above polynomial function in the form M{s) + N(s)%/F(s). Since the value

 u — U corresponds to s = 0, the existence of the root U of order m requires that the

 development in power series of M(s) + N(s)s/F(s) around s = 0 begins with a term

 of degree m. Let

 y/F(s) = Po + P\S + P2S2 + pi H , (10.3)

 he observed that, since s has degree 2, and M (s) + Ν (s) y/F (s) must be of degree m,

 it was convenient to consider two cases according as m is even or odd.

 For m = 2η, one has M = ao + a\s + · · · + ansn and Ν = bo + b\s + ■■■ +

 bn-2Sn~2\then, by equating to zero the terms of degree 0,1in (10.3) equations

 are obtained containing the coefficients of Μ, while for the following terms only the
 coefficients of Ν occur:

 bn-2P?> + bn-2P4 + · · · + boPn+\ = 0,
 bn-2P4 + K-3P5 + 1- bopn+2 = 0,

 bn-2Pn+\ + b„-3Pn+2 H H b0p2n-\ = 0.

 For m = 2n + 1, M is the same but Ν has one more term bn~\sn~], and then the

 equations above become:

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 111

 bn-lP2 + bn—2P3 + 1" boPn+l = 0,
 t>n-\P3 + bn-2Pi + · · · + bopn+2 = 0,

 bn-\Pn+l + b„-2Pn+2 H + bop2n = 0.

 It follows that the condition for the existence of a Poncelet's polygon of 2η sides

 is

 while for a polygon of 2n + 1 sides is

 p-i

 PA

 P4

 P5

 Pn+1

 Pn+2

 = o,

 Pn+1 Pn+2

 P2n-\

 P2 Ρ 3

 ' ■ ■ Pn+1

 PS PA

 ' · ■ Pn+2

 = 0.

 Pn+1 Pn+2

 P2n

 Hence, he observed that for a triangle the condition is just p2 — 0, for the quad

 rangle is pi = 0, and then, referring to the invariant χ and y above, he added: "on
 vérifiera aisément la concordance de ces conditions avec celles qui on été trouvées

 précédemment" [one can easily check that these conditions are the same than those

 previously determined].

 Halphen also affirmed that, at that point, the link with the continued fractions was

 evident, but that he reserved this study for a subsequent chapter.

 10.3 The "elliptic representation of the plane" and the curve Tlm

 From the elliptic representation of the polygonal line inter-scribed to two conics C

 and D, Halphen knew that the closure condition was equivalent to "mU is a period,"

 and here he wanted to go more in depth into the question.

 In the first volume of his treatise (Halphen 1886, pp. 96-103), Halphen defined the

 polynomial functions of p(u) and p'(u):

 Ψη (M) = P'(u)

 ~\n{p{u))

 + ·

 for η even,

 nA- 4

 fn(u) =

 n(p(u))~r- +■

 for η odd.

 η —I

 These functions vanish exactly at the nth parts of the periods (n > 2). Then, he defined
 the irrational functions

 _„2 — 1
 Yn(u) = l/fn(u)l/r2(u) ~T~,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ym+nYm—n — Ym+\Ym — \Yn Yn+l Yn—1 Ym'

 and consequently that

 Y2n+\ = Yn+2Yn ~ Yn-\Y*+V
 Y2n = Yn(Yn+2Y~ Yn-2Yn+\)·

 112

 A. Del Centina

 yj = Υ2 = 1, and showed that they satisfy the recursive formula

 2 2

 Putting

 it follows that

 x(u) = y%(u), y(u) = Y4(u),

 Y5 = y -χ,
 Y6 = y-x-y2,
 γι = (y -χ)χ - y3,
 K8 = (y[(;y -χ)(2χ -y)-xy2],

 Y9 = χ? [y3 (y - χ - y2) -(y- *)3)L

 In chapter X of the second volume of his treatise (pages 392-404), by means of the

 duplication formula, Halphen expressed the functions χ(2u) and y(2u) as combinants
 of the pencil generated by two conics / and ψ, i.e., as rational functions over P2

 invariant under the action of the symmetric group Σ4.99 In particular, he proved that

 the expression of Yn(2u) does not depend on the conics / and ψ but only on the four
 points / Π ψ.

 At p. 404, Halphen wrote:

 Ici se present tout naturellement la considération du lieu géométrique défini
 par l'équation ψη(2u) = 0. Nous devons donner de ce lieu géométrique une
 définition indépendante des fonctions elliptique et mettre en lunière un fait bien

 remarquable: ce lieu se décompose en plusieurs lignes distinctes...[It is natural

 here to consider the geometrical locus defined by the equation i//-„(2m) = 0.

 We must give to this geometrical locus a definition independent of the elliptic

 functions and highlight a very remarkable fact: This locus decomposes in several

 distinct components...]

 To this end, Halphen proceeded as follows.

 He considered ao> «1 » «2» «3. which are four points in the plane in general position,

 i.e., no three of them are on a line, as base points of a pencil of conics, and he associated

 with them the half-period ω,·, i = 0, 1, 2, 3, with &>o = 0. For any given point ζ in

 the plane, he considered in the pencil with base points αο, a\, 012, «3 the conic /
 passing through z. The cross-ratio a of the four points αο, αϊ, «2, «ι on / (which

 99 A combinant of the pair /, ψ, according to Sylvester (1853), is a covariant of the forms that, besides

 having the ordinary character of invariance when linear substitutions are applied to the variables, possesses

 the same character of invariance when linear substitutions are applied to their linear combinations.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 113

 coincides with the cross-ratio of the four lines ζαο, za ι, zo.2 and 2^3), wrote Halphen,

 defines the absolute invariant of the elliptic functions. Clearly, he was referring to the

 „3

 invariant J = 3 \Ί£. » which can be expressed as rational function of anyone of the
 six cross-ratios of the four points 00, e\, e2, ei, where e\, ei, e3 are the roots of the

 equation p'2 = 4p3 — gip — £3. In this way, observed Halphen, the function ρ (u) is

 a parameter for the points on /, which assumes the values 00, e\, ei, e·} for the values

 ao, ai, 012, «3 of the argument. Let γ be the cross-ratio of the four lines through ao

 containing, in this order, ζ, αϊ, «2, 0:3. From the assumption above, it follows that

 and at the same time

 p(u)-e\ e3 — e2
 y = —7~\ '

 p(u) -e2e·}- e\

 α =

 e3 - e2

 e3 - e\

 At this point, Halphen affirmed (p. 405):

 Voilà donc les fonctions elliptiques et l'argument définis, pour chaque point

 du plan, par les rapports anharmoniques de deux faisceaux de droits. Il s'agit

 maintenant de reconnaître la propriété géométrique des points qui répondent à

 des parties aliquotes de périodes [here then are the elliptic functions and the

 argument defined, for every point of the plane, by means of the cross-ratios of

 two pencils of lines. It is now time to recognize the geometrical property of those

 points which correspond to the nth parts of the periods].

 Then, he considered the line aoz through ao and z, and the conic ψ of the pencil

 which is tangent (necessarily at ao) to aoz. For the pair /, ψ, he found that the argument
 u of the point ζ coincides with U. So he claimed:

 Voici donc la propriété géométrique de tout point ζ dont l'argument u est une

 m-ième partie de période: si, parz, on mène une conique f du faisceau et que,

 tangentiellement à aoz, on prenne une autre conique ψ dufaicseau, il existe des

 polygones de m côtés, inscrits dans f et circonscrits à ψ. Pour chaque entier m, il

 y a un lieu du point z; c'est ce lieu qui doit être examiné. [Here is the geometrical

 property of each point ζ whose argument u is the wth part of a period: if through

 ζ is drawn a conic f of the pencil and, tangentially to ao z, another conic of pencil

 is taken, then there exists a polygon of m sides inscribed in F and circumscribed

 about ψ. For each integer m, there is a locus of the point ζ ; it is this locus that
 has to be examined.]

 It will be useful, for the future, to denote this locus Tlm and let U'm be the sub-locus

 of primitive mth parts of periods (as defined at the beginning of this section). The

 intersections of Um with the tangent to 1jr at ao define the conics in the pencil which

 admit an inscribed polygon of m sides which, at the same time, is circumscribed about

 ψ. So the degree of Tïm (Wm) is the number of those conics in the pencil which are
 m-circumscribed (properly m-circumscribed) about the conic ψ.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 114

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 34 Halphen's construction for doubling the argument of ζ on /: the corresponding point on / is the
 point y which is the second intersection of the second tangent to ψ from ζ

 Halphen first considered the multiplication of the argument by 2. He knew that, /

 and ψ being as above, the point of the plane having the same modulus and argument
 twice the argument of z, is precisely the second intersection with / of the second
 tangent to ψ from ζ (Fig. 34).

 Aiming to express this construction in formulae, he let

 a0 = (1,1,1), oi= (-1,1,1), a2 = (1,-1,1), a3 = (1,1,-1).

 Then, denoting by (x\,x2,x3) the variable coordinates in the plane and putting
 ^ = (zi, Z2, Z3). he was led to the following equations for the conics fz and \ji: (p. 406):

 fz = (z\ - zl)x] + (Λ - z\)xl + (z] - ζ\)χ1 = 0,

 Ψζ = (Z2 - Z3)x^ + (Z3 - z\)x\ + (zi - Zl)x\ = 0.

 He also found that the point of contact χ of the second tangent from ζ to the conic

 <pz has coordinates

 and y has coordinates

 x\ = Z2Z3 — Z\Z2 — Z\Z3,

 X2 = Z3Z\ - Z2Z3 - Z2Z1,

 X3 = Z\Z2 - Z3Z1 ~ Z3Z2,

 2 2 2 2 2 2
 y\ =z2z3-zlz2-z]zv

 2 2 2 2 2 2

 y2 =ZjZj ~Z\Z\ ~ZjZJ,

 2 2 2 2 2 2

 y3 = z\z2 — z\z\ -z2z3.

 From these formulae, it follows

 y\Z2 - Ziy2 _ y2Z3 - Z2J3 _ y3Z] - Z3y\
 (Zl - Z2)^3 (Z2 - Z3)x\ (Z3 ~ Zl)X2

 = Z\Z2 + Z2Z3 + Z3ZI

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 115

 Fig. 35 An illustration of the locus Π3 of points ζ whose argument is a third period: a conic

 He observed that the points ζ such that y — ζ are those points whose argument is

 a third of a period, so for the locus Π 3 he found the equation

 Ζ1Z2 + Z2Z3 + Z3Z1 — 0,

 i.e., a conic (see Fig. 35).

 Similarly, Halphen showed that the condition

 Z1Z2Z3 = 0

 characterizes the points of the plane whose argument is a quarter period; hence, Π4
 decomposes into the three coordinate lines (see Fig. 36).

 For Fig he argued as follows. Let (2ηω + 2n'a>')/6 the argument of z, then the
 integers η and n' cannot be both even; otherwise, it would be a point Π3. Consider the
 point whose argument is ηω + η'ω' is one of the α,· Φ «ο, then the difference between
 the arguments of a, and ζ is (2ηω + 2n'o/)/3. Then, if one considers the conic ψ
 tangent to the line α,ζ, the corresponding argument U is a third of a period. Hence,

 the point ζ has, with respect to a,·, the same property that each point in Π3 has with
 respect to «ο. By changing the sign of the coordinates, the points ao, «1, «2, «3 are
 permuted among them, and this change the conic Ao : z\zi + Z2Z3 + 23ζ 1 =0 into
 the conics

 Z2Z3 — Z1Z2 — Z1Z3 = 0, Z3Z1 — Z2Z3 — Z2Z1 = 0, Z\Z2 ~ Z3Z1 — Z3Z2 = 0.

 Denoting these conics, respectively, Ai, A2, A3, it follows that is the locus A\ U
 At U A3, so it has degree 6.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 116

 A. Del Centina

 Fig. 36 The locus Π4 of points ζ whose argument is a quarter period: the locus is decomposed into the
 three coordinate lines

 If in the Α ι, A2, A3 the ζ 's are replaced by the y's as above, one obtains the equations

 of the three curves constituting the locus Π']2, each of them of degree 8, so Π'12 has
 degree 24. Continuing in this way, one see that degfl24 = 96, etc.

 At this point (p. 409) Halphen recalled that the roots of the function \jjm(2u) are all

 the nth parts of the periods, being η any divisor of 2m.

 Then, he claimed: if m is odd, the locus Π,„ contains Π„ and U jn, in total four

 curves, for each divisor η of m\ if m = 2"m', where m' is odd, TJ'm decomposes in
 3a + (3a + 4) curves, where by he denoted the number of the divisors
 η' φ 1 of m', in particular if m — 2a the number of distinct curves is only 3a.

 We may interpret Halphen's reasoning as follows. If m is not a prime, then Π,„

 decomposes in Y\'m and a number of curve Π'η, not necessarily irreducible, one for
 each n\m, η > 3. Since Π3 and Π4 have, respectively, degree 2 and 3, the degrees

 of nm and U'm can be recursively computed for many values of m. We have already
 seen that decomposes into 3 conics, so is degree is 6, and Πδ = U Π3, so

 that it has degree 8. One can easily see that fig has 3 components of degree 4, and
 fis = Fig U Π4, so Fig has in total 4 components, and total degree 15. Similarly, Π'12
 has 3 components of degree 8, and Π12 = Π']2 U U T1'4 U Π3, so it has in total 10
 components and degree 35. This process can be continued.

 In Gruson ( 1992, p. 193), it is suggested that Halphen here proved the formula

 degn» = \nl Π 0 ~ P~2) '

 p\n,p prime

 but in the second volume of Halphen's treatise there is no trace of it. Nevertheless,
 taking (10.2), the above reasoning leads to that formula. Moreover, one has degll,, =
 (n2 — l)/4, if η is odd, and degn„ = n2/4 — 1, if η is even.

 The construction above has clear formulation in Barth and Michel (1993), where

 the two authors, unaware of Halphen's result, proved the above formula in a modern

 algebraic-geometric setting. We will return to this in the penultimate section of our

 paper.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I

 117

 10.4 Continued fractions and Poncelet polygons

 At p. 388 of the second volume of his treatise, Halphen noticed that Cayley's method

 for determining the closure condition "se rattache, de la manière la plus directe, à la
 théorie des fractions continues, ainsi qu'on le verra dans un Chapitre ultérieur" [this

 method, as it will see in a subsequent chapter, is connected, in the more direct way, to

 the theory of continued fractions].

 He dealt with this question in chapter XIV, where he pursued the study, initiated by

 Abel and Jacobi, of the development in continued fractions of *JX(x), being X{x) a

 polynomial in the variable χ.

 Abel, in his celebrated memoir of 1826, proved that the integral

 where p{x) is a polynomial, can be expressed by means of rational functions and

 logarithms of algebraic functions if and only if ^JX(x) admits a periodic continued

 fraction development.

 In his note (Jacobi 1831), Jacobi studied an algorithm for developing ^JX(x) in

 continued fractions. The difficulties that he encountered in the computation forced him

 to abandon the algebraic route, and to consider the use of elliptic functions in order

 to express the partial quotients of the continued fraction. He wrote down interesting

 formulae in the case X has at most degree four.100

 Halphen considered the continued fractions development of the more general

 element

 /  p(x)âx

 VW'

 Vx + Vy

 x + y

 where Y X (y)(degX — 3,4). His point of departure was the function

 Vm := C„

 [σ(α — u)]2m~^a(u + 2 ma +mv — w)

 [a(u)a{u + u)]"

 where σ is the Weierstrass σ -function, and m an integer. Vm is a doubly periodic

 function with respect to any of the four arguments a, u,v,w. Through the development

 of Vm/Vm-1 in continued fractions, Halphen established some general properties for

 the development of , e.g., symmetry and periodicity. Then, he concentrated on

 the development of *jX(x) and deduced recursive formulae, simpler than those found

 by Jacobi, for the computation of the partial terms of the continued fraction.

 Afterward, on page 600, Halphen returned shortly on Poncelet's polygons. He

 recognized that if the polynomial X (*) is of degree 3, two relations that he had found

 studying the development of *JX(x) were the same that "d'après M. Cayley" he had

 100 Jacobi published these formulae without proof. They were proved by Borchardt (1854), who also

 extended them to the case of the continued fraction development of,JX(x), with degX > 4.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 118

 A. Del Centina

 already discussed in chapter X at page 389. These two relations were those expressing

 the conditions for the existence of a Poncelet polygon of 2n, or 2n + 1, sides.

 With this observation, Halphen brought to light a connection between Poncelet's

 closure theorem and the development in continued factions of ^/X(x). Thirty years

 later this connection was investigated in depth by Gerbaldi, who dealt with the question

 from an algebraic point of view.

 This seems a good place to temporarily stop our story about Poncelet's porism,

 because with Gerbaldi and his studies we enter the twentieth century.

 References

 Abel, N.H. 1828. Remarques sur quelques propriétés générales d'une certaine sorte de fonctions transcen

 dantes. Journal fiir die reine und Angewandte Mathematik 3: 313-323; also in Oeuvres Complètes,

 vol. I, pp. 444-456, Gr0ndhal and S0n, Christiania 1881.

 Abel, N.H. 1829. Précis d'une thérie des fonctions elliptiques. Journal for die Reine und Angewandte
 Mathematik 4:236-277,309-348; also in Oeuvres Complètes, vol. I, pp. 518-617, Gr0ndhal and S0n,
 Christiania 1881.

 Amodeo, F. 1924. Vita matematica napoletana. Napoli: Tip. Ac. Pontiniana.
 Barth, W„ and J. Michel. 1993. Modular curves and Poncelet polygons. Mathematische Annalen 295; 25^19.
 Belhoste, B. 1998. De l'École polytechnique à Saratoff, les premiers travaux géométriques de Poncelet.

 Bullitin de la Sabix 19: 9-29.

 Birkhoff, G. 1927. Dynamical systems. Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society.

 Bohmer, Trautmann. 1985. Special instanton bundles and Pocelet curves. Singularities, representations of

 algebras, and vector bundles, Springer LNM 1273, 325-336. Berlin: Springer.

 Borchardt, C.W. 1854. Applications des transcendantes abéliennes à la théorie des fractions continues.

 Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik 48: 69-104.

 Bos, H.J.M., C. Kers, F. Oort, and D.W. Raven. 1987. Poncelet's closure theorem. Expositiones Mathemat

 Bottazzini, U., and J. Gray. 2013. Hidden harmony—geometric fantasies, the rise of complex function

 Brianchon, C.J. 1810. Solution de quelques problèmes de géométrie. Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique

 icae 5: 289-364.

 theory. New York: Springer.

 4: 1-15.

 Brill, A. 1873. Ûber Entsprechen von Puntksystemen aud Einer Curven. Mathematische Annalen 6: 33-65.
 Brioschi, F. 1857. Sui poligoni inscritti aile coniche. Annali di Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 8: 119-124.
 Cantor, M. 1901 .Vorlesungen Uber Geschichte der Mathematik, vol. 3,2nd éd., 552-553. Leipzig: Treubner.

 Cauchy, A.-L. 1820. Rapport à l'académie royale des sciences. Annales de Mathématiques Pure et Appliquée

 11(1820-11): 69-83.

 Cayley, A. 1853a. Note on the Geometrical Representation of the Integral J ~^==iÙÎ===. Philosoph
 ical Magazine S.4(5): 281-284; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 2,

 1889, Cambridge Un. Press, pp. 53-56.

 Cayley, A. 1853b. Note on the Porism of the in-and-circumscribed Polygon. Philosophical Magazine S.4(6):
 99-103; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 2, 1889, pp. 87-90.

 Cayley, A. 1853c. Correction of two Theorems relating to the Porism of the in-and-circumscribed Polygon.

 Philosophical Magazine S.4(6): 376-377; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley,

 vol. 2, 1889, Cambridge Un. Press, pp. 91-92.

 Cayley, A. 1853d. On the Geometrical representation of an Abelian Integral. Philosophical Magazine S.4(6):

 412-418; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 2, 1889, Cambridge

 University Press, pp. 138-144.

 Cayley, A. 1854. Developments on the Porism of the in-and-circumscribed Polygon. Philosophical Mag
 azine S.4(7): 339-345; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 2, 1889,

 Cambridge University Press, pp. 138-144.

 Cayley. A. 1857. On the porism of the in-an-circumscribed triangle. Quarterly Mathematical Journal 1:
 344-354; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 3, Cambridge University

 Press, 1890, pp. 67-75.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet's porism, I 119

 Cayley, Α. 1858. On the posteriori demonstration of the porism of the in-an-circumscribed triangle. Quar

 terly Mathematical Journal 1: 31-38; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley,

 vol. 3, Cambridge University Press, 1890, pp. 80-85.

 Cayley, A. 1861. On the Porism of the in-and-circumscribed Polygon. Philosophical Transactions of the

 Royal Society of London. 151: 225-239; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley,
 vol. 4, 1891, Cambridge University Press, pp. 292-308.

 Cayley, A. 1862. Sur le problème du polygone inscrit et circonscrit. Lettre à M. Poncelet. Comptes rendus Ac.

 de Se. 700-701 ; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 5,1892, Cambridge

 University Press, pp. 21-22.

 Cayley, A. 1865. On a triangle in-and-circumscribed to a quartic curve. Philosophical Magazine S.4(30):

 340-342; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 5, 1892, Cambridge
 University Press, pp. 489-492.

 Cayley, A. 1866. Note sur la correspondance de deux points sur une courbe. Comptes Rendus Ac. Sc.

 LXII: 586-590; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 6,1893, Cambridge
 University Press, pp. 542-545.

 Cayley, A. 1871a. On the porism of the in-and-circumscribed polygon, and the (2,2)-correspondence of

 points on a conic. The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 11 ; 83-91 ; also in The Collected Mathemat

 ical Papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 8, 1895, Cambridge University Press, pp. 14-21.

 Cayley, A. 1871b. On the problem of the in-and-circumscribed triangle. Philosophical Transactions of the

 Royal Society of London 161: 369—412; also in The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley,
 vol. 8, 1895, Cambridge University Press, pp. 212-257.

 Cayley, A. 1876. An elementary treatise on elliptic functions. Cambridge: Deighton, Bell.
 Cayley, A. 1895. The collected mathematical papers of Arthur Cayley, vol. 8. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Chappie, W. 1746. An essay on the properties of triangles inscribed in, and circumscribed about two given

 circles. Gentlemen's Magazine, Miscellanea Curiosa Mathematica 4: 117-124.

 Chasles, M. 1837. Aperçu historique sur l'origine et le développement des méthodes en géométrie. Bruxelles:

 Chasles, M. 1864. Considerations sur la méthode générale exposée dans la séance du 15 frévier. Comptes

 Hayez

 rendus Ac. Sc. 58: 1167-1175.

 Chasles, M. 1865. Traité sur les sections coniques. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Clebsch, 1864. Ueber einen Satz von Steiner und einige Punkte der Theorie den Curven der dritten Ordnung.

 Journal fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 63: 94-121.

 Coolidge, J.L. 1940. A history of geometrical methods. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Cremona, L. 1867. Un teorema attomo allé forme quadratiche non omogenee fra due variabili. Rendiconti

 del R. Istituto Lombarde, Serie IIV: 199-201.

 Crilly, T. 1986. The rise of Caley's invariant theory. Historia Mathematica 13: 241-254.

 Crilly, T. 2006. Arthur Cayley, mathematician laureate of the Victorian age. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins

 Darboux, G. 1869. Mémoire sur une classe de courbes et de surfaces. Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des

 University Press.

 Sciences 68: 1311-1313.

 tique de Paris 6e serie, 7: 92-94.

 Darboux, G. 1870a. Sur les polygones inscrits et circonscrits à l'ellipsoïde. Bulletin de la Société Philoma

 Darboux, G. 1870b. Sur une classe remarkable de courbes et de surfaces algébriques et sur la théorie des

 imaginaires. Mémoires de la Société des Sciences de Bordeaux 8: 291-350, 9 (1873), pp. 1-280

 Darboux, G. 1872. Sur un nouveau système de coordonnées et sur les polygones circonscrits aux coniques.

 Bulletin de la Société Philomatique de Paris 6e serie, 9: 100-107, 128-142.

 Darboux, G. 1873a. Sur une classe remarkable de courbes et desurfaces algébriques et sur la théorie des

 imaginaires, Paris, Gauthier-Villars; 2nd ed. Paris, Hermann 1886.

 Darboux, G. 1873b. Sur une démonstration analytique des théorèmes de Poncelet, et sur un nouveaux sys

 tème de coordonnées dans le plane. In Sur une classe remarkable de courbes et de surfaces algébriques.
 Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 183-207.

 Darboux, G. 1880. Sur les polygones inscrits à une conique et circonscrits à une autre conique. Comptes

 Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences 90: 85-87.

 Darboux, G. 1889. Leçons sur la théorie générale des surfaces, vol. 2, Paris, Gauthier-Villars. 2nd ed. Paris,

 Gauthier-Villars 1914.

 Darboux, G. 1917. Principes de géométrie analytique. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Del Centina, A. 2003. La memoria parigina di Abel e la sua importanza per la geometria. Lettera Matematica

 120 A. Del Centina

 De Morgan. 1865. On the correspondence of two points on a curve. Proceedings of the London Mathematical

 Dingeldey, F. 1903. Kekelschnitte und Kegelschnittsysteme. In Enzyklopedie der Mathematischen Wis

 senschaften, Band III, 2. Teil, 1 Halite, Leipzig 1903-1915, pp. 1-160.

 Didion, I. 1870. Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages du général J.-V. Poncelet. Mémoire de l'Académie de Metz

 Pristem 47: 45-55.

 Society s. 1(1): 77-84.

 50: 101-159.

 Dolgachev, I. 2012. Classical algebraic geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Dragovic, V., and M. Radnovic. 2011. Poncelet Porisms and beyond. Basel: Birkâuser (Springer-Science).
 Dragovic, V., and M. Radnovic. 2014. Bicentennial of the Great Poncelet's theorem, current advances.

 Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51: 373-445.

 Euler, L. 1765. Solutio facilis problematum quorundam geometricorum difficillimorum. Novi Comm. Ac.
 Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae XI: 103-123; also in Opera Omnia. Leipzig, 1911. ser. I 26: 139-157.

 Euler, L. 1768. Inteeratio equationis , ====== = , . Novi Comm.

 VA+Bx+Cx2+Dx^+Exa VA+By+Cy2+Dy3+Ey4

 Ac. Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae XII: 3-16; also in Opera Omnia, Leipzig, 1912. ser. I 20: 302-317.

 Euler, L. 1794. Institutiones calculi integralis, vol. 4, Petropoli, Im. Ac. Imperialis Scientiarum.
 Flatto, L. 2009. Poncelet's theorem. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.

 Flauti ,V. 1840-1844, Produzioni relative al programma di tre questioni geometriche proposto da un nostro

 professore, Parte I: Programma e disputazione su di esso, Parte II: Memorie premiate in risposta al

 programma, Napoli: Stamperia Op. Prof. Flauti.

 Fuss, N. 1797. De quadrilateris quibus circulum tam inscribere quam circumscribere licet. Nova acta Ac.

 Fuss, N. 1802. De polygonis symmetrice irregularibus circulo simul inscriptis et circumscriptis. Nova acta

 Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae 10: 103-125.

 Ac. Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae 13: 166-189.

 Gaultier, L. 1813. Sur le moyens généraux de construire graphiquement une cercle détérminé par trois

 conditions, et.... Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique 16e cahier: 124-214.

 Genocchi, A. 1858. Sopra una costruzione del teorema di Abel. Annali di Matematica Pura edApplicata

 1(1): 33-10.

 Gerbaldi, F. 1919. Le frazioni continue di Halphen in relazione aile corrispondenze (2,2) involutorie e coi

 poligoni di Poncelet. Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo 43: 78-104.

 Gergonne. 1810. Questions proposées. Théorème de géométrie. Annales de Mathématiques pures et

 appliquées 1(1810-1811): 62-64.

 Gray, J. 2007. Worlds out of nothing. New-York: Springer.
 Griffiths, P.A. 1976. Variations on a theorem of Abel. Inventiones Mathematicae 35: 321-390.

 Griffiths, P.Α., and J. Harris. 1977. A Poncelet theorem in space. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici 52:

 Griffiths, P.Α., and J. Harris. 1978a. On Cayley explicit solution to Poncelet's porism. Enseignement Math

 Griffiths, P.A., and J. Harris. 1978b. Principles of algebraic geometry. New York: Wiley.

 Gruson, L. 1992. Un aperçu des travaux mathématiques de G.-H. Halphen. In Complex Projective Geometry,

 ed. D. Ellingsrud, C. Peskine, G. Sacchiero, S.A. Stromme, Springer Lecture Notes 179, pp. 189-198,

 145-160.

 ématique 24: 31-40.

 Springer, Berlin.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1878. Sur les caractéristiques des systèmes de coniques et de surfaces de second ordre.

 Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique 28: 27-89.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1879a. Sur une application de la théorie des caractéristiques pour les coniques, à une

 question relative aux polygones de Poncelet. Bulletin de la Société Philomatique de Paris 7e série, 3:
 17-19.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1879b. Sur certaines propriétés métriques relatives aux polygones de Poncelet. Journal de

 Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées 3me série, 5: 285-292.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1886. Traité des fonctions elliptiques, premième partie. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1888. Traité des fonctions elliptiques, deuxième partie. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Halphen, G.-H. 1891. Traité des fonctions elliptiques, troisème partie. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Hunger, Parshall Κ. 1989. Toward a history of nineteenth-century invariant theory. In The history of modern

 mathematics in America, vol. 1, ed. D.E. Rowe, and J. McCleary, 157-206. Boston: Academic Press.

 Hunger, Parshall K. 2006a. The British development of the theory of invariants. Journal of the British

 Society for the History of Mathematics 21: 186-199.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Hunger, Parshal Κ. 2006b. James Joseph Sylvester; Jewish mathematician in a Victorian World. Baltimore:

 Hurwitz, A. 1879. Uber unendlich-vieldeutige geometrische Aufgaben insbesondere uber die Schiessung

 J. Hopkins University Press.

 sprobleme. Mathematische Annalen 15: 8-15.

 Hurwitz, A. 1891. (Jber Riemann'sche Flachen mit gegebenen Verzweigungspunkten. Mathematische

 Poncelet's porism, I 121

 Hurwitz, A. 1893. Ûber algebraische Gebilde mit eindeutigen Transformationen in sich. Mathematische

 Annalen 39: 1-61.

 Annalen 41: 391-430 (323-335).

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1828. Ueber die Anvendung der elliptischen Transcendenten auf ein bekanntes Problem der

 Elementargeometrie. Journal fir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 3: 376-389 (partly translated

 in French in / de Mathématiques Pure et Appl. 10 (1845) pp. 435^44); also in Mathematische Werke,
 vol. 1, (1881), Berlin, Von G. Reimer, pp. 277-293.

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1831. Note sur une nouvelle application de l'analyse des fonctions elliptiques à l'algèbre.

 Journal fur die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 7:41-42; also in Gesammelte Werke, vol. 1, (1881),
 Berlin, Von G. Reimer, pp. 329-331.

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1832. Considerationes generates de transcendentibus abelianis. Journal fir die reihe und

 Angewandte Mathematik 9:394-403 ; also in Gesammelte Werke, vol. 2, ( 1882), Berlin, Von G. Reimer,
 pp. 5-16.

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1846. Extrait d'une lettre addressée à M. Hermite. Journal fir die reihe und Angewandte

 Mathematik 32: 176-181; also in Gesammelte Werke, vol. 2, (1882), Berlin, Von G. Reimer, pp.
 115-120.

 Kleiman, S.L. 2004. What is Abel's theorem anyway? In The legacy of Niels Henrik Abel, ed. O.A. Laudal

 and R. Piene, 395-440. New York: Springer.

 Kline, M. 1972. Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Kotter, E. 1901. Die Entwicklung der synthetischen Geometrie; von Monge bis auf Staudt (1847). Jahres

 bericht der Deutschen mathematikervereiningung 5(1901): 1-485.

 Landen, J. 1755. Mathematical lucubrations. London: Nourse.

 Lebesgue, H. 1921. Exposé géométrique d'un mémoire de Cayley sur les polygones de Poncelet. Annales

 de la Faculté des Sciences de Toulouse 3e série, 13:61-91.

 Legendre, A.M. 1825. Traité des fonctions elliptiques et des intégrales eulé-riennes, vol. 1. Paris: Huzard

 Legendre, A.M. 1828. Traité des fonctions elliptiques et des intégrales eulé-riennes, vol. 3. Paris: Huzard

 Lhuilier, S.A.J. 1810. Théorèmes sur les triangles, relatifs à la page 64 de ce Annales. Annales de Mathé

 matiques pures et appliquées 1(1810-1811): 149-159.

 Loria, G. 1889a. Ipoligoni di Poncelet: discorso pronunziato nell'Università di Genova. Torino: Paravia.
 Loria, G. 1889b. Rassegna di alcuni scritti sui poligoni di Poncelet. Bibliotheca Mathematica, Serie 3(3):

 et Courcier.

 et Courcier.

 67-74.

 Loria, G. 1896. Il passato e il présente delle principali teorie geometriche. Torino: Clausen.

 Mackay, J.S. 1887. Historical note on a geometrical theorem and its development. Proceedings of the

 Edinburgh Mathematical Society 5: 62-78.

 Markushevich, A.I. 1992. Introduction to the classical theory of Abe lian functions. Translations of Mathe

 matical Monographs, vol. 96. Providence: AMS.

 Mention, J. 1860. Essai sur le problème de Fuss. Bull Ac. Imp. des Sc. St Péterrsbourg T.l: 15-29.
 Moutard, T.F. 1862. Recherhes analytiques sur les polygones simultanément inscrits et circonscrits a deaux

 coniques, in Poncelet, Applications d'analyse et de géométrie, vol. 1. Paris: Mallet-Bachelier.

 Poncelet, J.-V. 1822. Traité sur les propriétés projectives des figures, Paris: Bachelier; 2nd edition 1865-66.

 Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Poncelet, J.-V. 1862. Applications d'analyse et de géométrie, vol. 1. Paris: Mallet-Bachelier.

 Richelot, F.J. 1830. Anwendung der elliptischen Transcedenten auf die sphari-sche Polygone, welche zugle

 ich einem kleinen Kreise det Kigel eingeschrieben und einem anderen umgeschrieben sind. Journalfèr

 die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 5: 250-267; also translated in French in J. de Mathématiques
 Pure et Appl. 11, (1846) pp. 25-33.

 Richelot, F.J. 1849. Ueber die Anwendung einiger Formeln aus der Theorie der elliptischen Functionen

 auf ein bekanntes Problem der Geometrie. Journal fir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 38:
 353-372.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Rosanes, J., and M. Pash. 1865. Ueber des einen Kegelschnitte umbeschriebene und einem andern

 eibeschriebene Polygon. Journal fur die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 64: 126-166.

 Rosanes, J., and M. Pash. 1869. Ueber eine algebraischen Aufgabe, welche siner Gattung geometrischer

 Probleme zu Grande lieegt. Journal fur die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 70: 169-174.

 Salmon, G. 1855. A treatise on conic sections, 3rd ed. Dublin: Hodges and Smith.

 Salmon, G. 1857. On the problem of the ln-and-circumscribed Triangle. Philosophical Magazine 13: 190—

 191,267-269,337-338.

 Segre, C. 1892. Intorno alia storia del principio di corrispondenza e dei sistemi di curve. Bibliotheca

 122 A. Del Centina

 Mathematica 6: 33^17.

 Simon, M. 1867. De relationibus inter constantes duarum linearum secundi ordinis, ut sit polygonum alteri

 inscriptum, circumscriptum alteri. Inauguraldissertation, Berlin, Driesner.

 Simon, M. 1876. Ganzzhalige Multiplication der elliptischen Functionen in Verbindung mit dem Sch

 lessungsproblem. Journal fiir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 81: 301-323.

 Sinai, Ya G. 1976. Introduction to ergodic theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Sommerville, D. 1933. Analytical conics. London: G. Bell and Sons.

 Staude, 0.1883. Geometrischen Deutung der Addition Theoreme der hyperelliptischen integrale und Func

 tionen I. Ordung im System der confocalen Flachen 2. Grades. Mathematische Annalen XXII: 1-145.

 Steiner, J. 1826. Einige geometrische Betrachtungen. Journal fiir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik

 Steiner, J. 1827. Aufgaben und Lehsatze (n. 57). Journal fiir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik 2: 289.
 Steiner, J. 1832. Systematische Entwickelung der Abhangigkeit geometrischer Gestalten von einatider.

 Steiner, J. 1846. Sàe iiber curven zwiter und dritter Ordnung. Journal fiir die reihe und Angewandte Math

 1: 161-184.

 Berlin: G. Fincke.

 ematik 32: 300-304.

 Sylvester, J.J. 1853. On the calculus of forms, otherwise the theory of invariants, sect. VII, "On combinants".

 Dublin Mathematical Journal VIII: 256-269; also in The Collected Mathematical papers of James

 Joseph Sylvester, vol. 1, pp. 411-422, Cambridge Univ. Press 1904.

 The mathematical Questions. 1817. The Mathematical Questions Proposed in the Ladies' Diary and Their

 Original Answers, together with Some New Solutions 1706-1816, vol. I. London: Leybourn.

 Todd, J. A. 1947. Projective and analytical geometry. New-York: Pitnam Pub.
 Todd, J.A. 1948. Poncelet Poristic Polygons. The Mathematical Gazette 32: 274-280.

 Trudi, N. 1841. Suipoligoni iscritti e circoscritti allé curve coniche con date condizioni, Napoli: Stamperia

 per le opere del prof. Flauti.

 Trudi, N. 1843. Delle relazioni tra i determinati di due sezioni coniche l'una iscritta, l'altra circoscritta ad

 un poligono irregolare. Rendiconti del Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Napoli n.8: 89-93.

 Trudi, N. 1853. Rappresentazione geometrica immediata dell'equazione fondamentale della teorica delle
 funzioni ellittiche con diverse applicazioni. Memorie della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Napoli
 1(1856): 63-100.

 Trudi, Ν. 1863a. Studii intorno ad una singolare eliminazione, con applicazione alia ricerca della condizione

 tra gli elementi di due coniche, l'una inscritta, l'altra circoscritta ad un poligono; ed ai corrispondenti
 teoremi del Poncelet. Atti della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 1: 1-53.

 Trudi, N. 1863b. Su' teoremi di Poncelet relativi a' poligoni iscritti e circoscritti allé coniche. Giornale di

 Matematiche 1: 81-90, 125-126.

 Weil, A. 1980. History of Mathematics: Why and How. In Proceedings of the International Congress of
 Mathematicians, Helsinki 1978, ed. O. Lehto. Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica, vol. I, pp.
 226-236.

 Weyr, E. 1870. Ueber einige Satze von Steiner und ihren Zusammenhang mit der zwei und zwiigliedrigen
 Verwandtschaft der Grunfgebilde ersten Grades. Journal fiir die reihe und Angewandte Mathematik
 71: 18-28.

 White, H.S. 1916. Poncelet Polygons. Science 43: 149-158.
 Zeuthen, H.G. 1871. Nouvelle démonstration des théorèmes sur les séries de points correspondants sur deux

 courbes. Mathematische Annalen 3: 150-156.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:12:00 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

