 

 

 

 

Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design: some further remarks
Author(s): Gerhard Michael Ambrosi
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 5 (September 2012), pp. 557-583
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23251746
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:07 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2012) 66:557-583
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0103-z

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design:
 some further remarks

 Gerhard Michael Ambrosi

 Received: 23 March 2012 / Published online: 21 June 2012

 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract Some ancient Greek coins from the island state of Aegina depict peculiar

 geometric designs. Hitherto they have been interpreted as anticipations of some Euclid
 ean propositions. But this paper proposes geometrical constructions which establish
 connections to pre-Euclidean treatments of incommensurability. The earlier Aegine
 tan coin design from about 500 BC onwards appears as an attempt not only to deal
 with incommensurability but also to conceal it. It might be related to Plato's dialogue

 Timaeus. The newer design from 404 BC onwards reveals incommensurability, namely

 in the context of 'doubling the square'. It thereby covers the same topic but a different
 geometry as passages in Plato's dialogue Meno (385 BC). This coin design incorpo

 rates important elements of ancient Greek geometrical analysis of the fifth century BC

 like the gnomon, Hippocrates' squaring of the lunule (ca. 430 BC), and a geometrical
 version of monetary equivalence. Through this venue, the design's conceptual lineage
 might be traced as far back as Heraclitus' cosmology of about 500 BC.

 Keywords Ancient Greece • Geometry • Incommensurability • Euclid •
 Money • Coins

 Communicated by: Len Berggren.

 G. M. Ambrosi (E3)
 Emeritus, Universitat Trier, FB IV, VWL, 54286 Trier, Germany
 e-mail: ambrosi@uni-trier.de

 Present Address:

 G. M. Ambrosi

 Normannenstr. 10, 14129 Berlin, Germany

 "£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 558 G. M. Ambrosi

 ...If one would understand the Greek

 genius fully, it would be a good plan to
 begin with their geometry.

 Sir Thomas Heath (1921), vi

 1 Introduction

 Artmann (1990) has drawn attention to the fact that a number of ancient Greek coins

 had distinct geometrical motifs. Some of these he related to mathematical literature

 of that time, thereby giving interesting suggestions about the history of the associated
 geometrical knowledge. There are, e.g. coins from the Greek island of Melos which
 show a decomposition of a square into eight triangles, 'exactly the same geometric
 diagram described by Plato in his Menon 82b-85b, where he explains the doubling of
 a square' (Artmann 1990, p. 44).' Since Melos was destroyed by Athens in 416 BC,
 those coins must have been struck long before Plato's Menon, 'our,first direct, explicit,
 extended piece of evidence about Greek mathematics; it probably dates from about
 385 bc'—as Fowler (1999, p. 7) wrote about Plato's dialogue. But the old coins show
 that the geometry taught in that dialogue must have been wide-spread knowledge long

 before Plato put it into his impressive prose.

 A similar case was mentioned by Artmann (1990, p. 47) as involving Euclid's Ele
 ments of about 300 bc. He observed (ibid.) that its proposition II.4 is 'the geometrical
 version of the binomial theorem (a + b)2 = a2 + lab + b2'. But there are coins
 from the island of Aegina from around 400 BC which show 'precisely the diagram of

 Euclid's Theorem II.4'. A few years later Artmann (1999, p. 63) returned to this point
 and commented:

 We do not know why the people of Aegina selected this particular design for
 their money. But in any case the coins indicate the familiarity of Prop. II.4 some
 hundred years before Euclid's time.

 It is clear that we will never know for sure the intentions behind these coins' pat

 terns since there are no documents about them. Nevertheless, it is astonishing that

 before Artmann's brief remarks there never seems to have been the attempt to claim

 some sort of meaning for the geometrical Aeginetan coin designs. But as we will see
 below, if we probe deeper into the coins' geometrical background it is possible to see
 connections to contemporary geometrical debates. We know from Plato's dialogues
 that geometry at that time was not just an intellectual pastime but it contained for the

 contemporaries the laws which even gods had to follow. It therefore should not appear

 as overstretching claims for the importance of geometrical design if in the following

 we will eventually make brief allusions to Plato's and to Heraclitus' cosmologies.

 For our following arguments, it is interesting that the issue of the geometry behind

 the Aeginetan coins was recently taken up again in this Archive. Aboav (2008, p. 612)
 praised Artmann's idea to take 'the design on a coin of Aegina as illustrating a prop

 1 For a picture of the coin see Artmann (1990, Fig. 2). For the corresponding geometrical figure see below
 Fig. 2b.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 559

 osition of Euclid's Elements'. But he disagreed with regard to Artmann's reference to
 'Prop. II.4'. Aboav observed that some of the Aeginetan coins which Artmann referred
 to as depicting anticipated versions of Euclid's proposition II.4 in fact went beyond
 that proposition. Their geometry allegedly implies not just the decomposition of a
 square of type (a + b)2 into constituent smaller areas.2 They also obey a constraint
 of the type b2 = 2a2. This means that when the constituent large square which has
 the algebraic notation b2 is halved along its diagonal, then we get three areas of size
 a2, two of them being triangles. In this case, a large square with four sides, each of
 its sides of length (a + b), when decomposed into its constituent parts, gives: two
 areas of size ab and three somewhat smaller areas of size a2. Squares with this type of

 decomposition are thus constructed under a special constraint.3 Aboav (2008, p. 606)
 labelled them as 'type A' squares and he continued: 'It is a square of this type, rather
 than the 6-divided square of Euclid II, 4 (Artmann 1999, p. 63), that appears on some
 coins of Aegina of the fourth century' (Aboav 2008, p. 606).

 Here now Aboav's interesting contributions set in (i) a geometrical construction

 for 'type A' squares as just defined, (ii) a construction of what he called 'type B'
 squares with five equal constituent areas, (iii) a demonstration that results reached

 under point (ii) can be related not primarily to Euclid's Elements but rather to his book
 On divisions [of figures]. This book is lost but it was convincingly reconstructed by
 Archibald (1915). Furthermore, (iv) Aboav stresses that a number of Aeginetan coins
 of the fifth century BC were based on type B squares as constructed under the just

 mentioned step (ii) and he suggested that with this design the Aeginetans might have
 wanted to commemorate Pythagoras' death in Metapontum (which Aboav put at ca.
 490 bc).

 The following relates to the work just mentioned in that alternative constructions

 will be offered for Aboav's squares. One of our alternatives can be seen as a variant

 solution for the problem of doubling the area of the unit square. Thus, it fits quite well

 with our just mentioned knowledge that the ancient coins from Melos anticipated the
 mathematics discussed in Plato's Menon. There might also be some anticipation of
 Plato's dialogue Timaeus, namely by the Aeginetan coin design with skewed trans
 versals. The message of some Aeginetan coins with perpendicular transversals seems
 not to go beyond just confirming Artmann's impression that their design anticipated
 important content of Euclid's Elements. We will briefly comment on this aspect also
 in the following. In the end, we offer a synthesis and extension of some recent contri
 butions to the discussion of the geometry of ancient Aeginetan coin design.

 2 We are aware of the objection that the ancient Greek geometry is misrepresented when the claim is
 made that it is a 'geometrical algebra' (Unguru 1975/76). We use the algebraic notation here only as a
 brief reference to former contributions to this debate, not as a characterization of the substance of Greek

 geometry.

 3 For Aboav's geometrical construction see Aboav (2008, p. 605, Fig. 2). An alternative construction is
 offered below in Fig. 2a where the 'ai>'-rectangles are drawn as shaded rectangles.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 1 'Type A' squares and a generalization (Aegina, fifth and fourth century BC

 (c) cf. Kroll (2002),

 (d) cf. Head (1911),

 Nr.572, 573, 574

 P1.XXTV, 13, 14

 2 A typology of perpendicular Aeginetan coin design

 According to Artmann (1999, p. 162) 'the coinage of Aegina was the leading cur
 rency (like the US $) around the Aegean sea'.4 He refers this to the time 580-480
 bc. But it seems that even at as late a time as the one when Aristotle's Metaphysics
 was written—in the fourth century BC—Aegina was proverbial for monetary impor
 tance.5 Head (1911, p. 395) attests that the design of the Aeginetan coinage exhibits
 'a uniformity which characterizes it as de facto an international, and not a mere local,

 currency'. We can infer from these observations that Aegina's coin design was an
 important element of ancient Greek public life in general and not just for the Aegine
 tans themselves. It therefore might be well that we understand a bit more about the

 workings of the Greek mind if we understand more about the designs and the messages
 of the Aeginetan coins.

 Figure 1 gives a schematic overview of Aeginetan coins with perpendicular trans

 versals. This class of coin designs can be divided into two subgroups. Figure la, b
 depict schemes based on 'type A' squares as defined by Aboav. They are so constructed
 that they obey the '3a2'-constraint just mentioned. The squares of Fig. lc, d obviously
 violate that constraint in that the upper small square is much smaller than a triangle

 contained in the larger square. In this sense, they represent a second subgroup. One
 can imagine a third subgroup where the constituent squares are all equal so that the

 triangles in the lower square have only half the area of the upper square, but this type

 of coins is extremely rare.

 This suggests to enquire about the empirical relevance of these classes. Aboav

 (2008, p. 605) observes in the context of the Aeginetan perpendicular coin design that

 on the real coins typically 'the area of this little square to that of one of the triangles

 4 See also von Reden (2010, p. 72) who refers to 'Aiginetan currency domination' until ca. 480 BC and

 writes (ibid.) 'Aiginetan coins travelled earlier and further beyond the Aegean than others. The prominence
 of the Aiginetan weight standard is usually attributed to Aigina's dominant role in trade during the late
 Footnote 4 continued

 560 G. M. Ambrosi

 archaic period .. .however, the Aiginetan standard created a degree of monetary consolidation which in turn
 increased its role in trade'.

 5 In the attempt to clarify the term 'necessary', Aristotle, Metaphysics IV, 4, wrote that there is one sense

 of 'necessary' like the taking of medicine when one is ill or like having to sail to Aegina in order to get
 'necessaries'—chremata in the original, a term which can be translated as 'coins' or as 'money' (see Ross
 1928, 1015a25 for the latter).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 561

 is roughly as 4:4^' so that the area of the smaller square to that of the larger square
 typically is 4:9 in his way of counting or simply 1:2.25. If the triangles were of a size
 equal to that of the small square, the ratio between the upper square and the lower
 one should be exactly 1:2. Even by Aboav's own casual empiricism, the 'type A'
 square is an ideal type and there are many extant Aeginetan coins with perpendicular

 transversals which are not even remotely near to that ratio. The cases of the latter ones

 are covered schematically by Fig. lc or d.

 All Aeginetan coins with perpendicular transversals have the geometric pattern of

 Euclid's proposition II.4 as mentioned above (Artmann 1999, 1990). Thus, they all
 contain two 'a&'-type rectangles in the sense of Artmann (1990, p. 47). In the geo
 metrical terminology of Euclid and his precursors, these rectangles are 'complements'

 and proposition 1.43 of Euclid's Elements makes a special point of proving that these
 rectangular complements 'about' the diagonal—i.e. below and above the diagonal—
 are of equal area (see Artmann 1999, p. 40). This applies to all the rectangles inside the

 four squares in Fig. 1. Nevertheless, the equality of complements might be of special

 relevance in the case of the last two figures. The two pellets on one of the rectangles of

 Fig. lc or the corresponding double stripes on Fig. Id may be interpreted as symbols
 of doubleness in the sense of equality. Their appearance is quite appropriate on a geo
 metrical complement which always has its equal counterpart on the other side of the

 diagonal. There are several specimens of this type of coins and they seem to appear in

 this way especially when the design clearly does not comply with the '3a2'-constraint
 as discussed above.6 This suggests to ask for the intended message of such symbols.
 Maybe the message is just a stress on equality: the beholder of the coin should appre
 ciate that the coin design expresses an equality of 'value'. The obvious geometrical
 equality is here that the two complements have equal areas. But coins are meant for
 commerce and monetary exchange. Maybe there is here also an allusion to monetary
 equivalence—a point which we will pursue further below in Sect. 5.2.

 It should be noted that there are several coins which, in addition to respecting more
 or less accurately the '3a2' constraint, incorporate in their design some letters, in par
 ticular the letters 'A' or 'I'as shown schematically in Fig. la, b.7 This is remarkable
 because as the designs are drawn, these letters stand in that part which has a unit value.

 A unit value for the area of the small square follows implicitly from Aboav's inter
 pretation where that square has the value of 1 x a2 and the large inner square has the
 area value of 2 x a2 since it contains two triangles, each being as large as the small

 square. According to Heath (1921, pp. 30-31), the Greek notation for unity is either

 their letter Alpha or, in the older 'Herodianic' system, the sign ' |' which resembles the

 letter T. One can therefore suppose that these letters were put there with the intended

 implication of signalling a unit value in some sense, and in a geometrical context the

 6 For an example on the internet see e.g. http://www.sll0120695.websitehome.co.uk/PHP/SNG_PHP/
 04_03_Reply.php?Series=SNGuk&AccessionNo=0300_2003, and some others on this site, URL visited
 on 09 April 2012.

 7 In addition to the references written beneath the figures see also http://numismatics.org/collection/1944.

 100.36407 for an approximately fitting example containing the letter 'A' (visited on 9 April 2012, American
 Numismatic Society site). The 'Descriptive Information' on that web-page wrongly lists the letters as being

 'A, I, Pi'. But the last letter on the coin clearly is T (Gamma), the three letters abbreviating the island's name

 Aegina in Greek spelling as 'A IG'-(INA) with 'A' being in the unit square, according to our interpretation.

 4i) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 (a) The Aegina coins approach

 (b) Plato's Menon approach

 Fig. 2 Doubling the square

 intended sense could be that this square should be taken as unit of reference. That fits

 Aboav's interpretation. It fits also our following interpretation which treats the small
 square as being of unit value. There are many cases, however, when the coin design
 is left to speak for itself without any letters or symbols (Aboav 2008, p. 604, Fig. lb;
 Artmann 1990, p. 47, Fig. 18 ). 8 But it is open to much speculation what exactly that

 design was meant to say, as we will see below.

 3 Constructing a square under the '3a2' constraint

 Under Aboav's perspective, the main feature of the 'type A' squares on the Aeginetan
 coins is that they obey the '3a2' constraint mentioned in Sect. 1. This implies that
 the larger square must have exactly the double area of the smaller one. A geometri
 cal construction of this particular case of doubling the unit square is given below by
 Fig. 2a.

 562 G. M. Ambrosi

 This construction proceeds as follows:9 Draw a circle with arbitrary radius r. Quar

 ter the circle with two perpendiculars crossing at the midpoint. Insert a square into one

 quarter of the circle so that the square's diagonal is given by the radius r, one corner

 of the square being at the midpoint of the circle and the opposite corner being at its

 8 For a specimen of an Aeginetan coin with perpendicular transversals without any other symbols see also
 http://www-img.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk/img/cm/cm6/CM.LS.685-R(2).jpg , URL last visited on 13 April
 2012.

 9 For an alternative construction see Aboav (2008, pp. 695-696) which he chooses 'for its simplicity'
 (ibid.). It has, however, the complication that it starts from defining the sides of the outer square as being of

 unit length (his line AB with sections AF and FB). With this choice of the unit length, he ends with showing

 that the length of the side of the small upper square is 1 /a/2 in relation to the rest of the outer square (his
 AF/FB). He then proceeds (606) to show that 'AP/PC = 1/V2' holds as well, this time referring to the
 diagonal of his unit square. But its diagonal necessarily is larger than its side. It is far simpler to define the

 sides of the small square (his line AF) as being of unit value and to let all the other measures develop from
 there. This is what happens in the construction of our Fig. 2a.

 •£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 563

 circumference. Assign the unit value to the area of the square just drawn.10 Since the

 areal value of a square with unit value is generated by multiplying two of its sides so
 that 1 x 1 = l2, it is clear that by defining the area of the square just constructed as
 unity, therefore the sides of this square also have the unit value. The diagonal of the
 unit square has the value r = -J2. (Pythagoras' theorem).

 Draw now a second square opposite to the first one. Let two of its sides be given
 by perpendicular radii of the circle just drawn. We know now that their respective
 value is r = V2. Since the new square is constructed with two radii as its sides, one
 of its corners must also be the midpoint of the circle. Its diagonally opposite corner
 lies outside the circle. This is so because since the sides of the second square are
 r = \/2 each, then, by Pythagoras' theorem, the square of the diagonal must be (\/2)2

 + (a/2)2 = 4. The diagonal then has the value 2 and this is larger than the radius.

 The area of the second square is ~J2 x -Jl = r2 = 2. Thus, its area is double that of

 the first square which had the value of unity. Draw the diagonal from the midpoint of
 the circle so that the second square is halved into two isosceles right triangles. Assign

 the symbol a to the sides of the first square. The first square has the areal value a2 = 1.
 The second square has the double areal value of the first, hence 2a2 = 2. It therefore
 is clear that each triangular half of the second square has the value of a2 = 1.

 Extend now the sides of the two squares just drawn so that a square circumference

 is formed for the two squares. The resulting outer square is of the desired 'type A',
 the small square and the two triangles all having the same area. The '3a2' constraint

 is fulfilled. Under the perspective of the outer square, the perpendicular lines dividing
 the square are now two transversals which cut the square eccentrically. The larger
 inside square simply doubles the area of the other, namely of the unit square which

 stands in the left upper part of the construction.

 There are two non-contradictory ways of looking at the total construction and its

 constituent parts. Apart from the two ab-type rectangles mentioned in the Sect. 1, it

 has (i) three areas equal to a2 = 1; or (it) two squares, one of the area a2 = 1, the other
 of the area 2a2. Whereas aspect (i) is rarely considered as an interesting topic in the

 history of mathematics there is much literature about (»), the mathematics of doubling

 the square. As we mentioned in the Sect. 1, the first 'extended piece of evidence about
 Greek mathematics' (Fowler), namely Socrates' lesson in Plato's dialogue Menon, is
 about this very topic, the doubling of a square. It is true that the construction suggested

 by Socrates is different from ours. Figure 2b shows that the main difference between

 the present approach and the one which was discussed by Socrates in Menon is that
 he suggested to build the double square directly on the diagonal of the initial square

 as shown by the square with the broken lines of Fig. 2b where the initial square is the

 one with the somewhat thicker drawn-out lines in the north-west corner of Fig. 2b.11

 In our alternative construction as given by Fig. 2a, two sides of the doubled square are

 drawn as radii of a circle and hence the square resulting from these sides has more of

 a life of its own and it appears in the context of a circular construction. But a doubling

 10 The diagonal just described for the small square is not drawn in Fig. 2a in order to avoid the impression

 that the unit square is bisected in the course of this construction.

 11 For a detailed discussion of this figure and Socrates' associated argumentation see e.g. Szabo (1978,
 p. 93). See also the following footnote concerning the way the initial square was divided in Meno.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 564 G. M. Ambrosi

 of the unit square takes place in both cases 12 and hence many comments which we
 find concerning the mathematics of the Menon case will be of interest in the present

 case as well—a point to which we will have occasion to return to a few more times in

 the following text.

 We mentioned in the Sect. 1 already that the construction of 'type A' squares was

 only an initial step for Aboav (2008) whence he proceeded to the construction of 'type

 B' squares. For the details of his construction, we refer the reader to Aboav's article.

 A verbal characterization is that, instead of the two perpendicular transversals as just

 drawn, the 'type B' design has two skewed transversals. Like the perpendicular ones
 they intersect eccentrically but in such a way that, together with the 45° line in the

 right corner which we encountered as a diagonal in the 'type A' Fig. 2a already, they
 divide the area of the square into five equal parts according to Aboav. The construc
 tion of 'type B' squares appears as being a rather eccentric task, also in a figurative

 sense. Aboav's reason for undertaking this task is the existence of an earlier Aeginetan

 coin design which was characteristic for the entire fifth century until Aegina lost its

 independence through Athens and the population was temporarily expelled from the

 island in 431 BC until, after Athens' defeat in the Peloponnesian War, they could return

 in 404 BC and resume the minting of coins, henceforth with the 'type A'-based design

 as just discussed in connection with Fig. 2a.

 4 Aeginetan coin design: a case of regression in mathematical sophistication?

 Aboav (2008, p. 606) explained the disappearance of 'type B'-based coin design in
 the fourth century BC with the Aeginetans' temporary expulsion from their island and
 that they 'on their return have forgotten how it (the 'type B' square, GMA) had been
 drawn'. Thus, we seem to have here a striking manifestation of a regression of math
 ematical sophistication in a whole community. But we regard this hypothesis with
 scepticism.

 Aboav's explanation is not very plausible, even in the framework of his own assump

 tion, namely that the Aeginetans' coin design with the skewed transversals of 'type
 B' was introduced in commemoration of Pythagoras and shortly after the presumed
 date of his death around 490 BC in Metapontum. If it was indeed Pythagorean, then

 the mathematical knowledge behind the coin design was an imported one since it was

 in the Greek colonies of southern Italy that Pythagoras' doctrine flourished at that

 time and Aegina was in the Aegean Sea, a neighbour of Athens. If the once imported

 knowledge had been lost for all relevant members of the Aeginetan community by the

 time of their return after expulsion, then that knowledge could have been revived by

 new importation if that was what was wanted. After all, the old design was still around

 12 Szabo (1978, p. 342, Fig. 17) points out that the basic square in Meno is not of unit length, however,
 Socrates assigns two feet to the sides of the initial square. His square is thus divisible in two ways: along
 the diagonal, and along the middle of the sides, giving two parts in the former case and four parts in the

 latter. Socrates thereby anticipates Euclid's proposition Elements 1.34 about the diameter bisecting the area
 of a rectangle (Artmann 1999, 37, p. 37) and prop. II.4 about the quartering of a square (Artmann 1999,
 Footnote 12 continued

 p. 62)—the same proposition which Artmann sees behind the perpendicular transversals of Aeginetan coin
 design.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 565

 to be seen on the old coins. It is more likely that the Aeginetans changed the design of

 their coins not out of ignorance but on purpose. But what could that purpose have been?
 It is unknown why some ancient Greek communities chose geometrical design for
 their coins in the first place and also why there was some persistent change of the
 basic geometrical design in the coinage of Aegina. Thus, any consideration of these
 issues must be based on speculation. But as already mentioned in Sect. 1, there is some

 fairly contemporary ancient literature about the mathematical issues which were dis

 cussed at that time and we will see in the following that those changes in design can

 be fruitfully related to this literature.

 There is a remarkable trait of constancy in the Aeginetan coin design in spite of
 much change. It is the eccentric intersection of the transversals, no matter whether
 they are skewed, as in the fifth century BC ('type B' pattern) or whether they are

 perpendicular as they are in the fourth century BC ('type A' pattern). It is even more

 remarkable that if the partial diagonal of the respective squares were completed, then
 the ratio of its upper—normally not drawn—section to the drawn-out lower section is

 •s/2:2 or, what amounts to the same ratio, it is 1: V2 as Aboav (2008, p. 605) expressly

 points out, using the latter version.

 The surviving Aeginetan coins make it abundantly clear that an eccentric intersec

 tion of transversals was indeed intended over many decades of the fifth and fourth
 centuries BC. The proportions of the area segments realized on the coins were not

 always exactly the same as the ones stated and constructed by Aboav. There is never
 theless a remarkable constancy in spite of great variety of details. This suggests that

 there must have been some very strong unifying conception which could command

 adherence in very varied circumstance of the community. Behind such constancy over

 centuries there must have been more than the mere question how to divide a square plot

 (or cake) into five pieces under the condition that the pieces have one meeting point,
 but not in the middle of the square. According to Aboav's interpretation, this is the

 unifying question behind the Aeginetan coin design of the fifth and fourth centuries
 bc, namely the division of areas by means of geometrical constructions. But it is most

 unlikely that this view does justice to the driving force behind the Aeginetans' tenacity

 to their coin design.

 A simple and maybe indeed the primordial way of constructing the ratio ~Jl\2 might

 stem from the attempt to order square root expressions. This is shown in Fig. 3a in the

 context of a rudimentary application of Pythagoras' theorem. The figure depicts the
 VT, \/2, a/3, a/4 in a coherent scheme.13 But \/T = 1 and V? = 2 are, of course,
 trivial cases. This leaves the ~Jl and \/3 as non-trivial cases and these were indeed

 of utmost interest in ancient Greek mathematical thought as we know from, among

 other places, Plato's dialogue Timaeus, written probably around 360 BC. These par

 ticular roots are implied by the discussion of squares and equilateral triangles which
 the philosopher Timaeus invokes in the course of this dialogue in a search for the
 geometrical figures representing the cosmological elements earth, water, air and fire.

 An alternative system of ordering lines expressing these square roots would be the famous 'Theodorus

 spiral', named after a mathematician in Plato's dialogue Theaetetus. It has a series of right triangles with
 one leg always of unit length, and arranged in spiral form. But as Knorr (1975, p. 69) observed: 'no Greek
 mathematical work, for instance, contains the recursive construction of square roots of the spiral-type'.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In this context, the well-known philosopher of science Popper (1950, p. 528) once
 observed

 566 G. M. Ambrosi

 [Plato] would not have introduced the two irrationalities *J2 and V3 (which he

 explicitly mentions in 54b) had he not been anxious to introduce precisely these
 irrationalities as irreducible elements into his world. [Popper's emphasis and
 his round brackets]14

 These irrational numbers appear also in Fig. 3a where we have a (shaded) rectangu
 lar triangle with unit length of the short leg and the long leg having length %/2. It

 then follows from Pythagoras' theorem that the hypothenuse is V3 long as marked in
 Fig. 3a. The corresponding squares over the legs have diagonals with the values \fl
 and a/4 = 2 as shown. The line connecting these diagonals goes through a point 'P'
 which divides the total length of the line into a segment marked y/2 and a segment
 marked V4 = 2—that is: in the proportions just mentioned as underlying the diag
 onal in the 'type A' as well as in the 'type B' squares. Hence, it underlies centuries
 of Aeginetan coin design—in principle. There are coins on which this principle is not

 well respected but that does not invalidate the desire to detect the reason for the noted
 principle.

 In Fig. 3b, we extend the scope of the preceding figure by doubling the shaded
 triangle of Fig. 3a to form now an (unshaded) rectangle in Fig. 3b. Then combine one
 side of this rectangle with one side of the adjacent square with the unit side length
 and a second side of the rectangle with the side of the other adjacent square so that

 the lines thus combined together with the line through point P in Fig. 3a become the
 circumference of a new rectangular and isosceles triangle as shown. Now there is
 a horizontal line through P and a parallel line at the bottom of Fig. 3b forming two
 parallels. The hypothenuse and the vertical leg may then be treated as two transver
 sals for which the intercept theorem applies. In this case, we have then a geometrical
 statement that the ratio of -Jl:2 along the hypothenuse is the same as the ratio 1:
 along the corresponding leg, or transversal—a claim which we just stated verbally
 on the previous page and which can now be read off the two transversals with the
 corresponding markings.

 'Type B' squares as proposed by Aboav are symmetrical across the diagonal which
 contains the 45° line (see also Fig. 4b, c below). If we halve such a square along the

 axis of symmetry, we get Fig. 3c with a point P in its proper place. What is remarkable

 in this alternative rendering of the crucial point 'P' is that all the markings have disap

 peared which cluttered the previous lines and line segments in Fig. 3a, b. The reason

 for their disappearance is that the whole cut of lines and segments has changed so that
 we just have no basis for definite markings. Of course, if we have a point 'P' which

 marks the segments of the axis of symmetry in the stated proportions, then we know

 that the section from P upwards must have the value s/l. But this line segment is just

 a part of the axis of symmetry—it will not appear as being visible in the completed

 14 Plato uses in '54b' the Greek term 'dytmmis' which does not mean 'square root', in spite of Popper's
 just quoted claim concerning square roots. Taylor (1928. p. 372) comments '54b' by observing, contrary
 to Popper, that 'Timaeus ...speaks only of the "squares," never of their "square roots'". But in geometrical
 substance one can agree with Popper in the construction of the associated quadrangles and rectangles.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 567

 P

 1

 V21

 V3

 (a) Primordial square roots

 >13

 1

 V2

 Incommensurability
 and disorder

 Fig. 3 A primordial Pythagorean setup and problems of commensurability

 (c) Disorder concealed

 /p-—

 i
 %

 \

 i

 \2

 %

 \

 %

 >

 #
 #
 i

 (a) Head (1911)

 PI .XXIV, nr. 3

 (b) Constructing a

 (c) The "Timaeus variant"

 quinquepartite square

 Fig. 4 'Type B' design revisited

 square. Thus, the only visible line segment inside the square which would have inher
 ited a marking from the previous constructions would be that segment of the diagonal
 which was marked '2'. In the context of Fig. 3c, it is out of the question to propose
 the application of the intercept theorem as we did in the preceding paragraph because
 now we have no sections for the required parallels. This might be intentional because
 in a sense the formulation of such proportions relating integers and square roots is
 downright preposterous, because the latter are 'irrationals'. Their very name sets them

 apart from ratios.

 We might have herein an explanation for the appeal of Fig. 3c or of a square con
 taining this figure for the early mathematicians designing the Aeginetan coins with
 skewed transversals: the altered cut of lines as illustrated by Fig. 3c abolishes the trou
 blesome segments with square root expressions. With this remark, we are now back
 at the topic of 'incommensurability' which we briefly mentioned above in connection
 with Plato's dialogue Meno. The term refers to the fact that often the square roots
 of a number cannot be depicted as an integer or as a ratio—the square root of two
 being a special focus of attention since this corresponds to the length of the diagonal
 in a unit square. In fact, the V2 is the unit of measurement of a diagonal of a square
 with any side length as mankind knew from 1600 BC on. This is known from Old
 Babylonian cuneiform tablets with the corresponding geometrical constructions and

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 568 G. M. Ambrosi

 arithmetical calculations (Neugebauer 1945, p. 42).15 So, when in Fig. 3 we combined
 a line marked '2' with a line marked '\/2', we were combining magnitudes which are

 incomparable from an arithmetical perspective.

 The Old Babylonians demonstrated around 1600 BC that there was a fundamental

 arithmetic difference between integer magnitudes on the one hand and %/2-magni

 tudes on the other hand and they made the corresponding calculations with remarkable

 precision. According to many authors, the Pythagoreans knew about the possibility of
 incommensurability between integers and square roots by maybe 450 BC.16 It is not
 known whether this knowledge reached the ancient Greeks directly from the Baby
 lonians or through other channels. As H0yrup (1990, p. 210, n. 11) observed: 'Next
 to nothing is known about the transmission of Babylonian mathematics after the end

 of the Old Babylonian period (ca. 1600 BC), but that transmission took place is sure'.
 The Aeginetans as dominant international traders in archaic Greece certainly were
 predestined to come into contact with spatially distant knowledge. This is not just a
 speculation but the overseas communication of the Aeginetan traders was an outspo
 ken contemporary theme when, around 485 BC and in praise of the athlete Pytheas,

 the poet 'Pindar introduces the idea of publicizing the fame of his client by having his
 song sail on all the merchant ships from Aegina' (Figueira 1981, p. 323). It should
 be remembered that it is known that Aeginetan coins were interred in Persia, Persep
 olis (around 510 BC, Kraay 1976, p. 43), and, around 500-475 bc, in four places in
 Egypt (Kroll and Waggoner 1984, p. 337, Table II). It is most unlikely that in their
 international long distance trade the Aeginetans never exchanged ideas and never
 were interested in new methods of calculation—especially since they are known to
 have been highly experienced tradesmen. As such they must have been accustomed
 to extended arithmetical calculations—and they had a long tradition of geometrical
 designs on their coins.

 These considerations are important in order to free the mathematics of Aeginetan

 coin design from too narrow a connection with the Pythagorean activities.17 Both
 might have had a common root which had its beginnings in Old Babylon and the
 offsprings of which reached the Pythagoreans and the Aeginetans at about the same
 time. In short: it seems likely that by 510 BC the Aeginetans knew some geometrical
 method of doubling the square and some intricacies of incommensurability. These

 are speculations, but let us remember that the speculations have an incontrovertible
 material basis: the eccentric meeting point of all the transversals on Aeginetan coins

 after about 500 BC which, when interpreted mathematically, gives the diagonal propor

 tions of type \/2:2. It must be granted that between mathematical design and practical

 execution of coinage there are many steps where much can go wrong, thus blurring
 the basic idea of the designer's master-mind. But if the basic idea is accepted that

 15 On the internet, the site http://www.math.ubc.ca/~cass/euclid/ybc/ybc.html might be inspected for an

 instructive presentation of the astounding tablet YBC 7289 with a Menon-type square (visited on 20 April
 2012). For a detailed discussion of its context see Kaplan and Kaplan (2010, p. 29).

 16 See Knorr (1975,p.55):'a date of ca. 450 bc for that discovery [of incommensurability, GMA]... accords
 with the view of most others, for instance, Heller, von Fritz and van der Waerden'.

 17 See Kaplan and Kaplan (2010, p. 48) who write about 'the startling paradox delivered by modern
 scholarship: Pythagoras had nothing to do with the theorem that bears his name!'.

 *£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 569

 the persistent geometrical eccentricity of the Aeginetan coin design has a systematic
 background, then human curiosity ought to be permitted to ask for an explanation.

 We have mentioned three different contexts so far from where the proportion
 emerged which is characteristic for point 'P': (/) Aboav's idea of an anticipation of
 Euclid's On Divisions [offigures], (ii) This section's constructions of triangles produc
 ing geometrical representations of square roots, (iii) Doubling the square according to

 the previous section's Fig. 2a. Since all three constructions produce this proportion, it

 might well be that they all were relevant. But we consider the variant as represented
 by Fig. 2a to be the most elegant and the one which is most directly related to the

 general framework of Aeginetan coin design, but there are still other possibilities of
 construction as we will see presently.

 What is common to all constructions leading to the generation of this important

 point 'P' is that they all deal with lines standing for integer numbers—either 1 or 2—

 and then they combine them with 'incommensurables', lines representing a/2 or V3.
 There seems to be largely agreement that in the Greek history of mathematics there
 were two important epochs concerning these 'incommensurables': in a first epoch,

 they were recognized as incompatible with integers or rational numbers and they were

 treated as 'taboo', the Greeks having other terms for this eeriness, of course. Referring
 to 'the Greater Hippias 303b/c' and to 'Republic , 546c' Popper (1950, p. 526) writes
 that 'Plato still calls the irrational at first "arrhetos," the secret, the unmentionable

 mystery'. In a similar vein, Szabo (1978, p. 93) stresses that in Plato's Menon 83e,

 when Socrates gets the uneducated slave boy to perform the doubling of the square,
 he tells the boy to 'just show' the relevant diagonal, and Szabo comments: 'These
 words are a quiet hint to the informed reader that the length ...cannot be given a
 numerical value, because it is an arrheton' (Greek letters are transliterated, GMA),

 thus alluding to the same word as Popper did as characterization for the ancient Greek
 'incommensurables'.

 According to some ancient Greek historical anecdotes, there was indeed a veil of

 secrecy surrounding the incommensurability of square roots. But that relates probably
 to an era when Pythagoras still lived, maybe around 510 BC. An entirely different
 attitude existed as far as Plato himself is concerned. Popper (1950, p. 527) observes:
 'Plato's great interest in the problem of irrationality is shown especially in ...Laws
 819d-822d, where Plato declares that he is ashamed of the Greeks for not being alive

 to the great problem of incommensurable magnitudes'. Plato's complaint is not that
 the public knows too much about incommensurability but that it knows too little.
 Again and again Plato deals openly with incommensurability and likewise did his
 erstwhile disciple Aristotle. Fowler (1999, p. 290) gave a detailed list of more than 30

 occurrences of the concept of 'incommensurability' in Aristotle's writings. Artmann
 (1999, p. 229) notes that 'Aristotle ...quotes incommensurability as the prototype of
 a scientific discovery'.

 This shift in ancient Greek attitude towards incommensurability probably occurred

 around 450 BC because that is the time when the first mathematical proofs of its exis

 tence were invented. Since the first Aeginetan coins with skewed transversals depict
 ing or suggesting 'type B' design appeared well before that date, it seems plausible
 to assume that this design had traits of its era-specific secretive attitude to incom
 mensurability. But we do know from the above that the basic coin design is such

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 570 G. M. Ambrosi

 that in its constructed form it does imply the appearance of lines representing incom
 mensurable magnitudes, therefore a connection with incommensurability is clearly

 present. We can presume that at the end of the sixth century when we had the first
 appearances of this coin design there was indeed already awareness of incommensu
 rable magnitudes among Greek mathematicians but that this awareness consisted in
 a practical knowledge about possibly endless calculations when irrational numbers
 appeared. The difference to the subsequent period of dealing with incommensura
 bility in the way which is documented in the writings of Plato and Aristotle of the

 fourth century bc probably manifested itself in a lack of knowledge of methods of
 mathematically proving incommensurability and in a wariness of using proportions
 involving incommensurable magnitudes since proportions were initially thought to
 involve 'numbers' as integers and not irrational 'unmentionables'. An era-specific
 explanation of Aeginetan 'type B' coin design then might have two aspects: On the
 one hand, its inventors may be assumed to have known about incommensurability,
 as witnessed by the proportions associated with a well-constructed point 'P' of this
 design. On the other hand, these inventors seem to have consciously avoided drawing
 lines which could be seen as standing for incommensurable magnitudes, since these
 were 'unmentionables'. Reasons for such avoidance could have been respect for the
 aforementioned taboo associated with such magnitudes or an uneasiness to deal with

 them for practical reasons of tedious and endless approximations, or still other reasons

 beyond our present imagination.

 A drawing which concealed lines standing for 'unmentionable' incommensurable

 magnitudes was shown above in the context of the discussion of Fig. 3 in the course

 of which we had the juxtaposition of Fig. 3b which was full with markings for lines or
 line segments containing square roots on the one hand with Fig. 3c on the other hand
 where these markings disappeared because the line segments were cut differently. But

 that still leaves open the mathematical method of this different cut of lines, or rather:

 its geometrical method of construction. As already mentioned, Aboav (2008) believed
 that the relevant method was an anticipation of geometrical constructions which later
 found their expression in the last proposition of Euclid's book On Divisions. But if
 we inspect the surviving coins of that time, we see that many of them do not comply
 to Aboav's assumption that the five sections of the coins' square are of equal area.
 Some even have a mixture of a perpendicular and a skewed transversal as reproduced
 below in Fig. 4a. But many coins do show at least a symmetry across the diagonal.
 Such cases may be constructed as shown in Fig. 4b.

 Figure 4b presents an alternative to the constructions of Aboav's Figs. 4 and 5.

 It is based on the \/3 line of triangle 3b. Focus there the line of length V3 running

 from point P. Use the length of this line in order to construct an isosceles triangle
 over the diagonal section marked '2' as base. The resulting triangle is shown in the
 lower part of Fig. 4b by the two legs in thin broken lines running from the basis, the

 line segment '2'. In Fig. 4b, the total triangle of Fig. 3b has been doubled to form a
 square as shown. Of the isosceles triangle just constructed on the basis '2' take the

 leg which is mostly inside the square, extend its line through P, and mark its course

 from one side of the square to the other side. Focus the other leg of the triangle just

 constructed. Its thin broken line lies outside the square at the bottom of the figure.
 Draw a parallel with a thick broken line running through P and across the square.

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design

 571

 (a) Reconstructing " P " (b) Timaeus' geometric "elements'

 (c) Approximating k

 Fig. 5 The Timaeus approach

 There are now five thick broken lines running from P to the sides of the square. They

 divide the area of the square into five parts. Since the same construction could be done
 from the opposite corner of the square, the subdivision is symmetric. The diagonal
 line of length a/2 halving the upper quintile has disappeared. It is now covered by the
 area of that quintile and thus it is out of sight now. The lines representing irrational
 numbers are, of course, still underlying this construction but they are not obviously
 there. They cannot be simply pointed at as in Fig. 3b or in a square which is based on
 doubling that triangle. So, if it was indeed the aim of the early Greek mathematicians

 to conceal the phenomenon of incommensurability, then a 'type B' figure like Fig. 4b
 might have had some appeal. But under the perspective of incommensurability it is a
 device to conceal and not to reveal.

 Figure 4c shows, however, that there are other, seemingly similar, ways of creat
 ing such skewed transversals. The alternative offered there is based on an isosceles
 triangle with sides of length two based on the 45° line which is always characteristic
 of Aeginetan coin design. Thus, we have here an equilateral triangle with sides of
 length two whence we can proceed in a way analogous to the one just discussed in
 connection with Fig. 4b in order to arrive at the required symmetrical structure with

 skewed transversals. But this construction is maybe only seemingly similar because it
 might result from quite a different basic geometrical conception. Such an alternative is

 shown below in Fig. 5a. The pivotal point 'P' of the coin design appears there simply
 as that point which we get from a unit square when we add a line of length two at one

 of its corners in the way shown. The only unit of measurement in this context is ' 1' and
 an addition of two 'ones' to give the cipher 'two' and a line representing that cipher.
 We have here two very basic—one might say 'archaic'—geometrical concepts,
 namely 'area' and 'line' and the very basic ciphers 'one' and 'two'. Yet, in Plato's
 Timaeus, this setup is the basis for an entire cosmology. The beginnings of that argu
 ment can be traced if we now regard Fig. 5b which reproduces parts of Fig. 4c in that
 the unit square is now seen in connection with an equilateral triangle on the basis of
 the line '2', only that the construction of Fig. 4c is now tilted 45° to the left. This
 construction may be broken down into right triangles as shown, where the two right
 triangles generated from halving the square have a hypothenuse of length and the
 two triangles constituting the equilateral have both a leg of length V3 so that, again

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 572 G. M. Ambrosi

 following Pythagoras' theorem, the square of this length and the square of the other
 leg, namely 3 + 1=4 give the square of the equilateral's sides which have the length
 '2'. Thus, we arrive at the two square roots a/2 and >/3 which Popper (1950, p. 528)
 considered to be the 'irreducible elements' of Plato's 'world' as was quoted above.
 But in fact it is the two right-angled triangles just drawn which Timaeus proclaims

 to be 'the two irreducible "elements'", namely for producing the four primary bodies
 of Timaeus' cosmos (Cornford 1935, p. 211). It would lead too far, however, if we
 followed Plato's cosmological arguments further. Nevertheless, the geometrical simi

 larity is interesting which exists between Plato's 'elementary' construction of Fig. 5b
 on the one side and the potential geometrical basis for the skewed Aeginetan coin

 design of Fig. 4c on the other side. There is the possibility that this similarity had not
 just a geometrical aspect but also a cosmological one.

 A further aspect of Timaeus' elementary construction is its association with geo

 metrical 'beauty'. Timaeus (54 a) gives as reason for his choice of triangles that they
 give the most 'beautiful' appearance since they are 'constituent of the equilateral tri
 angle' (Gregory and Waterfield 2008, p. 47). Further criteria are not given but there is

 an aspect of Fig. 5b which we can appreciate only after the 1980s. It is only then that it

 was proven that a line drawn through two midpoints of the legs of an isosceles triangle

 to the circumference of a circle inscribing that triangle represents the 'golden section'
 (Walser 2001, p. 127, Fig. 128b).18 In Fig. 5b, the ratio of the total line marked '<!>'

 to that section of the line which lies inside the triangle expresses the 'golden ratio'
 <t> 1.61803. Whether this was known at Plato's time and in which way it was known
 is totally unclear, but the 'golden section', or the 'mean and extreme ratio' as it was

 called at that time, is often regarded as aesthetically appealing. Hence, this aspect
 might have been implied in some way when Timaeus invoked beautiful appearance as
 justification for his choice.

 There is a still further speculative aspect associated with Timaeus' elementary

 geometry. Its existence is stressed by Popper (1950, p. 530) and it is represented by
 Fig. 5c. The figure features two circles. The inner circle has a radius of unity, cutting

 the unit square at two corners and covering the rest of that square. The outer circle has a

 radius equal to the diagonal of the unit square and thus it represents a/2 as marked. The

 line halving the equilateral triangle has length >/3 as also marked. A rectangle with unit

 width and extending over these two sections has an area of 1 x (\/2 + \/3) = 3.146
 The circle with the unit radius has the area 1 x n = 3.141 Thus, the circle and the

 rectangle in Fig. 5c have approximately the same area of about 3.14 units. It is possible

 that a keen observer could have known this long before Plato's time. In any case, it

 is Popper's contention that Plato was aware of this approximation of 7r.19 Maybe this

 was a further reason why Plato let Timaeus propose his combination of the unit square
 and the '2'-based equilateral.

 18 Concerning its definition see Walser (2001, p. 2) 'We say that a line segment is divided in the ratio of

 the Golden Section, or in the Golden Ratio, if the larger subsegment is related to the smaller exactly as the
 whole segment is related to the larger segment.'

 19 Popper (1950, p. 529): 'Plato may have found out the approximate equality of \fl + V3 & n
 ... Plato knew of this equation, but was unable to prove whether or not it was a strict equality or only an
 approximation'.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 573

 One aspect of the 'beauty' of Timaeus' 'elementary' conception can be seen in

 that it offers an integrated framework for representing several irrational magnitudes:

 -s/2, -s/3, the 'golden' number <t>, and the circle number n in an approximation, while

 involving only the measurement of the unit for the unit square and the doubling of this

 unit for the basis of an associated equilateral triangle. But it still is true that the structure

 of Fig. 5b can be simultaneously alluded to and concealed, namely by spreading over
 it a square with skew transversals in the manner of Fig. 4c. The skewed transversals

 of Aeginetan coin design can be seen as implying the knowledge of incommensurable

 magnitudes but this will reveal itself only to the initiated beholders of the coin design.
 If there was indeed a latent desire to conceal the existence of incommensurability

 from outsiders in the discussion of these constructions, then this suggests that chro

 nologically they belong not to Plato's fourth century BC but rather to the time of the

 early Pythagoreans. Indeed, it seems that Plato's real Timaeus has to be placed into the

 preceding, the fifth century BC if he really was Socrates' mature conversation partner

 as it is claimed in the dialogue. Maybe even more relevant in this context is the ancient
 slander that Plato plagiarized the dialogue Timaeus from earlier work by Philolaus
 the Pythagorean (ca. 470 to ca. 385 BC). Even if that charge by Diogenes Laertius
 is dismissed, 'it is entirely reasonable to suppose that a work of Philolaus' acted as
 a source book for Plato's Timaeus' Olsen (1985, p. 76). If we assume that Philolaus
 himself might have had some earlier sources for his constructions, then this might well

 move the origin of these constructions to the time around 500 bc when the Aeginetan

 skewed coin design was first used (Kraay 1976, p. 44).

 At the end of the discussion of the Aeginetan skewed coin design, we see no reason
 to modify our prior suggestion that its appeal for the inventors of this design might

 well have been that it can simultaneously reveal knowledge about incommensurability

 while at the same time it conceals this phenomenon from the uninitiated viewers. But

 there are many patterns possible which the more or less skewed transversals can form

 and it will always be open to debate whether cases not fitting a particular geomet
 rical interpretation were expression of a different geometrical conception, whether

 they were the fault of incompetent craftsmen making the real coin, or whether there
 was absence of any formal intention. We can just marvel at the strange structure of
 these coins' design but we can also marvel at the richness of its possibly intentional
 implications.

 Concealment of incommensurability became obsolete once this phenomenon lost
 its mental horror. Plato's dialogue Meno gives literary proof that by his time it had
 become an intellectual enjoyment to show how to deal with incommensurability, and

 the doubling of the unit square played an important role in this context. As Artmann

 (1990, p. 44) observed, some coins of the island of Melos gave physical proof that this

 development occurred long before Plato's dialogue:

 This component of elementary instruction in geometry seems to have been so

 popular [by 420 bc, GMA] that it found its way into the decoration of coins.

 We propose to see the change of Aeginetan coin design after 404 BC in this context.

 Then the 'type A' design appears not as intellectual regression but as a sign of progress

 in mathematical thinking.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 574 G. M. Ambrosi

 5 Aegina's coin design as hallmark of Greek scientific genius

 5.1 The mastering of incommensurability

 A central aspect of the Aeginetans' newer coin design was the explicit demonstration

 of the doubling of the square as we argued above in connection with Fig. 2a. Doubling
 the square has occupied many historians of mathematics, not least because with Plato's

 Menon 82b-85b we have an excellent account of every single step in such a proce
 dure. The geometrical counterpart of these passages is not identical with the Aeginetan
 coin design but, as already noted, it is in principle that of Fig. 2b. Nevertheless, the
 argumentation is in substance the same and we are dependent on Plato's text and its

 interpretation since there is no other relevant literary evidence from that time.

 Maybe the strongest emphasis on the significance of this type of geometrical exer

 cise comes from Szabo (1978, p. 93) who, in view of these passages in Meno, pro
 claimed:

 Without a doubt the problem of doubling the square.. .led to the problem of the

 diagonal of the square and thence to the problem of linear incommensurability.

 Szabo goes on to claim (ibid.) that in this context we may also see the first Pythagorean
 proof for the existence of incommensurability and Knorr (1975, p. 26) gives the cor
 responding details in a Fig. 2b-type scheme. However, there are many ways to prove
 incommensurability (Artmann 1999, pp. 229-253, Chap. 24) and there is controversy
 whether the most relevant figure for the ancient proof really was the square and its

 diagonal or whether it was not rather the pentagon (von Fritz 1945).

 In any case, the ancient Greeks' 'genius for and their tenacity in the pursuit of
 scientific theory' became apparent 'amazingly soon after the stunning discovery of
 incommensurability' as Fritz (1945, p. 261) wrote in greatest praise. The conscious
 treatment of incommensurability was so important in this regard because in its wake
 there appeared a new conception of proportionality, namely one which included incom

 mensurable magnitudes as well as integers. This change enabled Hippocrates of Chios
 to extend conceptions of proportionality to segments of circles and to entire circles as
 Fritz (1945, p. 261, n.84) briefly points out.

 A reference to mathematical work on circles might appear to be a bit far-fetched

 in connection with the Menon-type discussion of the doubling of the square since this

 deals only with interlacing squares. But we may briefly return to Fig. 2 and, regard
 ing them as a group, we may remind ourselves that virtually the same doubling of
 the square occurs in both of them. The advantage of the Aeginetan approach to the

 self-same topic of doubling the square is now that the problem is solved with explicit
 reference to a circle. As we will see below, this construction will offer a direct venue

 to the just mentioned remarkable work of Hippocrates of Chios.

 5.2 Complements, equivalence and circular flow

 Although the explicit doubling of the square is a central aspect of the perpendicular

 Aeginetan coin design, it is not the only one. In our typology of such coins in Sect. 2

 <£i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 575

 (a) Circular flow (b) Double doubling (c) Square and circle (d) Stress on gnomon

 Fig. 6 Aspects of Aeginetan coin design

 above, wejuxtaposed the 'doubling' patterns of Fig. la, b to those of Fig. lc, d where it

 is plain that such doubling is not depicted. Instead, particular stress seems to be put on
 equality, namely equality of the respective «/?-rectangles of Artmann's parlance which

 was mentioned in the Sect. 1. Such equality of the two rectangles is a general feature of

 the diagonal-based rectangular division of any square, even if it does incorporate the
 doubling of the square as the types (Fig. 1 a, b) did. It seems that with the remarkable
 markers of doubleness in types (Fig. lc, d)—either in form of two pebbles or in form

 of two lines—the designers of such coins wanted to stress an aspect which they felt to
 be particularly important.

 If we see this construction in the light of Euclid's Elements, then it comes to mind

 that such an equality of rectangles is expressly formulated as

 Prop. 1.43
 In any rectangle the complements of the rectangle about the diagonal are equal
 to one another. (Artmann 1999, p. 40)

 As briefly mentioned in the discussion of Fig. 1, it is these 'complements' which we
 encounter in the Aeginetan coin design as upper and lower rectangle, their equality
 being assured by mathematical proof if we consider this construction as an anticipation
 of Euclid.

 Proposition 1.43 'has many useful consequences' as Artmann (1999, p. 40) com

 ments, in particular the consequence of preparing for the next two propositions which,

 in Artmann's further comments, amount to the algebraic problem of first defining a
 value A = ab where a and b are sides of an inscribed rectangle inside the outer rect

 angle or, in the present case an outer square as illustrated by Fig. 6a and, say, the lower

 shaded rectangle, its area standing for such a value A. Given such a multiplicative value

 A which is made up of two components we can then formulate the task to find a multipli

 cand x so that for a value R we get R = ax. Thus, if R = A and a is as before, then the

 value x is the same as b before. In this special case, it is not only the value of the multi

 plication which is the same but also the two multiplicands and the algebraic formulation
 corresponds to the geometrical equality of the two shaded rectangles in Fig. 6a.

 The geometrical Fig. 6a is a special case which follows from the fact that we put the

 application of Euclid's propositions 1.43 to 1.45 into the special figure of an encompass

 ing square and not into that of a rectangle. It is of the more general case of complements

 consisting of two rectangles with unequal sides but identical values that we must think

 *£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 576 G. M. Ambrosi

 of when invoking propositions 1.43-^45 in the present context.20 We are discussing
 here the design of coins. Its symbolism is likely to have been meant to relate to the

 context of coins and this is economic exchange, of course. Now, in economic context,
 a 'value' like the A or the R in Artmann's comment is a money value and money
 value as a result of a multiplication is the result of the two multiplicands: 'price' and
 'quantity'. They correspond to the a and b just used. Thus, the geometrical equality

 of area-values as shown by the complements in Fig. 6a, if interpreted in a context of
 economic exchange, means: 'pricei x quantityi = AT and 'Af =price2X quantity2'
 where the indices signify good' 1' and good '2' and where M is a specific money value,

 this value being represented by the shaded area of a rectangle and this rectangle having

 a complement of exactly the same area value—and monetary value—in a similar way
 as shown in Fig. 6a.

 It might seem that the 'economistic' interpretation just suggested is anachronistic.

 After all, at the time of the coin design under discussion, the Aeginetans had coined
 money for maybe <150 years and such equations of money values might have never
 occurred to them. But such an objection appears to be unfounded if we think of the
 famous epigram D90 of Heraclitus of Ephesus (ca. 600 BC):

 There is turnover[21] of fire against everything and of everything against fire,
 like gold against goods and goods against gold.

 There is much debate among commentators about the appropriate interpretation but it

 is mostly accepted that monetary turnover is taken here as a metaphor for the cosmos.
 The 'monetary form of exchange', according to Shell (1993, p. 60) 'informs many
 fragments of Heraclitus'. It is in this sense that Seaford (2004, p. 94) explains: 'gold
 here as a universal means of exchange is a model for the cosmic role of fire, which

 is for Heraclitus constitutive of the cosmos', elaborating then: 'Just as the circulation
 of goods (money-goods-money, etc.) is driven by...money, so cosmic circulation
 (fire-things-fire, etc.)' (Seaford 2004, p. 232).22

 It seems quite clear that from Heraclitus' time on there existed the perspective that

 monetary exchange can be seen as an exchange of equivalents and that there is a cir
 cular flow of currency. In this connection, Shell (1993, p. 60) quotes also Heraclitus'
 fragment D60, reading 'The way up and the way down are one and the same' and he

 comments: 'The way up and the way down refer to sale and purchase'. The only figure

 in the text (apart from the later plates) is when Shell (1993, p. 61) draws the circular

 flow of goods and gold between Ephesus and Sardis, the capital of Lydia from where
 we have indeed the oldest gold coins.

 The Aeginetan coin design accords well with such a perspective: the two rectan

 gles are complements in the sense of Euclid and as such they represent mathematically

 2® See Artmann (1999, pp. 40-41, Figs. 4.18, 4.19).

 21 In this translation of Heraclitus' antamoibe I follow Diels' 1901 German translation which uses the term

 Umsatz = 'turnover'.

 22 Similarly Shell (1993, p. 56): 'Heraclitus ...splits the barter transaction into two opposite operations,
 namely, sale and purchase. This split presupposes an intermediating third term, money...In a money econ
 omy, one thing is not exchanged directly for another, but is first exchanged for money which seems to
 represent or be all things'.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 577

 proven equality. As rectangles they represent price x quantity values. Embedded in a
 square they can associate a 'square deal' in accordance with the alleged Pythagorean
 conception of justice as a square.23 The fact that the equal (money) values of the rect
 angles are connected by segments of one circle (see Fig. 6a) suggests an invocation of
 a circular flow of money values in the tradition of Heraclitus' famous metaphor which

 likens the economic circular flow to that of the circular flow of fire in the all-involving

 cosmos.

 5.3 Doubling the circle

 It was mentioned above that one of the important spin-offs of doubling the square was

 the reformulation of conceptions of proportionality so that they could cover cases of
 incommensurability and nonlinearity, in particular cases involving circles. We may

 now carry on in this vein by hypothesizing that in such an extended view of propor

 tionality there must be a narrow correspondence between the doubling of the square

 and the doubling of the circle. Thus, if we have two square areas Aq and A q> with

 known proportionality to each other then there must be a corresponding proportionality

 between two circular areas Aqi and Aq2 so that we have

 Aa ■ AOl = CD2 : (V2)2 = Aqi : AQ2

 The corresponding circles are drawn in Fig. 6b where the area of the outer circle is
 double that of the inner circle in the same way as the square with side \fl is double
 the square with side 1. This result could be derived directly from Euclid's Elements
 where we have

 Prop. XII.2
 Circles are to one another as the squares on the diameters (Artmann 1999, p. 272)

 which means that for two circular areas we have the general case of Aqi : Aq2 = r2:r|
 where r stands for the radius (half the diameter) of a circle.

 We have here again the problem of chronology, namely that the putative Aegine
 tan construction antedates Euclid by about 100 years. But there are ancient authors'
 reports that Hippocrates' of Chios work (around 430 BC) indicates familiarity with
 'a form of the theorem that circles are as the squares on their diameters (cf. XII, 2)'
 as Knorr (1975, p. 40) relates, his reference being to the just quoted proposition. It
 is thus not implausible that around 400 BC there was awareness among some of the

 makers and the users of the newer Aeginetan coins that their design implied not only

 the doubling of a square but also the doubling of a circle as shown in Fig. 6b.

 23 Cf. Rucker (1982, p. 54) who lists the Pythagorean identifications of numbers with concepts and registers:
 '4 was justice (a "square" deal)'.

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 578 G. M. Arabrosi

 5.4 Squaring the lunule

 The basic outline of the newer Aeginetan coin design is that of a circle and a square
 interwoven with each other in a way which could easily lead to the question whether
 we have here not also a contribution to that popular ancient problem of 'squaring
 the circle' ,24 Good eyesight would immediately give a negative answer, confirmed by

 computation which shows that Aq ^ 5.83 < Aq 6.28. But there is also a positive
 answer in that the Aeginetan design incorporates one of the most astonishing ancient

 contributions to the debate of this problem, namely Hippocrates' of Chios squaring of

 the lunule. This is shown by Fig. 6c where the area of the moon sickle-shaped shaded

 area on the upper left is the same as that of the double unit square on the lower right.

 The construction of Fig. 6c requires that a circle is drawn with radius 2, the double

 of the side of the unit square. Its midpoint is the intersection of the circumference

 of the initial circle with the diagonal of the doubled square as shown. The resulting
 intersections of the new circumference with the outer square mark a segment of that

 circle which gives the lower border of the shaded moon sickle. One of Hippocrates'
 theorems now states that a right isosceles triangle with a hypothenuse given by the
 line connecting the two corners of the moon sickle has the same area as the moon.25

 But such a triangle consists in this case of the unit square enlarged at its right side
 by one of its halves and likewise enlarged at its lower side. The total area is then the

 double of the unit square, hence it is the same as that of the lower square.

 Hippocrates of Chios, the putative inventor of this type of construction, taught in

 Athens around 430 BC. He is reported to have written the first Elements of mathemat

 ics, but they have not survived. It is plausible that by ca. 404 bc, the earliest possible
 date for the new Aeginetan coins, knowledge of this type of construction had reached
 the mathematically interested Aeginetans. Those among them who conceived the new
 coin design might well have been aware of an implication of this design which is
 represented by our Fig. 6c.

 5.5 The gnomon as instrument and as metaphor

 In presenting the geometry of the newer Aeginetan coins as precursor of Euclid's
 proposition II.4, Artmann (1990, p. 48) remarked that there is a slight difference,
 commenting this difference as follows:

 Similarly subdivided rectangles and parallelograms abound in the Elements', the
 so-called 'Gnomon' is a familiar tool in geometrical (and arithmetical) proofs.
 The missing diagonal in the small square could be a means to emphasize the

 Artmann (1999, p. 61) then reproduced Euclid's definition (originally emphasized):

 24 Artmann (1999, p. 73): 'It must have been popular in the intellectual circles in Athens about 440-400
 B.C.E. Evidence for this is a line from the comedy The Birds written by Aristophanes'. The comedy is
 dated 414 bc and features a grotesque city planner who proposes the squaring of the circle.

 25 For a detailed construction along these lines consult O'Connor and Robertson (1999).

 gnomon

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 579

 II. Def. 2. (For rectangles) Let any one of the rectangles around the diameter of
 any rectangular area (together) with the two complements be called a gnomon.

 whence it emerges that the 'tilted L'-shaped structure surrounding the doubled square
 of the Aeginetan coins is such a gnomon. The fact that this gnomon itself is embraced
 by a semicircle in the present construction as illustrated by Fig.6d above may be
 interpreted as a reinforcement of the emphasis on the gnomon which Artmann has

 emphasized already. But it is rather unclear why the designers of the Aeginetan coins
 put so much emphasis on such a geometrical shape. Artmann (1999, p. 62) relates
 that the gnomon 'was originally a sort of primitive sundial', in literal translation 'an
 instrument for knowledge', as we may add, but both pieces of information contribute

 little to a better understanding of the significance of such a design on Aeginetan coins.
 There are some passages in Heath (1921, p. 78) which enlighten us further about

 this term and its ancient epistemological significance (emphasis as in the original):

 The term is used in a fragment of Philolaus [the Pythagorean, ca. 470 - ca. 385
 BC, GMA] where he says that 'number makes all things knowable and mutually

 agreeing in the way characteristic of the gnomon'. Presumably, as Boeckh (1819,

 p. 144) says, the connection between the gnomon and the square to which it is
 added was regarded as symbolical of union and agreement, and Philolaus used
 the idea to explain the knowledge of things, making the knowing embrace the
 known as the gnomon does the square.

 In short, the geometrical figure of a gnomon is not only mathematically very fruitful
 as we may learn from Artmann (1999, passim), but it may also be seen as a sign of
 friendly embrace which produces self-similar 'offspring' from the embraced square.
 It is in this latter sense that Aristotle, in his Categories (ca. 14 ; 15a29-33) describes
 the gnomon as follows:

 But there are some things which are increased without being altered; for exam
 ple, a square is increased (i.e. enlarged) when a gnomon is placed round it, but
 it is not any the more "altered" (i.e. changed in shape) thereby, and so in other
 similar cases. (Heath 1949, p. 20)

 Philolaus' and Aristotle's allusion to a clasping or embracing visual appearance of
 the gnomon gives this noun an ambiguity of meaning which one might liken to the one
 associated with the English verb 'to grasp something'. It can mean 'to understand'
 as well as 'to make something one's own'. The latter association is, of course, quite

 appropriate in connection with coins since they are meant to be used for acquisitive

 commercial purposes. It is quite congenial for a commercial context to have a means

 of payment with a symbol which can be understood as meaning 'knowledge' as well
 as 'seizure', or 'augmentation' as well as 'friendly embrace'. It seems that all of these
 meanings could have been implied when the coin design was interpreted as emphasiz

 ing a gnomon. An accentuating version of the coin design as represented by the above

 Fig. 6d therefore could indeed have been very much to the liking of its initial inventors.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 580 G. M. Ambrosi

 6 Summary and conclusion

 There are some ancient Greek coins from the island state of Aigina which depict

 peculiar geometric designs. They come in basically two interesting versions, one from

 the beginning of the fifth century BC, the other from its end. From the viewpoint
 of mathematics, this century was a 'golden age' as van der Waerden (1963) once
 remarked in his treatise on Science Awakening. We do not know why and by whom

 the coin designs were conceived as we know little about Aeginetan society and policy
 in general (Figueira 1981). Even the geometric constructions which generated these
 designs are in dispute (Aboav 2008).

 We do know, however, that the usage and the knowledge of the Aeginetan coins

 was wide-spread, that there was 'Aiginetan currency domination' (von Reden 2010,
 p. 72). This started to change from about 480 BC on—the time when Athens started

 to assert its hegemony and vied for monetary dominance herself. But in spite of the

 Athenian hegemony during much of that time, the fifth century ended with the mone

 tary standard of Aegina being used in a large part of the ancient Greek world (Figueira

 1981, p. 82). About 50 years later Aristotle treated Aegina as proverbial for something

 'necessary' in monetary matters (Metaphysics 1015a25), but it is not quite clear what

 that necessity was.

 As today there are people who are curious about the significance of the design on

 Aegina's coins, such curiosity must have been far greater among the ancient users
 of the coins. It should be remembered that for many centuries coins were the only
 imprinted mass medium (Shell 1993, p. 64). Their message certainly was noted and
 discussed intensively by their contemporary users. Hence, it is quite likely that we
 would have an improved understanding of the ancient Greek mind-set if we knew
 more about the mental background of the Aeginetan coins. But since there is no doc
 umentary evidence about them, we must rely on speculation and on considerations of

 plausibility in our quest for a better understanding.

 Differing considerably from previous interpretations (Artmann 1990,1999; Aboav

 2008), we proposed to see the Aeginetan coin design under the perspective of conceal
 ing versus revealing 'incommensurability'. Their older versions with skewed trans
 versals fall under the topic of concealing incommensurability. It does show knowledge

 of incommensurability, namely through the choice of an eccentric meeting point of
 the construction's transversals which divides the diagonal into two sections with the
 proportion Yet that design conceals incommensurability by hiding any line or
 section of a line which could be easily identified as representing an irrational number,

 including that part of the diagonal which represents the V2.

 The present interpretation of the construction of the older Aeginetan coin design

 with skewed transversals is in agreement with some ancient reports about the early

 Pythagoreans according to which 'traitors' who revealed the 'secret' of incommensu

 rability were expelled from the brotherhood and met an untimely death (for a 'mental
 movie' on this theme see Rucker 1982, p. 57). It is impossible to tell whether the Ae

 ginetans chose this design out of reverence (Aboav 2008, p. 611) or out of deference

 against the teachings of Pythagoras who may have died shortly before the appearance

 of this design. A publication via coin design of the Pythagorean secret of incommen

 surability, even in a veiled form, was hardly in the interest of a secretive Pythagorean

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 581

 Fig. 7 Artmann's coin sketch
 overlaid

 Brotherhood. But it is possible that the Aeginetans got knowledge of incommensura
 bility and 'eccentric' divisions of squares through their far-reaching overseas trading
 contacts for which they were well known. The seemingly old 'Pythagorean' knowl
 edge that the diagonal of squares had to be measured in terms of the 'irrational' ~/2 was
 definitely Old Babylonian wisdom of about 1600 BC as is well documented through
 clay tablets of that time.

 The Pythagorean secret of incommensurability had been lifted by the time when
 this phenomenon became the explicit topic of coin design. There are two cases which
 one can claim as being in point: one case is given by some coins from the island of
 Melos (ca. 420 bc), the other case is given by a number of coins from Aegina (from
 404 BC on). Important literary evidence for assessing these two cases comes from
 a time which is much later than their physical manifestation in minted form. Most
 important is a famous passage in Plato's dialogue Meno (written probably 385 BC)
 in which Socrates gives a geometry lesson on 'doubling the square'. This doubling
 occurs by taking the diagonal of the original square as the side of the square with
 double the area of the first. But Pythagoras' Theorem about right triangles shows that
 when the square's sides are given by integers, then such a diagonal must be measured

 in units of the V2, i.e. in irrational numbers, the diagonal thus being incommensurable

 with a side of the square which is measured in integers. Thus, incommensurability is
 revealed by doubling the square (Szabo 1978, p. 93); but at the same time it is also
 healed: in a square with a side of numerical length the incommensurable diagonal line,

 when squared, gives an area measurable in integers.

 It is clearly stated in modern literature that the Melian coin design of ca. 420 BC is

 the visual forerunner of the corresponding literary description in the Meno dialogue
 of 385 BC (Artmann 1990, p.44). But it is less clear that the typical Aeginetan coin
 design of 404 bc onwards deals with the self-same problem as the Melian one, albeit
 on the basis of a very different construction. Its main feature is a circle in which the

 radius gives the diagonal of the initial square and the side of the double square. Figure
 7 shows that such a construction does cover the historical coins quite well, but there

 is the problem that the circle of the construction is not congruent with the circle of
 the coin when it is supposed to include the whole of the double square. The solution
 which we see here is that the coin is struck not as a circle but as an oval (Artmann

 1999, p. 63, Fig. 7.3). This shape is a 'compromise' between the two relevant circles.
 At the left upper edge, its rounding follows the circle of the construction. At the right
 lower edge, its rounding catches the extruding part of the doubled square. The shape

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 confirms the plausibility of the geometrical interpretation given in our Fig. 2a in the
 above.

 582 G. M. Ambrosi

 Establishing connections between the Aeginetan coin designs and Plato's writings
 opens for us a voluminous modern secondary literature on ancient Greek mathemat
 ics. We established some links between Popper's (1950) geometrical interpretations of

 Plato's Timaeus and the older Aeginetan coin design with skewed transversals. We just

 mentioned that the newer Aeginetan design with perpendicular transversals has clear
 connections with Plato's Meno, the mathematics of which having been much discussed
 in several treatises on the history of mathematics (Knorr 1975; Szabo 1978; Fowler
 1999). There is a difference to Plato, however, in so far as the Aeginetan approach to
 doubling the square is more fertile than the one which is described in Meno. The Ae

 ginetan construction opens the perspective on a number of geometrical figures which

 are unrelated to or not so clear in the Meno approach, namely (i) the circle which is

 totally absent there, (ii) the gnomon which is implicitly there but more openly in the

 Aeginetan approach, and (iii) the complements, for which the same comment applies.
 Apart from their obvious significance for the developments in the 'golden age' of

 ancient Greek mathematics to which these concepts and constructions belong, they are

 also metaphors which are likely to be appreciated in the commercial context of coins:
 the complements symbolize equivalence of monetary values; the gnomon alludes to

 penetrating knowledge and to friendly embrace and fertile partnership; the circle recalls

 Heraclitus' famous reference to the circular flow of money as a metaphor for the role

 of fire in the ever-revolving cosmos.

 One can surely debate at length whether all the implications which we got out of

 the Aeginetan coin designs were put consciously into them by their ancient inventors.
 But let us see these designs not only as documents of the intellect which went into
 them but also as having been meant to tease the intellect of the beholder. Seen in this

 light, the coins' significance lies not just in the thoughts which went into their design
 but also in the ones which they provoked. Whatever the original intentions behind
 them, these coins may appear as snapshots of Greek mathematical ingenuity as well

 as lasting vestiges of their way of thinking beyond the narrower problems of geometry.

 Acknowledgments The author would like to thank Jed Buchwald for critical scrutiny of the manuscript
 and for very helpful suggestions. Remaining deficiencies are the author's responsibility.

 Aboav, D. 2008. Euclid's book on divisions of figures: a conjecture as to its origin. Archive for History of

 Exact Sciences 62(6): 603-612. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41134293. Accessed 10 Feb 2012

 Archibald, R.C. 1915 .Euclid's book On divisions of figures : ...with a restoration based on Woepcke's text

 and on the Practica Geometriae of Leonardo Pisano. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Artmann, B. 1990. Mathematical motifs on greek coins. The Mathematical Intelligencer 12: 43-50. doi: 10.

 Artmann, B. 1999. Euclid: The creation of mathematics. New York: Springer, http://books.google.de/books?

 Boeckh, A. 1819. Philolaos des Pythagoreers Lehren—nebst den Bruchstncken seines Werkes. Berlin:

 1007/BF03024032.

 id=Hp2DQgAACAAJ

 Vossische Buchhandlung

 Cornford, F.M. 1935. Plato's cosmology—The timaeus of plato translated, with a running commentary.

 Routledge: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997. Quoted from the reprint

 References

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pre-Euclidean geometry and Aeginetan coin design 583

 Diels, H. 1901. Herakleitos von Ephesos: griechisch und deutsch. Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung
 Figueira, T.J. 1981. Aegina, society and politics. Monographs in Classical Studies. New York: Arno Press.
 Fowler, D.H. 1999. The mathematics of Plato's Academy—a new reconstruction, 2nd edn. Oxford [u.a.]:

 Clarendon Press

 Oxford University Press,

 snible.org/coins/hn/index.html

 Press

 the reprint 1970

 Gregory, A., and R. Waterfield. 2008. Plato—Timaeus and critias. Oxford world's classics. New York:

 Head, B.V. 1911. Historia numorum, a manual of Greek numismatics, new and enlarged edn. http://www.

 Heath, T.L. 1921A history of greek mathematics, Vol. I—From Thales to Euclid. Oxford: The Clarendon

 Heath, T.L. 1949. Mathematics in aristotle. Oxford: Clarendon and Oxford University Press. Quoted from

 H0yrup, J. 1990. Dynamis, the Babylonians, and Theaetetus 147c7-148d7. Historia Mathematica 17: 201

 222. http://akira.ruc.dk/~jensh/Publications/1990

 Kaplan, R., and E. Kaplan. 2010. Hidden harmonies: The lives and times of the Pythagorean theorem. New

 York: Bloomsbury Press

 Knorr, W.R. 1975.The evolution of the euclidean elements—A study of the theory of incommensurable
 magnitudes and its significance for early greek geometry. Dordrecht, Holland and Boston: D. Reidel.
 Kraay, C.M. 1976. Archaic and classical Greek coins. The Library of numismatics. London: Methuen.

 http://books.google.de/books?id=SlNmAAAAMAAJ

 Kroll, J.H. 2002. Staatliche Mnnzsammlung Mnnchen—Attika, Megara, Aigina, Sylloge Nummorum Grae

 corum. Vol. Deutschland, Heft 14. Munchen: Hirmer

 Kroll, J.H., and N.M. Waggoner 1984. Dating the earliest coins of Athens, Corinth and Aegina. American

 Journal of Archaeology 88: 325-340

 Neugebauer, O., and A. Sachs. 1945. Mathematical cuneiform Texts, American oriental series, Vol. 29. New

 Haven: American Oriental Society and the American School of Oriental Research

 O'Connor, J.J., and E.F. Robertson. 1999. Hippocrates of Chios. MacTutor History of Mathematics http://

 www.gap-system.org/~history/Biographies/Hippocrates.html. Accessed on 28 Feb 2012

 Olsen, S.A. 1985. The pythagorean plato and the golden section—A study in abductive inference. Uni
 versity of Florida. Dissertation presented to the Graduate Council of the University of Florida, http://
 openlibrary.org/books/OL24475039M/The_Pythagorean_Plato_and_the_golden_section.

 Popper, K.R. 1950. The open society and its enemies, Revised edn. Princeton: Princeton University Press
 Ross, W.D. 1928. Metaphysica. In The Works of Aristotle, ed. W.D. Ross, Vol. VIII. Oxford: Clarendon

 Press (page numbering is only by Bekker numbers)

 Rucker, R. 1982. Infinity and the mind: The Science and philosophy of the infinite. Brighton, Sussex: The

 Harvester Press. http://books.google.de/books?id=iYSkPwAACAAJ

 Seaford, R. 2004. Money and the early Greek mind—Homer, Philosophy, tragedy. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press

 Shell, M. 1993. The economy of literature. Softshell Bks. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, http://

 books.google.de/books?id=aFefxqBFC54C.

 Szabo, A. 1978. The beginnings of greek mathematics, synthese historical library. Vol. 17. Dordrecht, Bos
 ton and Budapest: D. Reidel Publishing Company and AkadTmiai Kiado. English translation of AnfSnge
 griechischer Mathematik. Munchen: Oldenbourg, 1969

 Taylor, A.E. 1928. A commentary on Plato's Timaeus. Oxford: Clarendon Press
 Unguru, S. 1975/76. On the need to rewrite the history of Greek mathematics. Archive for the History of

 Exact Sciences 15: 67-114

 id=cWQLAQAAIAAJ

 van der Waerden, B.L. 1963. Science Awakening, Science Editions, http://books.google.de/books?

 von Fritz, K. 1945. The Discovery of Incommensurability by Hippasus of Metapontum. The Annals of Math
 ematics, Second Series 46(2): 242-264. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1969021. Accessed 5 Jan 2011

 von Reden, S. 2010. Money in classical antiquity. Key Themes in ancient history. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press. http://books.google.de/books?id=ZPZnUsMxOMoC

 Walser, H. 2001. The Golden Section, 2nd edn. Washington, DC: Spectrum, The Mathematical Association

 of America. Translated from the original German

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:07:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

