 

 

 

 

Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics: fluidity, the spring of

the air and their relationship to the concept of pressure
Author(s): Alan Chalmers
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 5 (September 2015), pp. 429-454
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569661
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:14 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2015) 69:429-454 (ÎN CrossMark
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-015-0159-7 VC

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics
 and pneumatics: fluidity, the spring of the air and their

 relationship to the concept of pressure

 Alan Chalmers1

 Received: 1 June 2015 / Published online: 15 July 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract This article in an attempt to identify the precise way in which Robert Boyle

 provided a mechanical account of the features that distinguish liquids and air from

 solids and from each other. In his pneumatics, Boyle articulated his notion of the

 'spring' of the air for that purpose. Pressure appeared there only in a common, rather

 than in a technical, sense. It was when he turned to hydrostatics that Boyle found

 the need to introduce a technical sense of pressure to capture the fluidity of water

 which, unlike air, lacked a significant spring. Pressure, understood as representing the

 state of a liquid within the body of it rather than at its surface, enabled Boyle to trace

 the transmission of hydrostatic forces through liquids and thereby give a mechanical

 account of that transmission according to his understanding of the term. This was a

 major step towards the technical sense of pressure that was to be adopted in Newton's

 hydrostatics and in fluid mechanics thereafter.

 1 Introduction

 The development of the sciences of hydrostatics and pneumatics in the seventeenth

 century is typically discussed, for example by Pierre Duhem, in terms of the intro

 duction of the concept of pressure.1 Considerations of pressure loom large in the

 more recent, and detailed, engagement with Boyle's pneumatics by Shapin and Schaf

 1 See Duhem (1905).

 Communicated by: Alan Shapiro.

 E3 Alan Chalmers

 alan.chalmers@sydney.edu.au; achalmers@usyd.edu.au

 1 Unit for History and Philosophy of Science, University of Sydney, Carslaw Building F07,

 Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 430 A. Chalmers

 fer (1985). From the point of view of the position argued in this paper, focus on

 the concept of pressure can be a misleading and inappropriate way of understanding

 developments in seventeenth-century hydrostatics and pneumatics. Moreover, those

 that have adopted such a focus have given insufficient attention to the precise import

 of the term 'pressure' and the changes it underwent in the seventeenth century and

 thereafter. The uncritical assumption that seventeenth-century figures such as Boyle

 employed the term 'pressure' in something like its modern sense has blinded historians

 to many of the subtleties involved in the evolution of a theorisation of the features that

 distinguish liquids and air from solids and from each other that gradually emerged in

 the period that separated the relevant work of Simon Stevin and Isaac Newton.

 Boyle built on the work of his predecessors to articulate technical notions of the

 'spring of the air' and fluidity. The term 'pressure' was used extensively by Boyle to

 be sure, but his early uses of it employed a common sense of that term rather than

 a technical sense. As far as his pneumatics was concerned, his notion of spring gave

 Boyle what was required from a technical point of view. He gave serious attention

 to hydrostatics, as distinct from pneumatics, only after his reading of Blaise Pascal's

 treatise The Equilibrium of Liquids in 1664. Recognising that liquids do not possess

 a significant 'spring' Boyle came to realise that hydrostatics required a precise char

 acterisation of 'fluidity' to distinguish liquids from solids. It was that task that took

 Boyle some way beyond the common sense notion of pressure to a more technical one.

 There was a productive interplay between developments in hydrostatics and pneu

 matics that is brought out in the following study. When Stevin wrote his Elements of

 Hydrostatics in 1586, he was able to take a sophisticated and mathematically formu

 lated science of weight as his model of a theorised science. Since liquids and solids

 alike possess weight, a theory of liquids as distinct from solids required that liquids

 be characterised in a way that pinpointed a feature or features of them distinct from

 weight. This was a step that Stevin did not succeed in taking.2 It was the behaviour of

 air, rather than liquids such as water, that most directly signalled the need to transcend

 weight. The resistance of a syringe to the motion of the plunger and the expansion

 of an inflated bladder as air is forced into it do not lend themselves to an explanation

 that appeals only to weight. Following Evangelista Torricelli's experiment demon

 strating the support of a mercury column by the atmosphere, there were anticipations

 of Boyle's attempt to characterise the nature of air by adding spring to weight. In the

 light of such developments, Pascal came to realise that liquids needed to be theorised

 in a way that distinguished them from both air and solids, focusing on the continuity

 and fluidity of the former for that purpose. This theoretical innovation, spelt out in his

 Equilibrium of Liquids, was not matched by the companion treatise, On the Weight of

 the Mass of the Air, which did not move significantly beyond considerations of weight

 and fluidity insofar as it lacked a concept playing the role of Boyle's 'spring'. Boyle's

 attempts to give a theoretical account of both pneumatics and hydrostatics, as distinct

 from each other and the science of weight, are the main focus of concern in this paper.

 I find it useful to characterise the causes involved in Boyle's hydrostatics and

 pneumatics, such as weight, pressure and the spring of the air, together with the

 2 I have analysed Stevin's hydrostatics from this point of view in Chalmers (2015).

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 431

 explanations provided by invoking them, as 'intermediate' causes and explanations.

 Boyle himself occasionally used that term to capture the sense in which such causes

 differed from the ultimate causes of material phenomena which seventeenth-century

 mechanical philosophers located in the shapes, sizes and motions of corpuscles of

 universal matter.3 Intermediate causes could be identified and explored by experiment

 and could serve their explanatory function whether or not they themselves could be

 explained at a deeper level. As we shall see, Boyle insisted that his pneumatics, for

 example, no more required that the spring of the air be explained than the ancient

 science of simple machines such as the balance required that weight be explained.

 In the following section, I discuss more fully the sense of 'mechanical' involved

 in Boyle's quest to identify the intermediate causes of hydrostatic and pneumatic

 phenomena. I prepare the way for my account in Sect. 4 of Boyle's introduction of

 the concept of 'spring' into pneumatics by surveying, in Sect. 3, the work of his

 predecessors on which he could draw. Section 5 contrasts the modern concept of

 pressure with a common sense of that term which dates from antiquity. This makes

 it possible for me to critically evaluate, in Sect. 6, where to situate Boyle's usage of

 'pressure' in his pneumatics in the spectrum between the two extremes. I argue that

 Boyle's pneumatics involved and required no significant move beyond the common

 sense of pressure. This no longer remained the case once Boyle turned his attention to

 hydrostatics. Section 7 captures the way in which Boyle moved beyond the common

 sense of pressure to give an account of how pressure is transmitted from point to point

 through the body of liquids. Boyle's theoretical innovations complemented those made

 by Pascal in ways described in Sect. 8. The main thrust and significance of my analysis

 is summarised in the concluding section.

 2 Boyle on mechanism and intermediate causes

 Boyle made one of his most forthright expressions of the sense in which he regarded

 his accounts of hydrostatics and pneumatics to be 'mechanical' in An Hydrostatical

 Discourse composed in 1672 as a response to criticism from Henry More. Defending

 his appeals to the weight and spring of the air in his pneumatics, Boyle wrote:

 And since such kinds of explanations have been of late generally called mechan

 ical, in respect of their being grounded upon the laws of the mechanics, I, that

 do not use to contend about names, suffer them quietly to be so: And to enti

 3 Boyle used the term 'intermediate' causes in 'A Proemial Essay' (1661) which was an introduction to

 Certain Physiological Essays which reported on some of Boyle's early experimentation other than that in

 pneumatics. It is reproduced in The Works of Boyle (1999), Ed. Hunter and Davis, Volume II, pp. 9-34.

 (Hereafter, I identify sources in this collection simply as Works followed by a roman numeral representing

 the volume and the page number, e.g., Works II, p. 23.) Boyle characterised intermediate causes more fully

 in a manuscript fragment dealing with final causes and the uses of experiment, dating from around 1688 and

 reproduced in Boyle (1990), Vol. IX, f40-41, reel 5, frame 250. 'Of the subordinate or intermediate causes

 or theories of natural things, there may be many: some more and some less remote from the First Principles

 and yet each of them capable to afford a just delight and useful instruction to the mind. And these we may

 call the cosmographical, the hydrostatical, the anatomical, the magnetical, the chemical and other causes

 or reasons of phenomena as those which are more immediate (in our way of estimating things) than the
 general and primordial causes of natural effects'. See also Boyle (1990), Vol. VIII, fl84, reel 5, frame 189.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 432 A. Chalmers

 tie my now examined explication to be mechanical, in the usual sense of that

 expression, I am not obliged to treat the cause of gravity in general; since many

 propositions of Archimedes, Stevinus and those others that have written of sta

 tics, are confessed to be mathematically or mechanically demonstrated, though

 those authors do not take upon them to assign the true cause of gravity but take

 it for granted, as a thing universally acknowledged, that there is such a quality

 in bodies that they treat of. And if in each of the scales of an ordinary and just

 balance, a pound weight, for instance, be put; he that shall say, that the scales

 hang still in equilibrium because the equal weights counterpoise one another;

 and in case an ounce be put into one of the scales, and not in the opposite; he

 that shall say that the loaded scale is depressed, because it is urged by a greater

 weight than the other, will be thought to have given a mechanical explanation

 of the equilibrium of the scales, and their losing it; though he cannot give a true

 cause, why either of those scales tends towards the centre of the earth.4

 Boyle is here making explicit what was implicit in the acceptance and deployment

 of the science of simple machines, dating from the works of pseudo-Aristotle and

 Archimedes and developed with increasing sophistication up until the dawn of the

 scientific revolution.5 The science of weight, involving the transmission of forces

 via contact action, was explanatory and useful and regarded as such in spite of the

 fact that gravity or weight and, one might add, the rigidity of balance arms and the

 near constant length of pulley strings were appealed to as causes which themselves
 remained unexplained. In the remainder of the article, I use the term 'mechanical' in

 the sense outlined here and referred to by Boyle as 'the usual sense of the word'.6

 Boyle insisted that there is merit in knowledge that explains by appealing to unex

 plained intermediate causes.

 And though it must not be denied that it is an advantage as well as a satisfaction

 to know in general how the qualities of things are deducible from the primitive

 affections of the smallest parts of matter, yet whether we know that or no, if

 we know the qualities of this or that body they compose, and how 'tis disposed

 to work on other bodies or be brought on by them, we may without ascending

 to the top of the series of causes perform things of great moment and such as

 without the diligent examination of particular bodies would, I fear, never have

 been found out a priori even by the most profound contemplators.7

 Knowledge of intermediate causes is to be found by 'diligent examination of par

 ticular bodies' that is by experimenting, rather than by a priori contemplation. Such

 4 Works VII, p. 148.

 5 For an appreciation of the degree of sophistication reached by developments in the science of weight

 prior to the seventeenth century, see Renn and Peter (2012).

 6 As I have stressed elsewhere, this use of mechanical 'in the usual sense of the word' differs from the

 sense involved in 'the mechanical philosophy' characterised by the insistence that phenomena be traced

 back to the interaction of corpuscles of universal matter characterised solely in terms of their shape, size

 and motion. The distinction between mechanism in the strict, philosophical, sense and in a more common

 sense is spelt out in Chalmers (1993, 2002, 2009, 2012).

 7 Works II, p. 24.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 433

 knowledge, which is not otherwise available, is of great moment and not to be despised

 since it is explanatory.

 The standpoint adopted by Boyle and described in the foregoing is clearly implicit

 in Spring of the Air (1661), where Boyle insists that his business 'is not—to assign the

 adequate cause of the spring of the air but only to manifest, that the air has a spring,

 and to relate some of its effects'.8 When, 5 years later, Boyle turned his attention to

 hydrostatics, he insisted that that field qualified as 'philosophy'.

 Hydrostatics is a part of philosophy, which I confess I look upon as one of the

 ingeniousest [sic.] doctrines that belong to it. Theorems and problems of the art,

 being most of them pure and handsome productions of reason duly exercised on

 attentively considered subjects, and making in them such discoveries as are not

 only pleasing, but diverse of them surprising, and such as would make one at

 first wonder by what kind of ratiocination men came to attain the knowledge of

 such unobvious truths.—For there are many things, as well as the more familiar,

 as of the more abstruse phenomena of nature that will never be understood by

 those that are strangers to the hydrostatics.9

 This passage appears early in a work that proceeds to describe phenomena explored

 by experiment and explained by appeal to the weight and fluidity of water. Here Boyle

 uses the term 'philosophy' in a way that later generations were to use the term 'sci

 ence'. If philosophical knowledge is distinguished from that of artisans by the fact

 that the former, unlike the latter, identifies causes which facilitate explanations of phe

 nomena, then Boyle can insist that hydrostatics is to be deemed part of philosophy, in

 spite of the fact that the causes and explanations involved are intermediate rather than
 ultimate ones.

 In modern terminology, one can summarise Boyle's stance in the following way. In

 order to convert pneumatics and hydrostatics into sciences on a par with the science

 of weight, it was necessary to move beyond weight, which solids, liquid and air share

 in common, by developing theoretical characterisations of the ways in which liquids

 and air differ from solids and from each other. It was the (intermediate) concepts of

 spring, fluidity and pressure that made it possible to identify the pushes involved in

 the transmission of forces through liquids and air by contact action, thereby affording

 mechanical explanations of hydrostatic and pneumatic phenomena.

 The foregoing remarks help us to appreciate Boyle's dissatisfaction with the treatise

 on hydrostatics compiled by Simon Stevin in 1586.10 That work was modelled on

 the mathematical treatises of Euclid and Archimedes and presented hydrostatics as a

 body of theorems derivable from postulates sufficiently unproblematic to be granted

 at the outset.11 Boyle was prepared to accept that Stevin had demonstrated that the

 8 Works I, p. 166.

 9 Works V, p. 194.

 10 The Elements of Hydrostatics in Stevin (1955), pp. 393-483.

 11 As is argued in Chalmers (2015), the mechanics of simple machines on which Stevin modelled his

 hydrostatics could be presented in Euclidean guise only to the extent that common sense and familiar tech

 nologies could yield propositions about weight that could be regarded as evident. The move to pneumatics,

 and to a lesser extent hydrostatics, involved a move beyond that familiar world to one revealed by way

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 434 A. Chalmers

 propositions constituting his hydrostatics were true but complained that he had not

 shown why they were true.12 He complained that mathematicians such as Stevin

 were wont to handle hydrostatics 'rather as geometricians, than as philosophers, and

 without referring them to the explication of the phenomena of nature'.13 The kinds of

 explication that Boyle sought were mechanical ones in the sense I have here identified.

 To provide them in his hydrostatics, and also his pneumatics, Boyle needed to trace

 the way in which the relevant effects were related to their causes by way of contact

 action. This quest eventually led Boyle to formulate a technical sense of pressure that

 went beyond the common sense.

 Unlike his predecessor Stevin, Boyle was not particularly concerned to express his

 accounts of pneumatics and hydrostatics mathematically. Rather he aimed to iden

 tify the intermediate causes of the phenomena and to show how they functioned

 mechanically rather than mathematically. By doing so, he aimed to provide mechanical

 explanations of hydrostatics and pneumatics that could be illustrated and vindicated

 by a range of experiments.14 This is the point of view I bring to bear on my analysis

 of Boyle's treatment of spring, fluidity and pressure.

 3 Anticipations of Boyle's 'spring of the air'

 Boyle's expressed aim in New Experiments Physico-mechanical Touching the Spring

 of the Air and Its Effects (1661), his first and major work on pneumatics, was 'to

 manifest that air has a spring, and to relate some of its effects'.15 The details of Boyle's

 case required the recognition that the spring of air is isotropic and is the greater the

 more the air is compressed. They also required the recognition that air has weight.

 None of these points were novel at the time that Boyle embarked on his experimental

 programme. In this section, I survey some of the accomplishments of the preceding
 decade or two on which Boyle was able to build.16

 Key ideas lying behind Boyle's treatment of air and its weight and spring were

 anticipated by Torricelli, in 1644, at the time of his experiment involving what has
 become known as the barometer. These were expressed in an interchange of letters

 between Torricelli, in Florence, and Michaelangelo Ricci, in Rome. Ricci sent extracts

 Footnote 11 continued

 of experiment. As a consequence, novel notions other than weight needed to be fashioned and the ade

 quacy of various claims made with their aid needed to be established, not by appeal to their unproblematic

 character but by appeal to their explanatory power and the extent to which their use was illustrated and

 supported by experiment. Hence, Boyle's reference in the passage in the main text to 'surprising' discov

 eries, and 'unobvious truths' revealed by 'diligent examination of particular bodies' and requiring for their

 comprehension novel concepts that are 'handsome productions of reason'.

 14 In the full title of Spring of the Air and elsewhere, Boyle referred to his pneumatics as 'physico
 mechanicai'. I suspect that by doing so he was drawing a contrast between his mechanical exposition and

 works with a more mathematical emphasis which were being referred to as 'physico-mathematical', as
 exemplified in the title of Mersenne (1644).

 16 My account of the background to Boyle's introduction of 'spring' owes a debt to Webster (1965).

 12 Works H, pp. 207 and 236.

 13 Works II, p. 195.

 15 Works I, p. 66.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 435

 of the letters to Mersenne in Paris, and their contents became widely distributed and

 well known, especially in France. In his first letter, of June 11,1644, Torricelli invoked

 the weight of atmospheric air as the support of the column of mercury in the barometer.

 We 'live submerged at the bottom of an ocean of the element air, which by unques

 tioned experiments is known to have weight'. The column of mercury does not fall

 because 'on the surface of the liquid which is in the basin, there gravitates a mass of

 air fifty miles high'.17

 In his response, Ricci raised two objections to Torricelli's appeal to the weight of

 the air. One of them involved the observation that the mercury in the barometer tube

 does not fall if the mercury in the outer dish is insulated from the weight of the air

 by a metal cap, giving a reason to doubt that the weight of air is indeed responsible

 for supporting the mercury column. In the main part of his reply, Torricelli assumed

 that a layer of air remains between the metal cap and the upper surface of the mercury

 in the outer dish. He argued that that air, which before the placement of the metal

 cap is compressed by the weight of the air above it, remains compressed once the cap

 is in place, and so presses on the mercury as before, thus preventing the descent of

 the column of mercury. Torricelli drew an analogy between the compressed air and a
 cylinder of compressed wool pressing on the base of its container. He invited Ricci

 to imagine that a sheet of iron be inserted part way up the wool so as to insulate the

 upper part from the lower. Torricelli insisted that the lower portion of the wool would

 remain compressed and so continue to press on the base as before. 'Try it yourself',

 wrote Torricelli, 'for I shall not continue to bore you'.18

 A second objection raised by Ricci led Torricelli close to acknowledging the

 isotropy of the forces acting in liquids and compressed air. Ricci noted that the force

 required to support the column of mercury must act upwards, whereas the weight of air

 acts downwards. Part of Torricelli's response involved the observation that if a pitcher

 partly filled with water is thrust mouth downwards in water and a hole is made in its

 base, now uppermost, to allow the air to escape, then the water will rise in the pitcher

 in spite of the downwards force arising from its weight. This effect, together with the

 recognition that wine will spurt horizontally from a hole in the side of a wine barrel,

 illustrates that 'although by nature liquids gravitate downwards, they press and spout

 in every direction, even upwards, as long as they find places to reach, - that is, places
 which resist with less force than their own'.19

 In spite of Torricelli's appeal to the weight of the air and his use of the 'ocean of

 air' metaphor, the recognition that it is the compression of air that is central to its

 characteristic behaviour, rather than weight, which it shares with liquids and air, is

 implicit in his exchange with Ricci. Air presses on a surface by virtue of the degree to

 which it is compressed. In the case of our atmosphere, it is the weight of air that causes

 the lower strata of air to be compressed. However, air compressed to the same degree by

 some other cause, such as the pressing of the plunger of a syringe, will press on a surface

 17 Torriœlli's letters are in Torricelli (1919), Vol. 3, pp. 198-201. The English translations, from which I
 have quoted, are in Pascal (1937), pp. 167-170.

 18 Pascal (1937), p. 169.

 19 Ibid. Torricelli had investigated the horizontal, and also vertical, efflux of liquids early in the 1840s. For
 details, see Maffioli (1994), pp. 71-89.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 436 A. Chalmers

 that bounds it in the same way and to the same extent. These points were brought to the

 fore by developments that took place in France in the wake of Torricelli's innovations.

 An experiment, versions of which were conducted independently by Giles Persone de

 Roberval and Etienne Noel in 1647, involved introducing equal volumes of water and

 air into the Torricellian space above the mercury in a barometer, with dramatically

 different results. The introduction of the air caused a much greater lowering of the

 mercury level than an equal volume of water, in spite of the fact that the water sample

 weighed around a thousand times more than the sample of air.

 In his discussion of that phenomenon, Roberval stressed that it is a natural property

 of air, that is, a property it possesses by virtue of being air, to expand spontaneously

 into any space available to it and to press on any surface that prevents it doing so. When

 atmospheric air is introduced into the Torricellian space, 'it spontaneously and of itself
 becomes rarefied in the tube'. 'As a matter of fact', Roberval elaborated, 'if besides

 mercury or water, there be admitted into any part of the tube some of our compressed

 and condensed air, as we have stated above, this air obtains its freedom and all its parts

 recoil and become rarefied and drive out the mercury or water, which for that reason

 will be depressed below the aforesaid height, either more or less, according to the air

 itself possesses greater or lesser power of rarefaction'.20

 Air has a 'power of rarefaction' not possessed by solids or liquids and which is

 the greater the more the air is compressed. The detachment of the force exerted by

 condensed air from weight considerations was taken a stage further by Roberval's

 insertion of a carp's bladder, freed of most of its air and tied at the neck, into the

 Torricellian space. The power of rarefaction of the air was illustrated in a visually

 compelling way by the expansion of the bladder, while the near spherical shape of it

 attested to the isotropic character of the expansive force that pressed 'on all sides'.21

 Experiments conducted or orchestrated by Blaise Pascal in a 2-year period from

 late 1646 were widely reported and influential, although, as Boyle became well aware,

 their repetition proved to be far from straightforward. The most significant ones were

 Torricelli's experiment conducted with water rather than mercury; the 'void in the

 void' experiment which demonstrated that the mercury level in a barometer falls to
 near zero when it is situated in the Torricellian space of a second barometer; the

 Puy de Dôme experiment which demonstrated the variation of the mercury level in a

 barometer with height; and the observation that a bladder with air trapped within it

 expands when taken up a mountain.

 Although all of the above developments were made known in England via cor

 respondence, especially that between Mersenne in France and Theodore Haak and

 Samuel Hartlib in England, a more accessible and influential source in England was

 a section on pneumatics in Expérimenta Nova Anatomica, by a French physiologist,

 Jean Pecquet, published in 1651. An English version was published in London in 1653.

 Pecquet presented clear accounts of the new experiments in pneumatics described

 above and deployed them to support his identification of the key cause of the effects

 involved in what he called the air's 'elater', to be distinguished from its weight. Pec

 20 The quotations are from the English translation of Roberval's letters in Webster (1965), pp. 497 and 499.

 21 Pascal (1937), p. 497.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 437

 quet's 'elater' was the equivalent of Roberval's 'power of rarefaction'. Boyle cited

 Pecquet on a number of occasions, and his notion of the 'spring' of the air shows clear

 signs of owing a debt to Pecquet's 'elater' ,22

 4 Boyle's innovations in pneumatics

 While the deployment of the spring of the air by Boyle in his pneumatics was not

 novel, it was highly significant nevertheless. The fact that the concept needed to be

 elucidated, clarified and publicised is evident from the fact that, as we have noted, the

 treatise on air written by Pascal in 1654 gave undue emphasis to the weight of air and

 did not involve a concept playing the role of Boyle's 'spring'. When Boyle came to

 review the book embodying Pascal's treatises, on liquids and on air, following their

 publication as one volume in 1663, he paid scant attention to the latter, concentrating

 his review on Equilibrium of Liquids. The reason he gave was that Pascal's treatise
 on air had been rendered outdated because of the extent to which the matters had

 been 'more clearly made out by experiments, which could not be made by Monsieur

 Pascal, and those other learned men, that wanted the advantage of such engines and

 instruments, as have in this place [The Royal Society] been frequently made use of'.23

 But Boyle may well have added that it was not only the character of the experimental

 evidence he invoked that rendered Pascal's theory outmoded, but the latter's failure to

 theorise the characteristic feature of air, over and above its weight, that was responsible

 for pneumatic effects and which Boyle had termed its spring. While Boyle's major

 contributions to pneumatics came via his experiments, especially but not exclusively

 those utilising the air pump, he also deployed and reflected on them to clarify and
 extend its theoretical formulation.

 In his explication of the spring of the air, Boyle followed his predecessors in drawing

 analogies between air and elastic solids. However, Boyle's theorisation of the spring
 of the air made explicit the distinction between elasticity in solids and in air. An

 elastic solid resists expansion as well as contraction, whereas air has 'a restless power

 of expansion' only.24 What is more, this power of expansion is isotropic, differing

 from elasticity in solids in that respect. These differences between air and solids were

 stressed by Boyle, for instance, when he described the force experienced on a finger

 used to seal the upper end of a barometer tube.

 It is to be considered, that the air being a fluid as well as a heavy body, it does

 not (as grosser weights would) press only on the upper parts of the finger, but

 pressing as much of the finger as is exposed to it almost everywhere, and almost

 uniformly as well as strongly, it does by its lateral pressure on every side thrust

 in the pulp of the finger into the hole where there is not any resistance at all, or

 22 The debt that Boyle, and other English researchers such as Henry Power, owed to Pecquet is stressed by
 Webster (1965), pp. 451-458.

 23 Works V, p. 205.

 24 Works I, p. 245.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 438 A. Chalmers

 at least near so much pressure against the pulp as that of the ambient air against

 the parts of the finger ambient to it.25

 I have selected this quotation from the many other references implying the isotropy

 of the spring of the air because here Boyle makes it clear that it is the fluidity of air as

 opposed to the solidity of 'grosser weights', that is responsible for the isotropy.26

 The passage quoted above is taken from Boyle's Defence against Linus, published in

 1662 as a response to a critique of the Spring of the Air by the Aristotelian Franciscus

 Linus. The latter proposed that forces attributed by Boyle to the spring of the air

 were in fact due to the stretching of a 'funiculus' (thread) joining the extremities of

 evacuated regions, so that, for instance, the force on the finger stopping the barometer

 tube described in the passage in question is indeed due to a sucking, in keeping with

 what might well be inferred, and indeed felt, when the experiment is conducted by the

 uninitiated. Boyle was keen to establish that pneumatic forces arise from the pushing

 due to condensed air rather than a sucking due to expanded air. Air does not have a

 natural propensity to contract in the way that a stretched solid does. Forces resisting

 expansion are plausible in solids, which are relatively rigid and have a natural size.

 However, the fluidity of air and its propensity to expand imply that its parts are not

 connected in a way that would generate a resistance to expansion. While a watch can

 be driven by the pushes and pulls arising from the contraction or stretching of a metal

 spring, Boyle was intent on showing that pneumatic effects arise as a result of pushes

 only, those due to the 'restless power of expansion' that he called its spring.

 Boyle strengthened the case for attributing the causes of pneumatic effects to pushes

 arising from the spring of air by correlating the strength of experimental effects with

 variations in the spring that he was able to bring about in the receiver of his air pump.

 He was able to give mechanical explanations of a wide variety of effects, some of them

 previously established and some of them novel fruits of his own experimentation. So,

 for instance, the difficulty of lifting the stopper in the receiver of the air pump once a

 significant quantity of air is pumped from the latter is explained by the fact that

 the air in the receiver, being very much dilated, its spring must be very much

 weakened, and consequently it can but faintly press up the lower end of the

 stopple, whereas the spring of the external air being no way debilitated, he that

 a little lifts up the stopple must with his hand support a pressure equal to the

 disproportion between the force of the internal expanded air, and that of the

 atmosphere incumbent upon the upper part of the same key or stopple.27

 Likewise, the expansion of a bladder caused by the evacuation of the receiver in

 which it is housed is due to the 'surmounting of the debilitated spring of the ambient air

 remaining in the vessel, by the stronger spring of the air remaining in the bladder'.28

 Two polished discs of marble in contact, one beneath the other, provide a third from

 26 About a decade later, Boyle devoted a whole tract to the differences between pressure in solids and in

 25 Works III, pp. 22-23.

 fluids. See Works VII, pp. 215-225.

 27 Works I, p. 171.

 28 Works I, p. 174.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 439

 amongst the many examples that can be drawn from Boyle's text. The difficulty of

 separating the discs is due to the fact that the lower surface of the lowermost stone

 'being freely exposed to the air is pressed upon by it, whereas the uppermost surface,

 being contiguous to the superior stone, is thereby defended from the pressure of the

 air which consequently, pressing the lower stone against the upper, hinders it from

 falling' 29 The transmission of the force due to air pressing on a water surface through

 the body of the water is demonstrated by immersing a partially inflated bladder beneath

 the water surface and demonstrating how the balloon expands or contracts as the degree

 to which the air presses on the water surface is decreased or increased by means of

 the air pump.30

 As Webster has stressed, some of the experiments in Spring of the Air, Experiments 7

 and 17 for instance, were designed to investigate the quantitative relationship between

 the spring of the air and its degree of rarefaction.31 Here Boyle did not meet with much

 success. However, within 2 years, Boyle had performed the experiment, oft repeated

 in school classrooms since then, involving a volume of air trapped by mercury in

 a U-tube the results of which supported the hypothesis that the spring of the air is

 proportional to its degree of rarefaction, that is, to its density.

 I have not attempted to give a detailed and comprehensive account of Boyle's

 experiments in pneumatics in this place.32 Rather, I have sought, by means of some

 examples, to illustrate how Boyle developed his concept of spring and deployed it

 to give mechanical explanations of phenomena exhibited by his experiments. In the

 following section, I set the scene for further reflection on his achievement with some

 remarks on the concept of pressure.

 5 A digression on the concept of pressure

 So far in my discussion of Boyle's pneumatics, I have avoided any significant reference

 to a term that he employed frequently in his writings on that topic, namely 'pressure'.
 As we shall see, there is something to be said for the view that it was by way of

 introducing the concept of pressure into hydrostatics and pneumatics that the likes of

 Pascal and Boyle set those sciences on their modern course. However, I stress that any

 such position requires that we become very clear about what concept of pressure is at

 stake, the available literature being deficient for its lack of specificity on this crucial

 issue. It will help sharpen our critical faculties if we contrast the modern, technical

 concept of pressure with the common sense notion of pressure that dates back to

 ancient times and which was referred to by the Latin pressio/pressionem33 We will

 29 Works I, p. 238.

 30 Works I, p. 210.

 31 Webster (1965), pp. 467-170.

 32 Conant (1970) and Webster (1965) are classic studies of these developments and a new and controversial

 perspective on them is Shapin and Schaffer (1985).

 33 Alan Shapiro noted the importance of the distinction between the common and technical senses of the

 term 'pressure' in his discussion of the hydrostatics implicit in Descartes' cosmological theory of light
 which, as Shapiro stresses, lacked a technical sense of 'pressure'. See Shapiro (1974), especially p. 251,
 note 29.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 440 A. Chalmers

 then be in a position to contemplate where Boyle's talk of pressure is to be situated in
 relation to these two extremes.

 The modern concept denotes the stress on an imaginary boundary within a fluid at

 any given location, measured as a force per unit area. In spite of its specification as a

 force per unit area, pressure is not a vector, as force is, but a scalar. In view of this,

 the equation F = P. A, giving the force due to pressure P on surface of area A, can be

 puzzling insofar as the left-hand side of the equation is expressed as a vector, whereas

 the right-hand side appears as the product of two scalars. The puzzle is resolved once
 it is realised that an area of surface, A, is directed like a vector insofar as it has an

 orientation. The orientation of any particular surface can be specified by a unit vector,

 i, normal to its surface. We can then write the expression for the force on a surface

 as F = P. A. i, an expression that now equates two vectors rather than a vector and

 a scalar. This is rarely done, however, and there is a reason for that. The force due

 to pressure on a surface of area A is independent of the orientation of the surface.

 Pressure within a fluid in equilibrium is isotropic. The gas equation, PV = nRT that

 became central to thermodynamics in the nineteenth century relates pressure to two

 other scalars, volume and temperature. Within the body of a fluid in equilibrium, the

 net force due to pressure, which acts equally in all directions, is zero. It is variations

 in pressure, such as those that occur at the boundary between a fluid and a solid,

 that lead to forces. Since Euler it has been recognised that the key property of fluids

 that distinguishes them from solids is that the former are unable to sustain a tangential

 stress. It is a consequence of this that the force on any surface within the body of a fluid

 in equilibrium is normal to that surface and that the force per unit area, that is, pressure,

 is isotropic. Given this understanding, pressure occurs only in fluids and not in solids.

 Let us now follow this reflection on the concept of pressure as it occurs in modern

 physics by corresponding reflection on a common conception of pressure employed in

 ancient times and which persists in today's everyday discourse. Many common usages

 to be found in Latin texts involve the effect of the weight of solids. The flattening of

 the grass beneath a blanket at a picnic is attributed to the pressure caused by the

 weights upon it. An example that moves beyond weight involves the expansion of a

 bladder caused by forcing a fluid into it. It is natural to understand the expansion as the

 result of pressure, and the bursting of the bladder as a result of that pressure becoming

 more than the bladder can withstand. These common usages of the term 'pressure' all

 involve forces on a solid surface. The verb 'to press', premo in Latin, carries with it

 the idea of a directed force. Individual examples of pressing have a direction. What is

 more, solids can exert pressing forces as well as fluids. Indeed, the weighing of solids

 against surfaces constitutes a paradigmatic example of pressure in its common sense,

 as implicit in the use of the example involving the flattening of grass at a picnic. It still

 makes common sense to note that the floor of a loft must be built so that it is sufficiently

 strong to bear the pressure of the load it will need to carry, the weight per unit area

 rather than total weight. The facts that, according to common understanding, solids

 as well as fluids can exert pressure, and that the pressings on surfaces that constitute

 pressures are vectorial, signal two significant ways in which the common sense notion

 of pressure differs from the technical sense.

 I do not introduce the contrast between the two notions of pressure in order to

 cast judgement on Boyle's usage according to how far he moved beyond the common

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 441

 towards the modern sense. Nor do I invoke the modern sense to serve an explanatory

 function as if it were acting as an attractor drawing the progress of pneumatics and

 hydrostatics towards it. My purpose is to highlight the fact that if we are to understand

 the notion of pressure as used by Boyle and his contemporaries, then there is work to

 be done to discern exactly what they intended by the term. The contemporary literature

 suffers for want of such work. For instance, contemporary translations into English

 of works by Stevin in Dutch and by Roberval and Pascal in French make use of the

 term 'pressure' without comment, presumably in the expectation that the reader will

 interpret it in its modern sense.34 The problem lurking here is exacerbated by the fact

 that while the translated texts talk of pressing, they do not use a noun (druck in Dutch,

 la pression in French) that is the equivalent of 'pressure'. The more recent analysis

 of Boyle's pneumatics by Shapin and Schaffer involves confusions that are of their

 own making due to the inadequate attention the authors pay to the precise meaning of

 'pressure' as it evolves in Boyle's writings.35

 6 The concept of pressure in Boyle's pneumatics

 If Boyle is to be read as making significant advances to the understanding of fluids by

 introducing a concept of pressure, then it is necessary, on the one hand, to identify the

 way in which his version of the concept moved beyond the common sense that dates

 from antiquity without, on the other hand, uncritically presuming that it involved all

 that is implied by the modern one. In my view, Boyle's writings on pneumatics, at least

 those prior to his reading of Pascal's Treatises in 1664, do not involve a technical sense

 of 'pressure' but only a common sense. As the title of his pioneering work suggests,

 the theoretical merit of New Experiments Physico-Mechanical Touching the Spring

 of the Air and Its Effects lay in the detailed way in which the spring, as distinct from

 the weight, of air was specified and brought to bear on the explanation of a range of

 pneumatic phenomena. Boyle did build on the work of predecessors like Torricelli,
 Roberval and Pecquet to develop a technical sense of spring that he used to capture

 the distinctive characteristic of air that distinguished it from solids. As a result of this

 spring, air presses on any surface with which it is in contact, such as the surface of

 the earth or the walls of a bladder. I claim that Boyle used the term 'pressure' in its

 common sense to refer to such instances of pressing. The only way in which the usage

 might be said to have moved beyond common sense was the explicit recognition that

 the force on a surface due to a sample of air under a given degree of compression is

 independent of the orientation of the surface together with the specification of that

 pressing as a force per unit area.

 No formal definition or explication of 'pressure' is to be found in Spring of the Air

 which contrasts with the pains to which Boyle went in order to clarify the notion of

 'spring'. The first occurrence of the term 'pressure' occurs in Boyle's elaboration of

 34 The works in question are the translation of Stevin's Elements of Hydrostatics in Dijksterhuis (1955),

 the translation of Pascal's treatises on hydrostatics and pneumatics in Pascal (1937) and the translation of
 the relevant letters of Roberval in Webster (1965).

 35 The confusions occur in Shapin and Schaffer (1985), especially Chapter 2. They are discussed in footnote
 42.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 442 A. Chalmers

 Experiment 1, which is concerned with the force on the sucker which is involved in

 the extrusion of air from the receiver of the air pump. When the handle attached to the

 sucker is released after such an extrusion, the sucker is drawn up towards the receiver.

 This happens because of 'the protrusion of the external air, which, being much less

 rarified than that within, the cylinder, must have a more forcible pressure upon the

 sucker, than the internal is able to resist'. In the next paragraph, Boyle begins his

 exposition of the spring at work.

 For the more easy understanding of the experiments try able [m'c.] by our engine,

 I thought it not superfluous, nor unreasonable in the recital of this first of them,

 to insinuate the notion by which it seems likely that most, if not all, of them will

 prove explicable. Your Lordship will easily suppose, that the notion I speak of is,

 that there is a spring, or elastical power in the air we live in. By which è X ot t h P

 or spring in the air, that which I mean is this: That our common air either consists

 of or at least abounds with, parts of such a nature, that in case they be bent or

 compressed by the weight of the incumbent part of the atmosphere, or by any

 other body, they do endeavour, as much as in them lies, to free themselves from

 that pressure, by bearing against the contiguous bodies that keep them bent.36

 Note that it is weight or force of some other body that is the 'pressure' which

 compresses the air. This need involve nothing beyond the common sense of pressure.

 It is the spring of the air that is the novel 'notion' explicated by Boyle.37 It is by virtue

 of this spring that atmospheric air presses any solid surface with which it comes in

 contact, that air trapped in a bladder causes it to expand, that supports the mercury

 in a barometer and which prevents a smooth marble disc from falling from a second

 disc to which it is adjacent. The forces on the various surfaces involved in such cases

 are frequently described by Boyle utilising a common concept of pressure that was far
 from novel.

 Boyle moved beyond the common sense of his day by insisting and demonstrating

 that air has weight as well as a spring, although he was not the first to do so. The cause

 of pneumatic phenomena considered by rivals to be due to nature's abhorrence of a

 vacuum come about 'in consequence partly of the weight and fluidity of bodies here

 below and partly, perhaps principally, of the spring of the air, whose restless endeavour

 to expand itself every way, makes it either rush in itself, or compel the interposed bodies

 into all spaces, where it finds no greater resistance than it can surmount'.38

 Pneumatic effects are a consequence of the spring, weight and fluidity of air. It is not

 difficult to understand why Boyle singles out spring as the principal cause. Because

 of its 'restless power to expand', air will fill any container into which it is put, its

 spring causing it to press against the sides of the container to a degree depending on

 its degree of compression. However, in the case of atmospheric pressure there is no

 containing vessel. In this case, there is a downwards force due to the weight of air,

 37 Boyle frequently used the term 'notion' to describe the concepts involved in his science and stressed the

 fact that novel experimental advances make necessary the fashioning of novel notions or the modification

 of old ones. See, for example, his remarks to this effect in Proemial Essay, Works II, p. 20.

 36 Works I, p. 165

 38 Works I, p. 245.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics...

 the lower layers of which are compressed as a result. At ground level, atmospheric

 air is compressed to a degree that is dependent on the weight of the air above it, with

 a resulting equilibrium between the force due to the resulting spring, acting upwards

 on the air, and the total weight acting downwards. The air, being thus compressed,

 presses in all directions, on the ground beneath it and on the sides of anything that is

 immersed in it. It is the weight of the air that causes the compression at ground level,

 and the spring accompanying this compression that is responsible for the pressing.

 That the spring of the air is the principal cause of the pressing is illustrated by the

 fact that the same degree of pressing will ensue if the air is compressed to the same

 degree by some cause other than the weight of atmospheric air. As Boyle pointed out,

 this is illustrated by the fact that, in the lead up to his version of the 'void in the void'

 experiment, when a barometer is inserted into the receiver of the air pump prior to its

 evacuation, the level of the mercury remains unchanged from what it was before, in

 spite of the fact that in the receiver it is shielded from the atmosphere.39 The spring

 of the air is the principal cause of pressing. However, the weight of air needs to be

 included as a cause because without it the restless power of air to expand would ensure

 that there is no atmospheric air and no atmospheric pressure.

 Spring and weight of air are on a different ontological level than the pressures to

 which they give rise. This point was made quite explicit by Boyle in Continuation

 of New Experiments Physico-mechanical Touching the Spring and Weight of the Air,

 and their Effects (1669). The quotation is from Boyle's Experiment 11, in which he

 demonstrates that when the air is sucked out from the region above the mercury in a

 vertical tube the latter rises in the tube until it reaches a maximum height if 29 inches

 or so, an effect Boyle attributed to atmospheric pressure, thereby removing the need

 to invoke nature's abhorrence of a vacuum. Boyle argued that

 whether there be or maybe a vacuum or not, there is no need to have recourse

 to a fuga vacui to explicate suction; and also whatever other causes have by

 Gassendus and Cartesius been ingeniously proposed to explicate the suction, it
 seems to depend clearly upon the weight of the atmosphere, or in some cases

 upon the Spring of the Air; though I deny not, that other causes may contribute

 to the pressure of the air; which I take to be the grand and immediate agent in
 these phenomena40

 All pneumatic effects result from the pressing of air against solid surfaces. In that

 sense, pressure is the 'immediate' agent and it is a 'grand' one in the sense that it is

 involved in all such effects. The main, non-immediate causes of these pressures are

 the weight and spring of air, although Boyle does not rule out the possibility that there

 be others.41 So pressures, that is, the pressings against a solid surface exerted by air,

 39 As noted above, this kind of point had already been made by Torricelli in his response to Ricci's queries.

 40 Works VI, p. 62.

 41 On a number of occasions Boyle pointed to the phenomenon of capillary rise as an additional cause,
 significant when liquids in narrow tubes are involved.

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 444 A. Chalmers

 come about as a result of its weight or spring (to which pair of causes Boyle elsewhere

 adds fluidity, as we have seen) or some combination of them.42

 Air, by virtue of the kind of thing that it is, possesses weight, fluidity and spring, the

 isotropic character of the spring being a consequence of the fluidity. As a consequence

 of these properties air presses against any surface with which it happens to be in contact.

 The common sense of 'pressure' can be readily utilised to describe such pressing, and

 this is precisely how Boyle used the term in his pneumatics, from the Spring of the

 Air and thereafter. This standpoint will need to be qualified in the context of Boyle's

 treatment of pressure as exhibited by liquids.

 7 'Pressure' in Boyle's hydrostatics

 Boyle had not focused on the issue of a theoretical characterisation of liquids as

 distinct from solids and air in Spring of the Air. In that work, Boyle distinguished air

 from solids by stressing that spring is distinct from weight, which solids and air alike

 possess, and that the spring of the air is distinct from elasticity in solids through being

 isotropic and being expansive only. Forces are transmitted mechanically from point

 to point in air on account of its spring. That is why Boyle had no need to develop a

 notion of pressure that went beyond the common sense one and which he could use to

 describe the forces exerted by air on solid surfaces. That standpoint could not work for

 liquids because they lack a corresponding spring, a fact that Boyle appreciated and had

 explored experimentally 43 He seems to have become aware of the theoretical challenge

 posed by liquids, as distinct from solids and air, after reading Pascal's Equilibrium

 of Liquids. His response was spelt out in Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by New
 Experiments (for the Most Part Physical and Easy) (1666).

 Apart from some minor qualifications, Boyle accepted the theoretical content of

 Pascal's hydrostatics as 'worthy of the author'.44 However, he had problems with the

 experimental evidence Pascal invoked in its support. He raised doubts about whether

 Pascal had performed the experiments he described and whether they could possibly

 be performed following Pascal's prescriptions. His doubts ranged from the probabil

 ity that stoppers in apparatus as described by Pascal would leak to the observation

 that some of the experiments required that experimenters make extended observations

 42 In Leviathan and the Air Pump, a book that, as noted in Wootton (2015), Chapter 11, has been referred to

 as 'the most influential book in the history of science since Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions',

 Shapin and Schaffer find ambiguities in Boyle's use of 'pressure' that can be seen as of their own making

 once the relationship between spring and weight on the one hand, and a common sense of 'pressure' on

 the other, is appreciated. According to our authors, Boyle used the term 'pressure' genetically to refer to

 spring and weight. 'So "pressure" is to be read as an embracing term, and its ambiguities and variation of

 meaning were themselves a resource that Boyle used in debating the air-pump trials' (Shapin and Schaffer

 (1985), p. 55). By grouping together weight, spring and pressure as Boyle's 'principal ontological concern',

 Shapin and Schaffer interpret passages in Boyle as ambiguous and merely rhetorical which, on the account

 1 offer, can be interpreted literally and not merely rhetorical as making clear and explicit claims about the

 relationship between pressure, in the common sense of the term employed at the time, and its causes, the

 spring, weight and fluidity of air.

 43 Works I, p. 168.

 44 Works V, p. 206.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics...

 twenty feet under water.45 He also pointed out the difficulty of readily reproducing

 Pascal's experiments due to the fact that many of them required large quantities of

 mercury and glass tubes over twenty feet in length. Boyle presented himself as an

 expositor of Pascal's hydrostatics seeking to clarify aspects of it by way of easy to

 perform experiments. He aimed to show how various hydrostatic phenomena, some of

 which can appear as 'surprising' and even 'abstruse' can be 'made out by new exper

 iments (for the most part physical and easy)', as announced in the title of his tract.46

 Near the beginning of Hydrostatical Paradoxes, Boyle characterised his objective

 as follows:

 It not being my present task to deliver the elements, or a body of hydrostatics, but

 only ten or twelve paradoxes, which I conceive to be provable by this new way

 of making them out, I shall to avoid confusion, deliver them in as many distinct

 propositions; after each of which, I shall endeavour in a proof, or an explication,

 to show, both that it is true, and why it ought to be so.47

 It is clear from his earlier remarks that Boyle aimed to go beyond 'geometricians'

 such as Stevin who, in his opinion and as noted above, had asserted various propositions

 to be true without showing how or why they are true. Boyle found the seeds of what

 he needed in this respect in Pascal's Equilibrium of Liquids. Pascal had indicated

 that hydrostatic forces are transmitted through liquids by virtue of their 'continuity

 and fluidity', giving rise to forces on bounding surfaces that are independent of their

 orientation.48 However, Pascal did not specify the way in which forces are transmitted

 from point to point within the body of liquids. As I see it, Boyle's main contribution

 to the theoretical grasp of hydrostatics was to fill this gap, thereby completing a

 mechanical account of how hydrostatic phenomena come about.

 Before embarking on his exposition in Hydrostatical Paradoxes, Boyle indicated

 that he would 'premise a word or two by way of either postulation or lemma' 49 I

 believe that his ensuing remarks reveal some innovative and consequential aspects of

 his approach, however innocuous they might appear to a modern eye on first reading.

 We are to consider a glass pipe, open at both ends, held vertically in a container of

 water with its lower end below the water surface. Boyle invokes 'an imaginary plane

 or surface, which touching that orifice [the lower end of the pipe] is parallel to the

 horizon; and consequently parallel as to sense to the upper surface of the water, and

 this being but a help to the imagination, will readily be granted'. Boyle proceeds to

 discuss various equilibrium conditions in terms of the forces acting on either side of

 this imaginary plane. The water will initially be at the same level inside and outside

 of the tube (provided the effect of capillary rise is negligible) because the water will

 press equally on all parts of the imaginary plane. If oil is poured on the water outside

 of the pipe, the water inside the pipe will rise until the effect of the weight of the oil,

 45 Works V, pp. 206 and 255.

 46 Works V, p. 194.

 47 Works V, p. 207.

 49 Works V, p. 207.

 48 See Pascal (1937), pp. 7-8 for a clear and explicit expression of this point.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 446 A. Chalmers

 acting on the plane outside of pipe via the main body of water, is countered by the

 additional water rising inside of the pipe. This strategy, of considering the forces acting

 on an imaginary plain within a liquid, which Boyle introduces simply as an aid to the

 imagination, is of considerable consequence. By extending its use to situations more

 complicated than a vertical pipe partially immersed in water to include those involving

 forces on planes that are not horizontal, Boyle in effect traces how hydrostatic effects

 are transmitted from point to point through a liquid.

 Boyle continued to use the term pressure in its common sense to refer to forces

 exerted by liquids on a solid surface. For instance, Paradox VI is concerned with the

 specification of the force exerted by liquids on the surfaces of immersed solids and we

 find Boyle specifying the 'pressure' on such a surface as equal to a column of liquid

 having a cross section equal to that of the surface in question and a height equal to the

 depth of that solid surface beneath the water surface.50 Boyle extended his discussion

 to include forces acting laterally as well as vertically in the following terms:

 Whence we may learn (what I have not yet found mentioned by any writer,) that

 even in the midst of the water we may suppose a pillar of water, of a basis equal

 to the side of an immersed body, (and reaching to the lowest part of it;) and that,

 though this imaginary aqueous pillar — be not included in any solid body or

 stable superficies; nevertheless its lower parts will have a lateral pressure tending

 outwards, against the imaginary sides, from the weight of the water that is above

 these subjacent and lateral parts; and will have the pressure increased propor

 tionably [xtc.] to the height to which the imaginary pillar reaches above them.51

 Here Boyle explicitly uses the concept of pressure in the extended sense that I have

 identified, to refer to the action of water on water. In addition, his reference to the fact

 that such an extension is not to be found in the work of any other writer suggests that

 his own conception of his originality on this point coincides with mine. In Boyle's
 exposition of hydrostatics, the reference of the term 'pressure' has been extended

 from the forces on the boundaries between solids and liquids to include the equal and

 opposite forces that act on each other across imaginary boundaries within the body of

 liquids in equilibrium.52

 The shift I have identified, from a common sense of 'pressure' to a more technical

 sense that serves to distinguish solids from fluids, is exemplified particularly clearly

 50 Works V, p. 239. This much was entailed by Stevin's Elements of Hydrostatics, but, to use Boyle's words,

 Stevin had asserted that it was true without showing why it was true. The inadequacies of Stevin's proofs
 are discussed in Chalmers (2015).

 51 Works V, p. 248, emphasis in original.

 52 Stevin introduced two technical terms in his Elements of Hydrostatics that to some degree resemble

 Boyle's imaginary planes. According to Stevin's Definitions VII and VIII a 'surface vessel' is 'the complete

 geometrical surface of a body, conceived as separable therefrom' and 'bottom' [bodem] is 'any plane against

 which rests any water'. Stevin explicitly likened the former to the planes of geometry, describing them as

 'vessels without any corporeal magnitude and without any weight' (Dijksteerhuis 195, p. 385). Although

 they do not have 'corporeal magnitude', Stevin's 'surface vessels' are solid insofar as they can contain
 water, in accordance with the nature of solids as specified in Definition VI which reads 'Solid body is one

 whose matter does not flow, and though which penetrates neither water nor air'. The surface vessels need

 to be solid surfaces in order for him to put to work his Postulate 111, the only postulate that introduces

 significant hydrostatic content into his theory. 'The weight causing a vessel to sink less deep to be lighter,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics...

 in An Hydrostatical Discourse. In that tract, published in 1672, Boyle responded to

 criticism of his position by More, the general drift of which was that the former's

 pneumatics and hydrostatics needed to be bolstered by reference to non-mechanical

 causes, such as the tendency of the elements to move to their natural places, in order

 to adequately explain the relevant phenomena. In his reply, Boyle made it clear that

 he was more than ready to 'assert an incorporeal being that made and governs the

 world' but insisted that appeal to incorporeal agents was not necessary to accommo

 date pneumatics and hydrostatics since they could be explained 'mechanically'.53 In

 his subsequent defence of this position, we find Boyle articulating and clarifying a

 mechanical conception of 'pressure' as a cause distinct from weight.

 In one specific interchange, More invoked an experiment which he saw as rais

 ing doubts about the extent to which hydrostatics can be explained mechanically. It

 involved the recognition that if a disc of wood, less dense than water, is forcibly held
 at the bottom of a container of water and then released, it rises to the surface. In his

 example, More supposed that the surface area of the wooden disc is only a little smaller
 than that of the cross-sectional area of the vessel of water in which it is immersed.

 He pointed out that the weight of the wooden disc plus the weight of the column of

 water vertically above and pressing down on it is greater than the weight of water

 surrounding the disc. More concluded that considerations of weight as understood by

 Boyle are incapable of explaining why the disc rises to the surface.54

 In his reply, Boyle in effect agreed with this latter claim, but argued that the problem

 is solved, not by assuming, as More did, that water does not weigh in its 'proper

 place', nor by invoking any other non-mechanical cause, but by invoking pressure, a

 mechanical cause distinct from weight. I will not rehearse the details of the interchange

 in this place because the issue at stake is brought out more clearly by an ingenious

 experiment of his own that Boyle invoked in an extension of the discussion.55 A focus

 on that experiment also enables me to draw an illuminating comparison with Galileo's

 deployment of a very similar experiment.

 In the experiment in question, Boyle poured some molten wax into a flask whose
 base was covered with a shallow layer of water. When the wax cooled and solidified,

 it contracted into a solid body of wax leaving a small space between it and the walls of

 the containing vessel. When water was introduced into this small space, the wax, being

 Footnote 52 continued

 but the weight causing it to sink deeper to be heavier, and that causing it to sink to the same depth, equally

 heavy'. This postulate is one that can be 'granted' insofar as it is an abstraction from common experience

 of the effect of adding or subtracting weights to floating vessels, which need to be solid to hold or support

 them. It is also clear from the context in which Stevin uses the term 'bottom' that these, although lacking

 thickness and weight, are solid surfaces against which water can press. The solid nature of 'bottoms' is made

 quite explicit when Stevin describes each of those bordering a rectangular prism of water as 'a corporeal
 rectangle' (Dijksterhuis (1955), p. 415). So, in spite of the degree to which Stevin's surface vessels and

 bottoms abstract from weight and corporeal magnitude they do not abstract from solidity as possessed by

 solids and so cannot perform the function played by Boyle's imaginary planes against which liquids press
 in a way not involving pressure against a solid surface.

 53 Works VII, p. 159.

 54 An English translation of the relevant passages from More's Enchiridion Metphysicum of 1671 is given
 by Boyle, Works VII, p. 160.

 55 The details of the interchange can be followed in Works VII, pp. 158-164.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 448 A. Chalmers

 slightly less dense than water, was raised so that its upper surface remained a little above

 the water surface. The rising of the wax by the water took place in spite of the fact that

 'this collateral water was so far from being heavier than the wax its pressure impelled

 up, that both the collateral and the stagnant water all together, being weighed in good

 scales, amounted to little above a quarter of the wax'.56 Boyle insists that here, as in

 More's experiment and in the case of immersed bodies in general, the phenomenon

 is explained by invoking 'the pressure of the ambient fluids on immersed solids as

 uniform or every way equal'.57 The wax floats because the force arising from the

 pressure on its lower surface exceeds that arising from the pressure on its upper surface.

 The notion that floating bodies experience an upthrust equal to the weight of water

 they displace encourages an understanding of floating involving balancing weights,

 an interpretation to which Archimedes' original text on floating bodies lends itself.58

 A solid displaces an amount of water which weighs down as a consequence of its

 propensity to return to its former place and floating occurs when that weight balances

 the weight of the immersed solid. Boyle's experiment undermines this interpretation

 as did More's, since, in the circumstances that they each consider, the displaced water

 weighs much less than the floating body. Galileo had undermined this understanding

 of floating in terms of balancing weights in this way over half a century earlier, and it

 is instructive to compare his treatment with that of Boyle.

 In the hydrostatics that Galileo developed in Bodies That Stay Atop of Water, or

 Move in it, published in 1612, we find him elaborating on the fact that a ship can float

 in a dock containing water that weighs less than itself. He illustrated this by reference

 to a block of wood floating in water in a vessel into which it barely fitted and so leaving

 room for very little water. Consequently, 'a very small quantity of water may raise up

 and sustain with its small weight a solid body that is a hundred or a thousand times
 heavier'.59 The situation is remarkably similar to Boyle's experiment with wax.60

 However, Galileo's explanation of the phenomenon differs markedly from that of

 Boyle. Galileo dealt with it by invoking a principle which was an extension of one that

 he found in Questions of Mechanics that he attributed to Aristotle.61 It is the principle

 that when balancing weights are displaced slightly from their equilibrium positions

 the product of weight and velocity of displacement on either side of the fulcrum are

 equal. If the floating body described by Galileo is slightly displaced downwards, the

 small amount of water surrounding it rises to a considerable degree and in such a way

 56 Works VII, pp. 162-163.

 57 Works VII, p. 161.

 58 Proposition 5 of Book 1 of Archimedes' On Floating Bodies reads, 'Any solid lighter than a fluid, if

 placed in the fluid, be so far immersed that the weight of the solid will be equal to the fluid displaced'

 (Heath 1950, p. 257). This is not the case in Boyle's experiment with the wax.

 59 I have used the translation of Bodies that Stay Atop Water in Drake (1981). The quotation is on p. 26. A

 detailed discussion of these views of Galileo and the path that led to them can be found in Palmieri (2005).

 60 There is no direct evidence that Boyle was drawing on Galileo's work here. He did, in Works V, p.

 194, cite Galileo amongst those of his predecessors who made considerable contributions to hydrostatics.

 However, Boyle included him amongst those who handled hydrostatics 'rather as geometricians than as

 philosophers', a judgement that makes sense in the light of the contrast between the treatment of floating

 by Boyle and Galileo that I am highlighting here.

 61 See Drake (1981), p. 31.

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics... 449

 that the velocity of displacement of the body times its weight is equal to the much

 greater velocity of the displaced water times its much smaller weight. It is in this way

 that Galileo considered himself to have identified the 'true cause' of floating.62

 I have sympathy with the view, already voiced by Stevin, that hypothetical displace

 ments that do not in fact take place when systems are in equilibrium cannot function

 as the true cause of that equilibrium.63 Once equilibrium conditions are known, they

 can be shown to be the correct ones by applying Galileo's principle. But, certainly

 if one is concerned with mechanical explanations, this falls short of identifying the

 (mechanical) causes of floating. Those were identified by Boyle, and he did so by

 invoking pressure. The phenomena figuring in the above discussion 'depend upon a

 mechanical aequipollence of pressure'.

 By this you may see that for the regulation of hydrostatical things, Nature has
 her balance too as well as Art, and that in the balance of nature the statical laws

 are nicely enough observed.64

 8 The relationship of Boyle's hydrostatics to that of Pascal

 As I pointed out early in the previous section, Boyle was motivated to give serious

 attention to the formulation of hydrostatics by Pascal's Equilibrium of Liquids. The

 style of reasoning at work in Pascal's treatise was 'experimental' in contrast to the

 Euclidean style of Stevin's hydrostatics. Whereas the content of Stevin's hydrostatics

 was to be derived from postulates sufficiently unproblematic to be granted at the out

 set, Pascal's version was to be rendered intelligible and grantable by demonstrating

 the range of phenomena, including phenomena elicited by experiment, which could be

 readily and straightforwardly explained by appeal to it.65 Boyle followed Pascal in this

 respect and improved on the latter's efforts insofar as he applied the new hydrostatics

 to a range of straightforward experiments capable of informing and being performed

 by 'persons no more than moderately versed in the vulgar principles of hydrostatics'

 and, moreover, ones that Boyle did in fact perform.66 Boyle solidified the case for

 Pascal's hydrostatics by improving the quality and quantity of its experimental basis.

 This important point notwithstanding, my focus in this section is on the relationship

 between the theoretical contributions to hydrostatics made by Pascal and Boyle. There

 is an important sense in which the two contributions were complementary, with Boyle

 supplying an account of the mechanisms responsible for communicating hydrostatic

 forces through the body of liquids and Pascal stressing the extent to which hydro

 statics could be accommodated under the umbrella of general mechanical principles

 governing all machines.

 62 Drake (1981), p. 41.

 63 Stevin's critique of the appeal to imaginary displacements as causes can be found in Dijksteihuis (1955),

 p. 509. However, he did not respond to the problem by supplying mechanical causes as Boyle was able to
 do.

 65 This comparison is developed in some detail in Chalmers (2015).

 64 Works VII, p. 164.

 66 Works V, p. 207.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 450 A. Chalmers

 The approaches of Pascal and of Boyle have been differentiated by describing

 the former as mathematical and the latter as experimental.67 Such a contrast is not

 borne out by the texts with which we have been concerned. Apart from the fact that

 Pascal provided and stressed the experimental basis of his theory, neither Pascal's

 Equilibrium of Liquids nor Boyle's Hydrostatical Paradoxes abound with geometrical

 demonstrations as is the case with Stevin's Elements of Hydrostatics. The former

 theories are mathematical to the extent that hydrostatic forces on surfaces need to

 be expressed and treated as forces per unit area, but they are alike in that respect.

 Notwithstanding this similarity between the treatments of hydrostatics by Pascal and

 Boyle, there is a theoretical emphasis in Pascal's treatment that is absent from Boyle's.

 Pascal's theoretical grasp of hydrostatics was expressed in his appreciation of the

 fact that devices such as the hydraulic press can be understood as 'machines for

 multiplying force' analogous to the simple machines figuring in the science of weight.

 As such, the former could be seen as conforming to the same principles as the latter.

 With respect to the hydraulic press, Pascal wrote:

 It is remarkable that this new machine exhibits the same constant relation that is

 characteristic of all the old machines, such as the lever, the wheel and axle, the

 endless screw, and others, which is that the distance traversed increases in the

 same [sic.] proportion as the force.68

 The fact that Pascal should have written 'inverse proportion' rather than 'the same

 proportion' here is clear from his discussion. Pascal extended the analogy with simple

 machines by noting that 'it is evident that it amounts to the same thing whether we

 make one hundred pounds of water move through an inch, or make one pound of water

 move through one hundred inches'. He also noted that the press also conforms to the
 principal that 'a body never moves by its own weight without lowering its centre of

 gravity' 69 Further, Pascal invoked the hydraulic press to bring out in a forceful way the

 distinction between the behaviour of solids and liquids. Since the force is transmitted

 from one aperture of the hydraulic press to the other by virtue of the 'continuity and

 fluidity' of the water, the functioning of the press is destroyed if the communicating

 water is frozen. Since the freezing does not affect the continuity, it is clearly the fluidity

 possessed by the water and not by the ice that is crucial for explaining the hydraulic

 press and other hydrostatic phenomena.

 None of the points figuring in the previous paragraph appear in Boyle's Hydrostatic

 Paradoxes. The hydrostatic press does not get a mention. Boyle was concerned, not

 to embrace hydrostatics within the scope of some general mechanical principles, but

 rather to identify how forces are transmitted from one location to another within

 liquids, thereby bringing about hydrostatic effects. The utility of Boyle's stance can

 be brought out by the following reflection. In the science of weight, the application

 67 See the recent discussion of this issue in Malet (2013) and the references cited there.

 68 Pascal (1937), p. 6.

 69 Pascal (1937), p. 8. Pascal introduced this point by announcing it as a 'proof which will be understood only

 by geometers and may be disregarded by others', thereby reinforcing my rejection of the characterisation

 of Pascal's approach as mathematical as opposed to experimental. I have modified the translation by Spiers

 and Spiers in Pascal (1937) to make it conform better to the French original.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics...

 of the principles appealed to by Pascal to particular instances requires a specification

 of the constraints at work. In the case of simple machines, such as the balance, the

 constraints are obvious and taken for granted. It is the rigidity of the balance arm
 that relates the distances moved by a weight to that moved by the one it balances.

 When it comes to hydrostatic machines, the precise nature of the constraints are not

 so obvious. Boyle's identification of the way in which forces are transmitted through

 liquids supplies what is needed here in a more explicit way than is accomplished in

 Pascal's Equilibrium of Liquids.

 Pascal had identified fluidity as essential to the behaviour of liquids. Because of

 this, together with the continuity of liquids, a force applied to an area at one point in a

 liquid will be transmitted throughout the liquid, exerting the same force per unit area

 on any other boundary of the liquid, however remote and whatever its orientation.70

 This falls short of tracing the way in which forces are transmitted across boundaries

 in the body of the liquid. It falls short of using 'pressure' to identify the force per unit

 area acting between neighbouring portions of liquid through the body of that liquid,

 as Boyle came to do. Pascal talked freely of water pressing against apertures using

 the verb 'pressed but did not talk of pressure within the body of liquids. As I have

 already noted, Pascal did not use the noun 'la pression' in Equilibrium of Liquids or

 Weight of the Air. It was Boyle who completed the mechanical account of hydrostatic

 phenomena by providing the links between cause and effect by way of pressure acting

 throughout the body of liquids.

 9 Concluding remarks

 Boyle was a leading proponent of the movement that by the 1660s was being referred

 to by him and others as the experimental philosophy. Pneumatics and hydrostatics

 exemplified the new kind of science insofar as it was to be rendered intelligible by

 reference to, and supported by, experiments rather than via Euclidean-style proofs from

 given premises. As far as pneumatics was concerned, experiment was also essential

 insofar as it was only by way of it that many of the key phenomena became apparent.
 Torricelli's and the Puy de Dôme experiment provide ready examples, and Boyle
 was able to expand the range of novel experimental effects by way of his air pump.
 By the time Pascal and Boyle turned their attention to a theoretical formulation of

 hydrostatics, a need for novel experimenting was not pressing since a wide range

 of relevant hydrostatic effects was already familiar, as is evident, for instance, from

 Mersenne's survey and extension of relevant phenomena in 1644.71 A strong case for

 the theory in Pascal's Equilibrium of Liquids could be made by appealing to the natural

 way in which it could account for a range of well-known effects, which is why he could

 be confident of the results of further experiments that he had not in fact performed.72

 70 See Pascal (1937), pp. 7-8 for a clear and explicit expression of this point.

 71 See Mersenne (1644), pp. 215-233. As noted in Duhem (1905), Mersenne's somewhat disorganised

 survey of the hydrostatics available to him contains some original observations. They include an anticipation

 of the hydraulic press (p. 228) and the recognition that hydrostatic effects are destroyed if the water is frozen

 ( pp. 228 and 229). The latter page is wrongly numbered as 239 in the copy of Mersenne (1644) available
 on http://books.google.com.

 72 This position is argued in Chalmers (2015).

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 452 A. Chalmers

 Boyle shared with many of his contemporaries the desire to rid philosophy of what

 had come to be seen as the obscure appeal to Aristotelian forms and aimed to replace

 them with contact action between particles of matter. As far as the account of the

 ultimate ontology of the material world figuring in Boyle's mechanical philosophy is

 concerned, it was reduced to the shapes, sizes and motions of particles of universal

 matter and nothing else. When it came to the less ambitious, but for Boyle very

 urgent, task of establishing explanations of particular kinds of observable phenomena

 that were accessible to experiment, he took his cue from the ancient science of weight.

 He sought to move beyond that science by identifying causes in addition to weight

 capable of affording the kinds of mechanical explanations that it involved in fresh

 domains. Like weight, the new causes were to be experimentally accessible and yet

 intermediate insofar as they lacked an explanation in terms of the ultimate ontology

 of the mechanical philosophy. As far as pneumatics and hydrostatics were concerned,

 the novel intermediate causes elaborated on by Boyle were 'spring' and 'fluidity', the

 latter being elucidated by appeal to a concept of pressure.

 In pneumatics, the relevant phenomena were linked to their causes by way of the

 spring of the air. The relevant pushes were transmitted from point to point through a

 body of air in a way analogous to that in which a force is transmitted from point to

 point through a stretched elastic string. This conception will not do in hydrostatics

 since liquids lack a significant 'spring'. Following his reading of Pascal's hydrostatics

 and building on the emphasis to be found there on the fluidity of liquids as crucially

 responsible for the transmission of hydrostatic forces, Boyle came to understand flu

 idity in terms of pressure acting isotropically throughout the body of liquids. It was

 in that way that Boyle was able to link hydrostatic phenomena to their causes by

 contact action communicated mechanically through the intervening medium, thereby

 rendering them intelligible according to his understanding of the term.

 The notion of pressure acting throughout a fluid was to become central to Newton's

 hydrostatic. Proposition 19 of the Principia reads:

 All the parts of an homogeneous and unmoved fluid included in any unmoved

 vessel, and compressed on every side (setting aside the consideration of conden

 sation, gravity and all centripetal force), will be equally pressed on every side,

 and remain in their place without any motion arising from that pressure.73

 Alan Shapiro has noted that Newton was the first to explicitly acknowledge that the

 net force due to pressure at any location in a fluid in equilibrium is zero because each

 part of it is pressed equally 'on every side'. In his pioneering, and rare, analysis of

 Newton's hydrostatics, Shapiro traces its evolution for its beginnings in On the Grav

 itation and Equilibrium of Fluids composed by Newton in the late 1660s. He analyses

 in detail how Newton's ideas on hydrostatics grew out of his critique of Descartes'

 natural philosophy but acknowledges that 'Newton also drew on the mathematical tra

 dition of Archimedes and Stevin, and the contemporary experimental tradition, which

 he most probably learned from the works of Boyle'.74 In the light of the argument of

 73 Newton (1954), p. 290.

 74 Shapiro (1974), p. 274.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Robert Boyle's mechanical account of hydrostatics and pneumatics...

 this paper, that remark does not do justice to Boyle's theoretical reflections, amongst

 which we find the first treatment of pressure as transmitted from point to point through

 the body of a fluid.

 References

 Boyle, Robert. 1990. Collections from the Royal Society: letters and papers of Robert Boyle. Bethesda:

 Boyle, Robert. 1999. The Works of Robert Boyle, ed. Michael Hunter and Edward B. Davis, Vol 14. London:

 Chalmers, Alan. 1993. The lack of excellency of Boyle's mechanical philosophy. Studies in History and

 University Publications of America.

 Pickering and Chatto.

 Philosophy of Science 24: 551-556.

 Chalmers, Alan. 2002. Experiment versus mechanical philosophy in the work of Robert Boyle. Studies in

 History and Philosophy of Science 33:187-193.

 Chalmers, Alan. 2009. The Scientists atom and the philosopher's stone: how science succeeded and phi

 losophy failed to gain knowledge of atoms. Dordrecht: Springer.

 Chalmers, Alan. 2012. Intermediate causes and explanations: the key to understanding the Scientific

 Revolution. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 43: 551-562.

 Chalmers, Alan. 2015. Qualitative novelty in seventeenth-century science: hydrostatics from Stevin to

 Pascal. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 51: 1-10.

 Conant, James Bryant, (ed.). 1970. Robert Boyle's experiments in pneumatics. In Harvard case studies in

 experimental science, Vol. 1, pp. 1-63. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

 Dijksterhuis, E.J. (ed.). 1955. The principal works of Simon Stevin, volume 1: mechanics. Amsterdam:

 Swets and Zeitlinger.

 Drake, Stillman. 1981. Cause, experiment and science: a Galilean dialogue incorporating a new English
 translation of Galileo's 'Bodies That Stay Atop Water, or Move in it'. Chicago: University of Chicago
 Press.

 Duhem, Pierre. 1905. Le principe de Pascal. Rev Générale des Sciences Pures et Appliqués 16:599-610.
 Heath, T.L. 1950. The works of Archimedes. New York: Dover.

 Maffioli, C.S. 1994. Out of Galileo: the science of waters, 1628-1718. Rotterdam: Erasmus Publishing.

 Malet, Antoni. 2013. Between mathematics and experimental philosophy: hydrostatics in Scotland in 1700.
 In The mechanisation of natural philosophy, ed. D. Garber and S. Roux, 159-187. Dordrecht: Springer.

 Mersenne, Marin. 1644. Cogitata physico-mathematica. Paris: Antoni Bertier.

 Newton, Isaaac. 1954. Principia, Volume 1, The Motion of Bodies. Trans. Andrew Motte, ed. Florian Cajori.

 Palmieri, Paulo. 2005. The cognitive development of Galileo's theory of buoyancy. Archive for History of

 Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Exact Sciences 59: 89-222.

 Pascal, Blaise. 1937. The Physical treatises of pascal: the equilibrium of fluids and the weight of the mass

 of the air. Trans. A. G. H. Spiers and I.H. B. Spiers. New York: Columbia University Press.

 Renn, Jürgen, and Peter Damerow. 2012. The equilibrium controversy: Guidobaldo del Monte's critical

 notes on the mechanics of Jordanus and Benedetti and their historical and conceptual background.

 Max Planck research library for the history and development of knowledge sources 2. Berlin: Edition

 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffen 1985. Leviathan and the air pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the experimental

 Open Access, http://www.edition-open-access.de.

 life. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Shapiro, Alan. 1974. Light, pressure, and rectilinear propagation: Descartes' celestial optics and Newton's

 hydrostatics. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 5: 239-296.

 Stevin, Simon. 1955. The Principal Works of Simon Stevin, Volume 1, Mechanics, ed. E. J. Dijksterhuis.

 Torricelli, Evangelista. 1919. Opere di Evangelista Torricelli. Trans. G. Loria, and G. Vassura. Florence:

 Amsterdam: Swets and Zeitlinger.

 Montanari.

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 454 A. Chalmers

 Webster, C. 1965. The discovery of Boyle's law and the concept of the elasticity of air in the seventeenth

 century. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 2: 441-502.

 Wootton, David. 2015. The invention of science: the scientific revolution from 1500-1750. London: Allen

 Lane and Harper Collins.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:14:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

