 

 

 

 

Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens' "anomalous suspension"
Author(s): Michael Nauenberg
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 3 (May 2015), pp. 327-341
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569555
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:19 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569555?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:327-341
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-015-0152-1

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'
 "anomalous suspension"

 Michael Nauenberg1

 Received: 12 January 2015 / Published online: 5 April 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract In 1662 Christiaan Huygens carried out the famous Torricelli experiment

 to test the existence of atmospheric pressure by inserting the apparatus in the glass

 receiver of a vacuum pump, and evacuating the air inside it. He reported that when

 the air was exhausted, a column of water remained suspended in a 4-foot tube. This

 unexpected result was in stark contrast with earlier experiments of Boyle and Hooke

 that apparently had confirmed Torricelli's explanation that such a water column was

 supported by outside air pressure, and would fall when the air was removed. Huygen's

 "anomalous suspension" led to the continuation of controversies in the seventeenth

 century about the nature of the vacuum that these experiments were expected to resolve.

 Surprisingly, the origin of Huygens' unexpected result has remained a puzzle up to

 the present time. In this paper, I discuss the dynamics of such a column of water

 under the experimental conditions reported by Boyle and by Huygens, that turned

 out to be different, and present the results of a replication of their experiments with a

 modern vacuum pump. Contrary to the conventional explanations of these experiments,

 I demonstrate that in the Boyle-Hooke version of this experiment, the water column

 descends initially because it is forced down by the gas pressure due to air dissolved

 in the water which is released inside the Torricelli tube after the external pressure

 is sufficiently decreased. Huygens, however, first removed this trapped air before he

 carried out his experiment. In the absence of this internal gas pressure, the early

 rudimentary vacuum pumps were inadequate to decrease the air pressure sufficiently
 inside the receiver to demonstrate the descent of a Torricelli column of airless water

 4-foot in height or less.

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 S Michael Nauenberg
 mnauenbe@ucsc.edu

 1 Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 328 M. Nauenberg

 1 Introduction

 In 1660, Boyle published a report of a series of experiments which he undertook with

 the assistance of Robert Hooke, to study the physical properties of air (Boyle 1660).1

 For this purpose Hooke, with the help of a technician, designed and constructed a

 vacuum or air pump after seeing a report of Otto von Guericke's invention of such a

 pump. In the opening remarks of his report, Boyle explained the motivation for these

 experiments

 .. .perceiving by Letters from some other Ingenious Persons at Paris, that several

 of the Virtuosi there, were very intent upon the examination of the Interest of the

 Ayr, in hindring the descent of the Quick-silver [mercury], in the famous exper

 iment touching on the Vacuum ... by prosecuting and endeavoring to promote

 the noble experiment of Torricellius.. .(vol. 1 of Hunter and Davis 1999b)2

 Actually, Evangelista Torricelli's famous experiment was first carried out by a for

 mer student of Galileo, Vincenzio Viviani (Middleton 1964a), by filling with mercury

 a long glass tube closed at one end, placing a finger on the open end, and then inverting

 the tube in a container with some mercury. On removing the finger some of the mercury

 is released from the tube leaving a column of mercury 76 cm in height standing inside

 the tube. At the time, there was considerable disagreement about the explanation for
 this phenomenon. Torricelli argued that the weight of the column of mercury was

 supported by the pressure of the surrounding air, and he maintained that the space left

 between the top of the column and the top of the tube was a vacuum. The plenists, how

 ever, following Aristotle's ideas, believed in his dictum that nature abhors a vacuum,

 and claimed that the apparently empty space above the top of the column contained a

 "subtle fluid" that somehow suspended the mercury column inside the tube. The exper

 iments of Boyle and Hooke were intended to shed light on this question by enclosing

 the Torricellian apparatus inside a closed glass jar or receiver, and exhausting the air

 in this receiver with an air pump. If the mercury column fell as the air was evacuated,

 the argument of Torricelli and his followers would be supported by an experimental

 test, a novel and controversial concept at the time;3 otherwise the claim of the plenists

 for suspension of this column by a subtle fluid would be supported. For example, the

 well-known philosopher Thomas Hobbes declared that:

 Whoever sucks water into his mouth through a tube first sucks the air in

 between... which being removed cannot have a place (in a plenum) except by

 moving that next to it: and so by continual pressure the water is driven into the

 tube, and replaces the air that is sucked out (see footnote 3, Shapin and Schaffer
 1985c).

 1 Reprinted in vol. 1 of Hunter and Davis (1999a). Huygens' (1932a) notes on his experiments appear
 in vol. 17. Historical accounts of these experiments can be found in Stroud (1981a), van Helden (1991),
 Shapin and Schaffer (1985a) and Vermij (2004a).

 2 Letter of Robert Boyle to Charles Boyle, son of Boyle's brother Richard.

 3 For example, Thomas Hobbes declared "Why such apparatus and the expense of machines [such as an

 air pump] of difficult manufacture, just so you could get as far as Hobbes has already progressed? Why did

 you not begin from where he left off? Why did you not use the principles that he established?". T. Hobbes,

 Dialogus physicus 1661. Translated and reprinted in Shapin and Schaffer (1985b).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 329

 Hookf.'s Pneumatic Engine or Air Pump.
 Hookk's Pneumatic Engine or Am Pump.

 Fig. 1 Hooke's air pump with a spherical glass receiver placed on top of it

 Boyle (1660, see footnote 1) reported that both a mercury and a water column in
 a Torricelli setup placed inside the receiver of their air pump (Fig. 1), descended as
 the air was evacuated with their pump, claiming that this result supported Torricelli's

 explanation. But soon afterward, Christiaan Huygens announced that he had repeated

 this experiment inside a receiver of an air pump of his own design (Figs. 2, 3), but he

 found that after first removing the air bubbles in the water which had appeared when

 he first activated his pump, the Torricellian column of water in his receiver failed to
 descend no matter how long his pump was in operation (Huygens 1932c). Huygens'
 unexpected phenomenon was called "anomalous suspension," and it was claimed by

 him and other plenist that this experiment supported the existence of a "subtle fluid" in

 the space above the water column that suspended it. For a long time his experiment with

 airless water could not be replicated, but eventually Hooke and others confirmed his
 result, although apparently neither Boyle nor Hooke accepted Huygens' explanation
 for it (Shapin and Schaffer 1985d).

 Remarkably, the origin of anomalous suspension was not clarified, and it has

 remained an unsolved puzzle to the present day. In Huygens' and the development

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 330 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 2 Huygens' apparatus for a
 Fig. 2 Huygens' apparatus for a
 Torricelli experiment placed
 Torricelli experiment placed
 inside the receiver of his air
 inside the receiver of his air

 pump (Huygens 1932c, p. 317)
 pump (Huygens 1932c, p. 317)

 A

 v  ( 'J

 c>^

 I

 _ *

 i

 $

 -^4

 :p

 ^

 of the air pump, Stroud (1981b) wrote that "no one had been able to explain it [anom
 alous suspension]", while in The age of the air pump, van Helden (1991) wrote that
 "today the phenomenon is attributed to adhesion between the water and he glass tube".

 More recently in his biography of Huygens, Vermij (2004b) repeated this claim, appar
 ently first made by Shapin and Schaffer (1985d) in their book, Leviathan and the Air

 Pump, that "this puzzling phenomenon is caused by the adhesion force between H2O
 molecules and the glass of the air pump". It will be shown, however, that this expla

 nation is not valid and that Boyle's report of his experiment reveals that he and Hooke
 already had some understanding for the origin of the so-called anomalous suspension

 reported by Huygens.

 This paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 describes some of the historical back

 ground which led to Torricelli's experiment, Sect. 3 gives a qualitative explanation for
 the dynamics of a Torricellian water column under the different experimental condi
 tions of Boyle-Hooke and of Huygens, Sect. 4 describes the result of an experiment
 that replicates the Boyle-Hooke and Huygens experiments with a modern vacuum
 pump, and Sect. 5 provides some concluding remarks.

 2 Historical background

 The construction of the vacuum pump and the discovery of the physical properties of

 air were, undoubtedly, the most important development in experimental science at the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 331

 Fig. 3 Huygens' original air
 Fig. 3 Huygens' original air
 pump. The receiver A is on top,
 pump. The receiver A is on top,

 and the air pump with its piston
 and the air pump with its piston

 is below. When the piston
 is below. When the piston
 descends, the valve below the
 descends, the valve below the

 receiver is opened to allow the
 receiver is opened to allow the
 air in the receiver to expand into
 air in the receiver to expand into

 the cavity of the pump. When
 the cavity of the pump. When
 the piston ascends this valve is
 the piston ascends this valve is
 closed, and a second valve
 closed, and a second valve

 attached to the pump, but not
 attached to the pump, but not

 shown in this diagram, is then
 shown in this diagram, is then

 opened to exhaust the air in the
 opened to exhaust the air in the
 pump (Huygens 1932c, p. 313)
 pump (Huygens 1932c, p. 313)

 beginning of the scientific revolution.4 In his book, "Dialogues Concerning Two New
 Sciences", Galileo reported a fact already commonly known at the time, that water
 from a cistern could not be lifted with a suction pump higher than 18 cubits (Galileo

 1954).5 He explained this limit by an analogy: to lift a "rope, or rod of wood, or of

 iron, which if sufficiently long would break by its own weight when held by the upper
 end..." (Galileo 1954). What held the upper end of a column of water he attributed

 to the vacuum created by a suction pump. Aristotle had taught that "nature abhors

 4 In his book, Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Sciences (Harvard Univ 1957), J. B. Conant devotes
 the first 60 pages to "Robert Boyle's experiments in Pneumatics." In this account, however, there is not a
 single mention of Huygens the puzzling "anomalous suspension," thus giving a somewhat lopsided history

 of the experimental discovery of the physical properties of air.

 5 One cubit = ,46 m.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 332 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 4 Gasparo Berti's experiment

 a vacuum," and his followers, the plenists, believed that some sort of "subtle fluid"
 occupied the region above the water where air had been exhausted by the pump, which
 somehow suspended the water column. There are several accounts that around 1642
 1643, Gasparo Berti devised an ingenious experiment, to determine the maximum
 height of this water column (Middleton 1964b). Instead of pumping air out, he filled
 with water a long tube clamped by ropes to the side of his house, which could be
 opened or closed at both ends by "threaded brass screws" taps. The lower end of this
 tube was immersed in a casket filled with water, and the valve at this end was opened,

 while the valve at the top was closed (see Fig. 4). Berti found that the water in the
 column then dropped until it reached a height of "eighteen cubits above the level of
 the water in the cask," a result in agreement with the limit reported by Galileo. Berti

 also claimed to confirm that the space left in the tube above the column of water did
 not contain air, because when he closed the bottom valve and opened the top valve air
 rushed in "with a great noise" (Middleton 1964b).

 According to a later account by Carlo Dati, a disciple of Torricelli who had known

 Galileo, Vincenzio Viviani, carried out a similar experiment at the request of Torricelli,

 but using mercury instead of water. Galileo had pointed out that, according to his theory,
 the maximum possible height of a suspended column of fluid would be inversely
 proportional to its density. Hence, by using mercury, Viviani could use a much shorter

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 333

 tube and dispense with the valves in Berti's experiment. In a letter written on June 11,

 1644, to his friend Cardinal Michelangelo Ricci (Middleton 1964c), Torricelli reported

 that the maximum height of the column of mercury was an "ell and a quarter and a finger

 more" (Middleton 1964d).6 Contrary to Galileo, however, Torricelli reasoned correctly

 that the column of mercury was held up by the pressure of the surrounding atmospheric

 air. This explanation also had been proposed, independently, by Isaac Beeckman in

 Holland, but it was not accepted by the plenist. In addition, a controversy had ensued

 about the nature of the space above the water column supposedly evacuated of air.

 The observation that light, magnetism, and apparently sound were transmitted in this

 space was given as evidence of the presence of a subtle fluid, which the plenist claimed

 was responsible for the suspension of the fluid column. But new evidence that the

 surrounding air supports the mercury column was obtained by Blaise Pascal who had

 urged his brother-in-law, Perier, to take such a mercury barometer (as it is called now)

 up a mountain, the Puy-de-Dôme, in order to check whether at higher altitudes, where

 air pressure supposedly decreases, the mercury column falls somewhat. On September

 19,1648, he found that at the top of the mountain the height of the mercury column was

 "three inches and one-and-a-half lines" less than at the foot of the mountain. In addition,

 Adrien Auzout and Roberval carried out a "vacuum within a vacuum" experiment

 which removed the air surrounding their barometer tube, causing the mercury column

 to disappear (Middleton 1964e).

 Boyle (1660, see footnote 1) reported 46 experiments with his air pump, and in

 experiment #19, he described the behavior of a Torricellian column of water inserted
 in the receiver when the air was evacuated:

 We took then a Tube of Glass, Hermetically seal'd at one end, of about 4-foot in

 length, and not very slender: This at the open end we fill'd with common Water,

 and then stopt that end till we had inverted the Tube, and open'd it beneath the

 surface of a quantity of the like Water, contain'd in a somewhat deep and slender
 Vessel. This Vessel, with the Tube in it was let down into the Receiver, and the

 Receiver being clos'd up after the accostum'd manner, the pump was set awork

 . . . That till a considerable part of the Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the

 Tube continu'd top-full of Water as when it was put in, it being requisite that a

 great part of the Air formerly contain'd in the Receiver, should be drawn out, to

 bring the remaining Air to an AEquilibrium with so short and light a Cylinder
 of Water.

 But when once the Water began to fall in the Tube, then each exsuction of Air

 made it descent a little lower, tought nothing near so much as the Quick-silver

 [mercury] at the beginning did in the Experiment formerly mention'd. Nor did

 there appear so much inequality in the spaces transmitted by the Water in its
 descent, as there did in those observ'd in the fall of the Quick-silver ... And

 whereas we drew down the Quick-silver in the Tube so far as to bring it within

 and inch of the surface of the other Quick-silver into which it was to fall, the

 lower we were able to draw down the water was, by our conjecture, to about a

 6 An ell was a unit used by tailors for the distance between the elbow and the wrist. This unit varied between

 27 and 45 in. depending apparently on the typical arm length of people of different nationalities.

 £) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 334 M. Nauenberg

 foot or more above the surface of the Vessel; of which I know not whether if will

 be needful to assign so obvious a cause as that, though the little Air remaining in

 the Receiver could not hinder a Cylinder of above an Inch high of Quick-silver

 from subsiding; yet it might very well be able by its pressure, to countervail the

 weight of a Cylinder a foot long or more, of Liquor so much less ponderous than

 Quick-silver, as Water is (vol. 1 of Hunter and Davis 1999c, see footnote 2).

 This experiment caused considerable excitement among the seventeenth-century

 virtuosi interested in the new method of scientific experimentation, and it appeared that

 the vacuist, who accepted Torricelli's explanation, had won the day. Unfortunately,

 the experiment could not be replicated easily, because building an air pump was a

 very difficult enterprise. In Holland, Christiaan Huygens heard reports about these

 observations, and since he had been very interested in the Torricelli experiments in

 Italy and France because of its significance for the existence of a vacuum, he visited

 Boyle in London to learn about his work. Soon after his return, he began to construct a

 similar but improved (by his account) air pump to replicate these experiments himself
 (Huygens 1932c). After overcoming some considerable difficulties, he succeed in

 building such a pump (Figs. 2, 3), and at the beginning, he found results similar to

 those obtained by Boyle and Hooke, reporting that "after five or six strokes of the

 pump" the water in the Toricellian column fell to the level of the water in the basin.7

 But while activating his air pump, Huygens had observed that there was a considerable
 formation of bubbles in the water which he attributed to air dissolved in water. This

 important bubble formation, which generally has been overlooked in modern accounts

 of this experiment, had been reported also earlier by Boyle in his experiment #22:

 We shall now adde, that in the like Experiment made in such a Tube, or a greater,

 it may be observ'd, That when the Water begins to fall there will appear store
 of bubbles fasten'd all along the sides of the Glass; of which bubbles, by the

 agitation of the Vessel consequent upon the pumping, there will arise a good

 numbers to the top of the Water, and there break; and as the Cylinder of Water is

 brought to be lower and lower, so the bubbles will appear more numerous in that

 part of the Tube which the Water yet fills.. .(vol. 1 of Hunter and Davis 1999d,
 see footnote 2)

 The reason why the water column did not descend until "a great part of the Air"

 in the receiver had been exhausted was that initially the dissolved air in the water

 appearing as bubbles adhered to the walls of the glass tube. Therefore, early on, it did

 not contribute to the internal gas pressure which later pressed downwards on the water
 column.

 In a subsequent experiment, Huygens operated this vacuum pump for a sufficient

 long time until bubbles ceased to emerge from the water, and then he repeated the

 experiment with his airless water. This time, to his surprise, after exhausting as much

 air as he could from his receiver, the column of water did not fall. This unexpected

 outcome, which became known as "anomalous suspension," appeared to support the

 claims of the plenist who denied the existence of a vacuum. But initially Hooke and

 Huygens' Ouvres XIV 481-197.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 335

 other members of the Royal Society were unable to replicate it and questioned its

 existence. Eventually, however, with the help of Huygens, who travelled to London to

 demonstrate anomalous suspension, Hooke and others were able to reproduce it. But

 Hooke and Boyle remained unconvinced by Huygens' interpretation of his experiment

 with water purged of air, and the controversy between plenist and vacuist remained
 unresolved (Stroud 1981b; Shapin and Schaffer 1985d; Vermij 2004b).

 3 Origin of "anomalous suspension"

 During the seventeenth century the origin of anomalous suspension was controversial,

 but surprisingly, it has remained a puzzle up to the present time. A clue to this puzzle is

 the observation that before this so-called anomaly could be observed, it was necessary

 to remove the dissolved air normally contained in water open to the atmosphere.

 That air or some other gas is present in water already had become evident to Boyle

 and Hooke, because during the early phase of air evacuation from the receiver they

 had observed that bubbles form inside the glass walls containing the water column.

 These bubbles first attach themselves to impurities on the glass, but as the pressure
 of the air inside the receiver decreases, these bubbles become detached from the

 glass walls and ascend to the top of the water column, giving rise to gas pressure
 inside the Torricellian tube. It will be shown that it is this pressure, in addition to

 the weight of the water column, that initially forces the water column down. Hence,

 the conventional explanation, that the water column starts to fall when its weight can

 no longer be supported by the pressure of air remaining in the receiver, is incorrect.

 Remarkably, Boyle and Hooke already had provided evidence that trapped gas gave

 rise to additional downward pressure on the water column, observing that by heating

 it, it "quickly drave the Water to the bottom of the Tube..." In experiment #22 of his

 report, Boyle revealed,

 That upon the inletting of the external Air, the Water was not again impell'd to

 the very top of the Tube whence it began to fall, but it was stop in its ascent

 near an Inch beneath the top ... The Phoenomenon under consideration seem'd

 manifestly to argue that the many bubbles that broke at the top of the Water did

 contain a real Air, which, being collected into one place and hindered by the top

 of the Glass from receding, was able to withstand the pressure of the outward

 Air... We drew the second time the Air out of the Receiver and found that by

 reason of the body that possess'd the top of the Tube, we were able not only to
 make the Water in the Tube fall to a level with the surface of the Water in the

 Vessel: But also (by plying the Pump a little longer) a great way beneath it: which

 since it could not well be ascrib'd to the bare subsiding of the Water by reason of

 its weight, argued that the Water was depress'd by the Air: which was confirm'd

 by the Figure of the surface of the Water in the Tùbe, which was much more

 concave then that of Water in Tubes of that bigness uses to be. And this further

 tryal (to adde that upon the by) we made at the same time, That when the Water in

 the Pipe was drawn down almost as low as the Water without it, we observ'd, that

 (though we desisted from pumping) by the bare application of hand moderately

 warm to the deserted part of the Tube, the remaining Water would be speedily

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 336 M. Nauenberg

 and notably depress'd. And having for a while held a kindle Coal to the outside

 of the Tube (the Pump being still unimploy'd, because the Vessel chance to hold

 extraordinarily well) the Air was by the heat so far expanded, that quickly drave
 the Water to the bottom of the Tube, which was divers Inches beneath the surface

 of the ambient Water... (vol. 1 of Hunter and Davis 1999d, see footnote 2)

 Although Huygens also had noticed the presence of these air bubbles, he decided to

 remove them by first placing the water in a container inside the receiver, and activating

 his air pump until the air bubbles that initially formed had disappeared. Afterward, he

 conducted the Torricellian experiment with this airless water. In a June 1662 letter to

 J. Chapelain and R. Moray, he wrote:

 To carry out the same experiment with the air removed from the water, I left, for

 an entire night, the receiver exhausted from air after I made the water from the

 tube descend in the manner described. And the next day the water in the basin did

 not emit a single bubble of air... I continue to activitate the pump to a vacuum

 ..., but the water in the tube did not descent at all, but remained suspended.
 (Huygens 1932b)

 Hence, a plausible explanation why the column of airless water in Huygens' exper

 iment did not fall even after extensive pumping was that enough air remained in the

 receiver to support the weight of his 4-foot water column. Later, when Hooke finally

 was able to replicate Huygens result, he added perceptively that "I am very confident

 that if the pump had been longer plied, the event would have been much otherwise".8

 But other practitioners apparently failed to understand that the rudimentary early air

 pumps did not removed sufficient air from the receiver for a 4-foot column of airless
 water to fall.9 Moreover, during the ensuing disputes, no one seemed to have heeded

 Boyle's injunction that a gauge was needed to determine the air pressure of the resid
 ual air inside the receiver. Boyle conceded that the new experiments in London by

 Huygens and by Lord Brouncker to verify anomalous suspension "was try'd ...wth

 very good successe" (see footnote 8), but he argued that

 in regard they had noe Gage to try how farre they had exhausted ye Aire in
 the Receiver it seem's not absurd to conjecture that there might remaine in ye

 Receiver enough [air] to keep up in ye Tube 3 or 4-foot of Water (see footnote
 8).

 To support the weight of a 4-foot column of airless water, including the effect of water

 vapor, requires a residual air pressure greater than .15 of atmospheric pressure which

 8 Quoted in Shapin and Schaffer (1985d, p. 252).

 9 Huygens also reported that "I saw my experiment of purged water in the void in a pipe of 7-feet in height,

 where the water stayed up without falling, succeeded 2 or 3 times, in the presence of Lord Brouncker, Mr.

 Boyle and of many other persons" (quoted in Shapin and Schaffer 1985d, p. 252). Such a higher column of

 water, however, exceeded the height of his receiver and required that an apperture be made on top of it. After

 the 7-foot tube was inserted in the receiver, it had to be properly sealed with wax, but this change is likely

 to have decreased further the efficiency of the air pump. Claims were also made for anomalous suspension

 of mercury, e.g., Boyle and Brouncker reported that well-purged mercury would stand at a height of 52 in.
 without using an air-pump (Shapin and Schaffer 1985d, p. 254).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 337

 evidently must have been the limit reached by the early rudimentary vacuum pumps.

 Eventually, it was observed that such a water column would fall, either because some
 dissolved air had remained in the water and was slowly released inside the tube, or

 because air slowly leaked into the receiver.

 4 Replication of the Boyle-Hooke and the Huygens air pump

 experiments

 I replicated the Boyle-Hooke and the Huygens air pump experiments with a short

 Torricellian column, and a modern vacuum pump, shown in Fig. 5.

 The glass tube in my experiment was 23.7 cm in length, and I filled it with ordinary

 tap water inverting the open end of the tube into a beaker partially filled with water.

 The resulting water column was 14.5 cm above the water surface in the beaker. The

 pressure due to such a column of water corresponds to 10.7 mm of mercury. When I

 started to evacuate the air from the receiver, I found that gas bubbles began to form,

 as Boyle and Huygens had reported, which initially remained attached to the glass

 wall of the beaker and the tube. As the pumping continued, however, these bubbles

 began to detach from the glass wall and at the same time the water column began to

 fall although the pressure inside the receiver was still well over 100 mm of mercury,

 i.e., more than 10 times the pressure due to the weight of my initial water column.

 Evidently, the water column began to fall because the pressure of the gas formed by

 the bubbles surfacing inside the tube exceeded the pressure of the air and the pressure

 due to the water column still remaining inside the receiver. When the top of the water

 column reached the level of the water in the beaker, I recorded a pressure over 30 mm

 of mercury corresponding to the gas pressure inside the tube. This pressure is in part

 due to water vapor pressure, which is 24 mm of mercury at Γ = 25 °C, but it drops

 rapidly with decreasing temperature, while the excess pressure is due to the air from the

 bubbles released inside the tube. At the rate of pumping in my experiment, however,

 the water cooled considerably below room temperature, and a better estimate of the

 residual vapor pressure would be 5-10 mm of mercury. Further pumping depressed

 the top of the water column further inside the tube below the water level in the beaker.

 When the pressure in the receiver reached about 10 mm of mercury the column of

 water inside the tube essentially vanished, while a large bubble of gas was released at
 the bottom of the tube. Some water then reentered the tube while the surface of the

 water in the beaker began to boil violently. I waited until the boiling began to subside

 and then allowed the air to reenter into the receiver forming again a water column in

 the tube. Now, like Huygens, I had water that had been purged at least partially of

 dissolved air. After I let air return to the receiver, and when I began pumping air out

 of it, the water column did not start to fall until the pressure was considerable lower

 than before. If the gases confined in the water had been removed entirely, I would

 have expected that the critical pressure below which the water column begins to fall

 would be 24 + 10.7 = 34.7 mm of mercury, but I found that some gas still remained

 inside the tube because the column started to fall at a higher pressure of about 50 mm

 of mercury.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 338 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 5 Torricelli setup inside the receiver (glass jar) of a vacuum pump, consisting of a beaker nearly full
 of water, and an initial column of water in an inverted glass tube held in position by tape. The vacuum pump

 with a pressure gauge is seen in the background

 My experiment revealed some complications not taken into account by the sim

 plified discussion in the previous section. I assumed that during the exhaustion of air

 in the receiver by the vacuum pump activated at a finite rate, the partial pressure of
 each component of the air dissolved in the water is in equilibrium with the corre
 sponding component in the external air. However, this is not the case for at least two
 reasons: (1) It takes some time for this equilibrium to be established, and therefore
 complete equilibrium does not occur when the exhaustion of air from the receiver is

 changing continuously, and (2) there is clear evidence that as the external air pressure

 is decreased, some of the gas dissolved in the water first form bubbles which do not
 emerge right away, but instead become attached to the glass wall of the Torricellian
 tube, as was originally reported by Boyle and Hooke and by Huygens. The net effect
 is that for any given external pressure, initially there is less gas than expected inside

 this tube, and therefore the height of the water in the tube for a given external pressure

 was higher than expected.

 Direct evidence for the gas released inside the Torricellean tube was obtained by

 continuing to exhaust air from the receiver until the water column fell to the bottom

 of the beaker. At this point a very large bubble emerged violently from the bottom of

 the tube, demonstrating unequivocally the existence of this gas. After returning the air

 into the receiver, I found as expected that the column of water, now purged of some

 dissolved air, starts to fall when the air pressure in the receiver is considerable lower
 than earlier, in the case of normal (tap) water. Moreover, in the case of airless water,

 the pressure at which the top of the column reaches the level of the surrounding water

 in the beaker corresponds closer to the pressure of water vapor, while it is considerable

 higher in the case of normal water.

 For a further experimental demonstration, I inserted two identical Torricelli devices

 under the same receiver, but one contained tap water while the other had water previ

 ously boiled to release some of the dissolved air. After the vacuum pump was turned

 on and the air pressure inside the receiver decreased sufficiently, the device containing

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 339

 the tap water began to release air bubbles and the column of water dropped, while

 the corresponding column in the device with airless water remained in place. A video

 recording of this experiment can be seen at https://www.youtube.com/results7search_

 query=nauenberg2, or at www.physics.ucsc.edu/~michael.

 5 Concluding remarks

 I have shown experimentally that the descent of a Torricellian column of water as a

 function of external air pressure is quite different for ordinary (tap) water, correspond

 ing to the experiment of Boyle and Hooke, than for airless water, corresponding to

 the experiment of Huygens. I have shown that the reason why the early Boyle-Hooke

 experiments confirmed Torricelli's "elastic power in the air" was that air originally

 dissolved in water was released from the column of water inside their tube during

 pumping, providing downward pressure on this column. This effect had not been antic

 ipated, and it was ignored during the controversies about the existence of Huygens

 anomalous suspension that occurred because Huygens had removed the dissolved air

 in the water, before carrying out his experiment. From my replication of these exper

 iments described in Sect. 4,1 conclude that the early air pumps were not adequate to

 lower the external pressure sufficiently to depress a 4-foot column of airless water in a

 Torricelli tube like Huygens', thus given the appearance of an anomalous suspension
 of water in his tube.

 The description in experiment #22 by Boyle and Hooke indicates that they had
 found that some dissolved air was released from the water column when the external

 air pressure was decreased by their air pump. Moreover, they also had observed by

 heating this gas that it would expand exerting an additional pressure on top of this

 column, but the significance of their observations apparently escaped Huygens' atten

 tion. This is particularly surprising, because Huygens understood very well the linear

 relation between pressure and density of air (at constant temperature) which had been

 established experimentally by Boyle and Hooke.1011 Indeed, soon after learning about

 their experiment, Huygens applied this relation, now known as Boyle's law, to obtain

 a relation between pressure and height in the atmosphere.12

 Modern historians of science have come up with various unphysical explanations
 for the nonexistent phenomenon of anomalous suspension. For example, in a short

 footnote to the extensive discussion of the Boyle-Hooke versus Huygens controversy

 in their book Leviathan and the Air Pump, Shapin and Schaffer proposed that "some

 of the factors which could be considered relevant to a current scientific explanation of

 10 In 1662, Boyle published the results of this experiment, as well as arguments against Hobbes and Linus,

 as an Appendix to the second edition of his book (Boyle 1660, see footnote 1). In 1665, Hooke also published

 similar results in his book Micrographia, reprinted in Gunther (1938).

 11 Hooke first conjectured the PV = constant relation by the observation that during each cycle of his pump,

 the air density in the receiver decreased by a factor V/(V + V'), where V is the volume of the receiver

 and V is the volume of the pump and that, likewise, the height of his Torricellian column (with mercury)

 decreased approximately by the same factor. Boyle also credited this conjecture to Richard Towneley and

 to Lord Brouncker. See footnote 4, p. 54.

 12 Huygens' Ouvres XIV 431-442.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 340 M. Nauenberg

 anomalous suspension [are]: (1) Short range attractive forces between fluid and glass;

 (2) viscosity; (3) surface tension: (4) the presence of residual air [in the receiver]".13 It

 turns out, however, that only (4) was a correct guess, but by itself it does not explain why

 Boyle and Hooke did not observed anomalous suspension too. There is no evidence

 that removing the gases trapped in water would enhance either its viscosity, surface

 tension or attractive forces to such an extend as to suspend a 4-foot column of water

 in a glass tube. Yet up to the present time, similar notions have persisted among other

 historians of science who have discussed this subject (Stroud 1981b; Vermij 2004b).

 In the early air pump experiments there must always have been some residual air left

 in the receiver, but as we have shown here, by itself, this residual air does not explain

 the difference between the initial results reported by Boyle-Hooke in London and by

 Huygens in Holland.

 In their celebrated book, Leviathan an the Air Pump, Shapin and Schaffer conclude

 that "As we come to recognize the conventional and artifactual status of our form of

 knowing, we put ourselves in a position to realize that it is ourselves and not reality [the

 italics are mine] that is responsible for what we know... Hobbes was right".14 But this

 conclusion is based on the false assumption, as Hobbes had asserted, that experiments

 can not determine the nature of reality. The resulting controversy that began 350

 years ago, at the dawn of experimental science, and continues to the present time is

 based on the premise that Boyle-Hooke and Huygens were doing experiments under

 identically the same conditions. But it has been shown here that this premise is false,

 which accounts for their different experimental outcomes.

 Acknowledgments I would like to thank John Heilbron for a stimulating exchange on the puzzle of
 anomalous suspension, and Fred Kuttner for his assistance in replicating the air pump experiments presented
 here.

 References

 Boyle, Robert. 1660. New experiments physico-mechanical, touching the spring of the air and its effects.

 In The works of Robert Boyle, eds. Hunter Michael, Edward B. Davis. London: Pickering & Chatto.
 Galilei, Galileo. 1954. Dialogue concerning two new sciences. Translated by Henry Crew & Alfonso de

 Salvio, 14-17. New York: Dover Publications.

 Gunther, R.T. 1938. Early science in Oxford, vol. XIII, 224-228. London: Dawsons.
 Hunter, Michael, and Edward B. Davis. 1999a. The works of Robert Boyle. London: Pickering & Chatto.
 Hunter, Michael, and Edward B. Davis. 1999b. The works of Robert Boyle, 157. London: Pickering &

 Hunter, Michael, and Edward B. Davis. 1999c. The works of Robert Boyle, 205-206. London: Pickering &

 Hunter, Michael, and Edward B. Davis. 1999d. The works of Robert Boyle, 210-220. London: Pickering &

 Huygens, Christiaan. 1932a. Ouevres complètes de Christiaan Huygens, 305-333. La Haye: Martinus

 Huygens, Christiaan. 1932b. Ouevres Complètes de Christiaan Huygens, vol. IV, 174-175. La Haye: Mar

 Chatto.

 Chatto.

 Chatto.

 Nijhoff.

 tinus Nijhoff.

 13 Leviathan, p. 241, footnote 24.

 14 Leviathan, p. 344.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solution to the long-standing puzzle of Huygens'... 341

 Huygens, Christiaan. 1932c. Ouevres complètes de Christiaan Huygens, vol. XVII, 305-333. La Haye:

 Martinus Nijhoff.

 Middleton, W.E. Knowles. 1964a. The history of the barometer, 19-32,37. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

 Middleton, W.E. Knowles. 1964b. The history of the barometer, 10-12. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

 Middleton, W.E. Knowles. 1964c. The history of the barometer, 23-24. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

 Middleton, W.E. Knowles. 1964d. The history of the barometer, 23. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
 Middleton, W.E. Knowles. 1964e. The history of the barometer, 29. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985a. Leviathon and the air pump. Princeton: Princeton University

 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985b. Leviathan and the air pump, 379. Princeton: Princeton Uni

 Press.

 versity Press.

 versity Press.

 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985c. Leviathan and the air pump, 381. Princeton: Princeton Uni

 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985d. Leviathan and the air pump, 241, footnote 24. Princeton:

 Princeton University Press.

 Stroud, Alice. 1981a. Christiaan Huygens and the development of the air pump. Janus 68: 129-158.

 Stroud, Alice. 1981b. Christiaan Huygens and the development of the air pump. Janus LXVIII: 136.
 van Helden, A. 1991. The age of the air pump. Tractrix 1:149-172.

 Vermij, R. 2004a. Christiaan Huygen, De mathematisering van de werkelijkheid. Diemen: Veen Magazine.
 Vermij, R. 2004b. Christiaan Huygen, De mathematisering van de werkelijkheid, 87. Diemen: Veen Mag

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:19:17 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

