 

 

 

 

Solving the Giant Stars Problem: Theories of Stellar Evolution from The 1930s to The

1950s
Author(s): Davide Cenadelli
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 2 (March 2010), pp. 203-267
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342416
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:41 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:203-267
 DOI 1 0. 1007/s00407-009-0055-0

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem: Theories of Stellar
 Evolution from The 1930s to The 1950s

 Davide Cenadelli

 Received: 1 October 2009 / Published online: 25 December 2009

 © Springer- Verlag 2009

 Abstract Historiography has pointed out that the time between the mid 1910s and

 the early 1930s can be considered a pivotal period in the history of stellar astrophys-

 ics. In those years, scholars like Saha and Eddington first applied atomic physics to

 astrophysics. Theoretical astrophysics was born. This led to the development of the
 first physically sound models for stellar interiors and atmospheres. These landmark
 achievements spurred scholars to elaborate theories for stellar evolutions, and in the

 following decades several astrophysicists focused on this problem. The evolutionary
 role of red giants turned out to be the main issue. Those stars were initially assumed

 to be young ones going through the formation stage, but astrophysicists gradually
 realized that they were rather to be considered old, evolved stars. The solution of the
 giant stars issue required a couple of decades: it was not until the mid 1950s that a
 satisfactory explanation was obtained. This provides a detailed picture of the theories
 of stellar evolution from the 1930s to the 1950s and of the solution to the red giants

 problem, with special emphasis on how such a solution was made possible by a series
 of subsequent steps: the identification of changing chemical composition as a main
 evolutionary feature of a star, the inclusion of nuclear physics within the theoretical

 framework of stellar astrophysics, the recognition of the importance of inhomogene-

 ities that settle within stars as nuclear processes go on.

 Communicated by Tilman Sauer.

 D. Cenadelli (El)
 Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Brera 28, 20121 Milano, Italy
 e-mail: davide.cenadelli@unimi.it

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204 D. Cenadelli

 1 Introduction

 The history of stellar astrophysics in the twentieth century is widely dealt with in
 historiography. Many works on earlier periods up to the 1920s and the 1930s exist

 in the literature, but it appears that the subsequent decades have been less frequently
 accounted for. A reason for this is the well-established fact that the time between

 the mid 1910s and the early 1930s is a pivotal period in the development of stellar
 astrophysics.1 In those years, scholars like Saha, Russell, Fowler, Milne, Jeans and
 Eddington first applied atomic physics to the description of both the inner and the

 outer regions of the stars. The so-called Quantitative Era of astrophysics2 began, with

 the description of the stars' internal structure, the theoretical explanation of stellar

 spectra via the quantum theory, and the determination of the chemical composition
 of the stars as its first outcome. In other words, scholars developed the first sound

 models for stellar structure. Although these achievements were later subject to further

 discussion, revision and improvement, they are still the pillars current astrophysics is
 built upon.

 These landmark achievements spurred scholars to elaborate theories for stellar evo-

 lution: the description of the different features of dwarf and giant stars demanded an

 evolutionary interpretation. Several astrophysicists focused on this problem. In par-
 ticular, the evolutionary role of red giants turned out to be a thorny issue. Whereas

 in the twenties these stars were generally thought to be young bodies in the stage of
 formation, in the following decades such a picture was put into question and it became

 increasingly clear that giants are rather old, evolved stars. Consequently, the giants
 issue appears to be a well-defined problem emerging from the meaningful disconti-
 nuity astrophysics experienced in the twenties and the thirties.

 1 Historiography has stressed this issue quite extensively. It is commonly recognized that at the time astro-
 physics experienced a discontinuity that would lead to a new definition of the discipline itself- with the
 onset of theoretical astrophysics - and to the identification of new perspectives and problems. Whether the
 term "discontinuity" should be replaced with "revolution" is questionable. I lean towards the former, as I
 think that period cannot be labelled as a scientific revolution in the Kuhnian sense (i.e. a whole redefini-

 tion of a disciplinary field that gives rise to a completely different perspective). Actually, the main change
 astrophysics underwent was the attainment of a sound theoretical basis through its newly created link with

 quantum physics. Of course, this was conducive to the rise of new important issues, like the investigation of

 both the inner and the outer regions of the stars. By the way, it should be noticed that perspective changes
 if the onset of observational astrophysics in the mid-nineteenth century is also taken into account. In fact,
 astrophysics as a whole has a revolutionary character indeed. Meadows (Meadows 1984) suggests that
 astrophysics can be considered a "revolution" in the sense that it shifted astronomers' attention elsewhere.

 That this field of research opened up new horizons and dramatically changed modern astronomy is hardly
 questionable. Among the most interesting works on this subject, see DeVorkin and Kenat (1983a), DeVorkin
 and Kenat (1983b), Dingle (1963), Goldberg (1988), Hearnshaw (1986, pp. 208-254), Herrmann (1984,
 pp. 1 15-120), Hoskin (1999, pp. 252-267), Meadows (1984), Menzel (1972), Sitterly (1970), Strömgren
 (1972), Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, pp. 96-100).

 A division of the history of stellar astrophysics into an earlier "Qualitative" and a later "Quantitative Era"

 is suggested by DeVorkin and Kenat (1983a). The authors claim they took this suggestion from a previous
 paper by Menzel (Menzel 1972). Saha's first application of atomic physics to stellar spectroscopy in 1920
 acts as a watershed between the two eras.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 205

 This article carries out an in-depth investigation of the giants affair from the post-

 Eddington period to the mid-1950s, when scholars devised the first sound model for

 giants.

 Although such a description might be a bit too schematic, the main steps that drove

 scholars from the Eddington era to the first reliable giant stars models can be sum-
 marized as follows.3 The first step was the identification of chemical composition as
 a major issue in evolution. This followed directly from Eddington's and Strömgren 's
 work about hydrogen abundance in the early thirties. Strömgren himself played a

 key role in this task by identifying the ever-changing composition throughout stellar
 life as a feature to be accounted for. However, Strömgren only focused on general

 changes that affected the whole stellar mass, i.e. he thought that stars could change
 their composition while remaining homogeneous at each stage.

 Later on, scholars realized they had to describe these changes quantitatively and, to

 do that, they needed to turn to nuclear physics, which was growing impressively at the
 time.4 This is a major reason why stellar evolution theories from the 1920s and 1930s

 were to be totally discarded soon afterwards. They did incorporate modern features

 such as the perfect-degenerate gas duality, but they had no links to nuclear processes

 theories that were still in their infancy at the time. As we shall see, an understanding of

 the evolutionary patterns of stars required a detailed description of nuclear processes,
 which would then have to be connected to the laws of stellar structure. During the

 twenties, scholars relied solely on atomic physics to penetrate the mysteries of stellar

 matter. When nuclear physicists like Bethe and Gamow began to turn their attention to

 astrophysics, new perspectives opened and, as a major outcome, the haze that wrapped

 up the theories of stellar evolution began to fade.5 It is no surprise that, then, scholars

 were still a long way from regarding giants as evolved stars at the time.

 A further step forward was made when Chandrasekhar and other scholars argued
 that chemical inhomogeneities, rather than a mere changing composition, could occur

 within a star as hydrogen burning went on. This led them to investigate 'composite'
 models in which the stellar core and envelope were differently described and suitably

 fitted to one another. This turned out to be a good assumption giants could be built

 upon.

 Finally, between the late 1940s and the mid 1950s, Hoy le, Sandage, Schwarzschild
 and collaborators developed models that included a detailed description of chemical
 inhomogeneities, as well as other key features like gas degeneracy and core collapse,

 and they succeeded in developing the first sound theories of giants.

 Reference texts that clearly highlight these points are Amy (1990), Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, pp.

 133-56), Hufbauer (2006). More generally, this paper was inspired by these works.

 4 Although there exists a tight relation between the giants problem and the details of nuclear processes, I
 will not probe the latter topic. I will just mention the main results that must be exploited when developing

 giant stars models.

 ^ This consideration by Hufbauer (Hufbauer 2006, p. 203) emphasizes the "breakthrough" role played by

 nuclear physics in astrophysics. Such a term is justified by the circumstance that the introduction of nuclear
 physics into astrophysics has similarities with the previous, ground-breaking exploitation of the atomic
 models. However, such an analogy should not be pushed too far. This issue will be further discusses in this

 paper.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 206 D. Cenadelli

 The main contents of this paper will be preceded by two introductory sections:

 Sect. 2 lays down a theoretical background of stellar models, whereas Sect. 3 provides

 an overview of the theories devised by scholars in a former period. Sections 4-9 are

 devoted to the historical issues associated to the giants problem. Finally Sect. 10 draws

 some conclusions about the main features of the scientific development process in the
 period considered.

 2 Theoretical background: basic stellar models

 2.1 The basic equations

 This section lays down some basic concepts about stellar structure that will be useful

 later on in this paper. Those concepts were developed by a number of scholars between

 the mid-nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth century.

 A basic assumption when building a stellar model is that spherical symmetry holds,

 i.e. that the star's features are solely dependent upon the distance r from the centre. This

 makes it possible to introduce r as an independent variable such as 0 < r < /?, where
 R is the stellar radius. Pulsations, rotation and magnetic fields are not considered. A
 stellar model aims at describing the internal structure of a star via the calculation of

 the values of the state parameters T ( r ) (temperature), P(r) (pressure), p(r) (density)
 and of the quantities M(r) (mass within radius r) and L(r) (luminosity generated
 within radius r), for any value of r. In the following, L and M will indicate the total
 luminosity and mass of the star.

 If the star is supposed to be mechanically stable, then the hydrostatic equilibrium

 It should be noticed that Eq. 1 is valid as far as an equilibrium between gravity and

 pressure exists. If this is not strictly the case, Eq. 1 can still be assumed valid if a
 star passes through subsequent states of quasi-equilibrium, i.e. provided it does not
 undergo quick and abrupt stages of contraction or expansion. During stellar evolution
 Eq. 1 is usually satisfied.6

 Moreover, general considerations allow to introduce a continuity equation for the

 equation holds:

 dP(r) M(r) /ч
 - = '«■> /ч о

 mass:

 d M(r) i

 dr = 47tr2p(r) i (2)

 Consequently, an equation of state for the gas is required. If gas is in perfect-gas

 conditions, we have:

 P(r) = PgasOO + Prad(r) = К N (r)T (r) + 'aT(rý (3)

 6 Prialnik (2000, p. 72).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 207

 where Pgas is the pressure due to the gas, Prad is the radiation pressure, N(r ) is the
 number of particles per unit volume, К is the Boltzmann's constant (here and hence-
 forth, the uppercase "K" will indicate Boltzmann's constant, the lowercase any
 generic constant - see for example Eqs. У and 3", and the Greek "/c" the absorption
 coefficient - see below in this section).

 If the gas is degenerate, then the equation of state is:

 P(r ) = kipir)5'3 (3')

 in the non-relativistic case, or:

 P(r) = k2p(r)W (3")

 in the relativistic case.

 So far, we have three equations in the four quantities P, p, 7' M, so another one is

 required. Hence the need to introduce an energy-generation equation:

 d L(r) 9
 - - = 4л r p(r)s(r) (4)

 dr

 where e(r) is the energy generated per unit time and mass. Equation 4 features two
 more unknowns: L(r) and e(r) itself. The latter ceases to be such if nuclear physics

 supplies relations capable to estimate it as a function of temperature, density and chem-

 ical composition.7 Once e(r) is known, a further relation is needed to close the system

 of equations. This can be an equation tying T ( r ) with L(r), i.e. an equation for energy
 transport, which is caused by convection or radiation depending on the conditions.
 Alternatively, the system of equations can be closed even avoiding the introduction

 of Eq. 4, by simply making the useful assumption that there exists a further relation
 among the variables P, p,T, M . A power-law relation between P and p like the one
 shown in Eq. 5 is, in some cases, a tenable choice

 P(r)=kp(r)y. (5)

 Equation 5 is called polytropic relation, n = (y - l)-1 is called polytropic index

 and a stellar model built following this method is called a polytrope.8

 7 It is important to point out that the term s was introduced many years before any actual knowledge about
 nuclear processes could provide information about it. This is the case for Eddington's standard model.
 Models like Eddington's are perfectly reliable notwithstanding this lack of knowledge, provided some
 assumptions are made about the probable nature and distribution of the energy-generating processes within
 the stars. Eddington and other scholars made such assumptions and worked out stellar models. This issue
 will be further discussed later in this section. As we shall see, it is precisely through the term e(r) that

 nuclear physics enters the equations of stellar structure.

 ® For a full description of polytropes, see for example Collins (1989, pp. 42-53), Kippenhahn and Weigert
 (1990, pp. 174-190) or Prialnik (2000, pp. 74-79).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 208 D. Cenadelli

 It should be noticed that the constant к in (5) is usually a free constant. However, к

 may also be fixed, as in the case of a degenerate gas (Eqs. У and 3")-9 A polytrope is
 usually integrated by eliminating P(r) and M(r) from the set of equations to obtain
 a differential, second-order equation featuring two dimensionless variables tied to r
 and p (this is the well-known Lane-Emden equation.)10

 The theory of polytropes was first put forth by the American engineer Jonathan H.

 Lane and by the German structural engineer August Ritter in the years around 1 870-

 1880, well ahead of the well-known work carried out by the Swiss physicist Robert
 Emden at the beginning of the twentieth century. Lane developed the first model of
 a gaseous, self-gravitating sphere in convective equilibrium. As long as convection
 is supposed to take place in such a way that the gas cells undergo quasi-adiabatical
 changes, Lane's sphere is well described by a polytrope (see Eq. 20 in Sect. 5). Ritter
 in his turn solved the soon-to-be-called Lane-Emden equation for different values of

 n (Lane, in turn, had solved it numerically for the values n = 3/2 and n = 5/2). After

 expanding and streamlining the work of his predecessors, in 1907 Emden published
 the milestone book Gaskugeln , where he numerically integrated the equation named
 after him for various values of the index n. This book would grow to become the
 reference work about polytropes for many years.1 1

 It should be noticed that no issues associated to energy production and transport are

 found in the polytropic case. This has sometimes led to allegations that it might not be

 a likely description of any actual star, but this is not the case. For example, the afore-
 mentioned perfect-gas sphere, where convection is dominant and a quasi-adiabatic
 equilibrium sets up, happens to be a polytrope. Another important case is the one for

 which n = oo. This turns out to be an isothermal sphere - a likely occurrence, as we
 shall see, in certain stages of stellar evolution.

 2.2 Eddington's "standard model"

 The famous British astrophysicist Arthur S. Eddington developed his "standard model"

 of stellar structure based on a star for which the perfect-gas law held and energy trans-

 port via radiation was dominant. 12 By resorting to the usual expression of gas and radi-

 ation pressure, and by introducing the quantity ß (defined as the gas-to-total-pressure
 ratio), we can write:13

 9 The degenerate gas state equation 3' or 3" are in fact polytropic relations, with indexes n = 3/2 and
 n = 3, respectively.

 10 Collins (1989, p. 45).

 1 1 About these pioneering contributions, see Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, pp. 73-79 and 250-251). As the
 authors suggest, the Lane-Emden equation could also be called the Lane-Ritter-Emden equation: "It is
 unfortunate that the value of Ritter's astronomical papers has never been adequately recognized." (p. 79)

 12 Eddington worked out his "standard model" in a number of papers published in the years 1916-1932,
 the most important of them being Eddington (1916, 1917, 1924a,b, 1932).

 13 Masani (1984, p. 67).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 209

 w ' "(r)4/I (6>

 where H is the hydrogen mass and д the mean molecular weight (i.e. the mean mass

 per particle in units of H). It is clear that, generally speaking, both ¡1 and ß depend
 upon r. For the moment, we can neglect any r -dependence for д.14 If we further
 suppose ß to be constant, based on the previous equation the star turns out to be a
 n = 3 polytrope. In order to assume ß as constant, Eddington was forced to make a
 questionable assumption. He first introduced a parameter r¡ defined as follows:

 Ш L

 Af(r) M

 In Eddington's words "[. . .]r¡ varies as the energy liberated per unit mass, averaged

 through the part of the star interior to the point considered".15 It can be demonstrated
 that ß = const O r¡ к = const,16 where к is the absorption coefficient. This was defined

 by Eddington as "the absorption by a cylinder of unit mass and unit cross-section".17

 Therefore, Eddington supposed that r] times к must be constant anywhere in the

 star. Although this assumption was criticized, Eddington felt confident that it would

 always be approximately true. In fact, he reckoned that the absorption coefficient was

 likely to decrease towards the innermost regions, whereas r] was likely to increase as

 the energy sources were supposed to be more powerful around the hotter centre of the
 star.18

 Strictly speaking, the luminosity of a star does not appear in a polytropic model.
 However, it is a natural component of any radiative model. Eddington succeeded in

 introducing it and showed that it is tied to the absorption coefficient к through the

 expression:19

 L = 4*CG(1-^ (8)

 КГ]

 14 In other words, we consider a star to be a homogeneous body and we suppose that high (complete)
 ionization occurs almost everywhere inside it. The fact that an actual star may be not homogeneous is a

 focal point of this paper and will be discussed at length in the following sections.

 15 Eddington (1917, p. 599).

 16 Prialnik (2000, p. 83).

 17 Eddington (1916, p. 18). An equivalent definition for к by (Smith 1995, p. 247) is "the absorption
 cross-section per unit mass". In other words, к is given by M pi where / is the mean free path of a photon.
 The dimensions of к are cm2 g_l .

 18 This is an example of the problems that the lack of knowledge about the energy-supplying processes
 could raise, and of the tentative ways that were sometimes used to bypass them. Moreover, Eddington had

 to decide which values to adopt for the product r¡K. After long speculations, he finally went for г]к = акс,
 where кс is the value of the absorption coefficient at the centre of star and a is a coefficient whose value

 depends upon the distribution of the energy sources. Eddington often supposed a = 2.5. For further infor-
 mation about the assumptions Eddington made and their acceptability, see Mestel (2004).

 19 Eddington (1924a, p. 109).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 From Eq. 8 Eddington derived its famous "quartic" equation:20

 210 D. Cenadelli

 1 - ß = const. X M2ß4ß 4 (9)

 and from (8) and (9) he worked out the mass-luminosity relation.21 To attain this
 famous relation, Eddington had to estimate the value of к and he used Kramers'
 photoionization law:22

 *(r) = K0p(r)T(r)-y2 (10)

 where ко is a constant that depends upon the constitution of stellar matter.
 Eddington actually worked out its value from observational data and this gave rise
 to the well-known "opacity discrepancy".23

 As we shall see, the relation expressing the p and T -dependence of the absorption

 coefficient would become a major concern for scholars in the following years.

 2.3 Cowling's "point-source" model

 Polytropes are a tentative, relatively simple technique to deal with stellar structure,
 and in some cases they are reliable models. However, simple stellar models can also

 be constructed by incorporating luminosity, Eq. 4, without going through Eqs. 7 and 8,

 but rather by making other likely assumptions about the distribution of energy sources

 within the star, i.e. about the function L(r). In general, from the definition of radiation

 pressure and absorption coefficient it is possible to write:

 dPradir) _ K(r)p(r)L(r)

 d r 4nr2c

 No solution can be derived from Eqs. 1, 2, 3 and 1 1, as another relation is needed.
 This is found in the assumption about energy generation. In 1930 Thomas G. Cowl-
 ing developed the so-called point-source model,24 in which the whole of the stellar

 energy is generated in the central point: L(r) = L for any value of r from 0 to R. It

 follows that L(r) is constant and the system can be closed by choosing an opacity law.
 Cowling assumed that к and д were constant anywhere in the star25 and introduced a
 dimensionless variable и given by u- const, x . He then worked out a conclusive

 20 Eddington (1924a, p. 109).

 22 Eddington (1924b, p. 3 1 0).

 21 Eddington (1924b, p. 310); the mass-luminosity relation is a major topic in literature; see for example
 Mestel (2004) and Hufbauer (2006).

 23 On the opacity discrepancy see DeVorkin and Kenat (1983b) and Cenadelli (2008).

 24 Cowling (1930); for further information about this model see also Prialnik (2000, pp. 86-89).

 25 Of course, these are very questionable assumptions, and Cowling was perfectly aware of this. He
 remarked: "It is not suggested that the model represents physical conditions accurately: but a full dis-
 cussion of this model should give insight into the nature of stellar structure." ( Cowling 1930, p. 92).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 2 1 1

 equation that plays the same role as the Lane-Emden equation in the polytropic case
 and contains only a function T (w):26

 _LA(_L A(V^ni = _± 4 (12) ( }
 7"3 dr 1 T3 dT V <WJ = и 4 (12) ( }

 Finally, he then integrated this equation numerically.

 2.4 Composite models

 In the early thirties, Eddington's work on stellar models fostered further investigation

 by other scholars (besides Cowling), notably Edward A. Milne and Bengt Strömgren.
 Milne worked out models27 with a constant value for к. Such models turned out to be

 centrally condensed, i.e. with Tc and pc -* oo (subscript V standing for central). This

 led Milne to realize that the perfect-gas law could not hold, and he suggested that such

 stars be studied as constituted by two different regions: an outer n = 3 polytrope - as

 suggested by the standard model - and an inner n = 3/2 polytrope corresponding to a

 state equation like (3'). The idea of the existence of a "stellar nucleus" was rising. Mil-

 ne's paper inspired Strömgren. The Danish astrophysicist postulated that there exists

 a stellar nucleus where energy is supplied, surrounded by an inert outer region.28 This

 model had some similarities with Cowling's, but Strömgren removed a very question-

 able point, i.e. that к is constant, and rather assumed Eq. 10 to hold. For the outer

 region, he made use of Eqs. 1 , 2 and 3, and Eq. 1 1 that he wrote in the equivalent form:

 d (Ì 4 ' 1 /c(r)p(r)L(r) ^ dT(r) _ " 3 к(г) p (r)L(r)
 dr '3 ) ~ с 4лт2 ^ dr " _ 4яс 4лг*ТЧг) '

 that I report here, as it is often written thus. This is the equation of energy transport
 for radiation.

 Strömgren took reasonable values for ко and /x, the latter being equal to 2.229
 throughout the whole star: no chemical inhomogeneities were considered. It is a com-
 mon feature of all the early models that possible chemical composition variations
 within a star are not accounted for. Then he started the numerical integration from the

 surface, moving inward with the condition L(r) = L as long as he was in the inert
 region. He accounted for the fact that in the innermost region pT~ 3^2 could become so

 large as to switch to the degenerate-gas case, and thus he had to replace Eq. 3 with У .

 Then the main issue was to fit two polytropes together, i.e. to use the values of radius,
 mass and density at the deepest point of the n = 3 model as boundary conditions

 26 Cowling (1930, p. 94).

 27 Milne (1930).

 28 Strömgren ( 1 93 1 b).

 29 At the time scientists had not yet come to the conclusion that hydrogen is very abundant in stars. See
 also note 49. On the other hand, Strömgren carefully analysed possible variations of kq within the star.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 212 D. Cenadelli

 for the n - 3/2 model.30 The main result Strömgren arrived at was that, if Eq. 10
 holds, similar conclusions (as in the к = const, case) can be drawn about the possible

 existence of centrally condensed configurations.

 Apart from further details about the method used, it is interesting to notice that

 Milne's and Strömgren's models highlight some noteworthy issues: the importance

 of a full understanding of the nature of the energy-supplying sources as a key point
 to construct a physically realistic stellar model, the possible existence of centrally
 condensed models, and the idea that a star could be described via different models in

 the different zones, to be fitted together at the interface between them.

 The fitting of a n = 3 to an л = 3/2 polytrope came back in the limelight a

 few years later, when Cowling built up a model with a convective core and a radi-
 ative envelope.31 He was investigating the convective and vibrational stability of a
 point-source model where energy generation has a strong dependence upon p and T.
 Cowling found that, with Kramer's opacity law, convection was supposed to appear
 in the central region of a star if the dependence on temperature was higher that the

 eighth power. On the other hand, the envelope kept fully radiative. In fact, Cowling's

 point-source model does not - strictly speaking - describe an actual physical situation

 due to the infinities it implies. Nevertheless, as we shall see, it is a likely model for
 nuclear reactions that possess a strong dependence upon temperature, like the CNO
 cycle.32 As Cowling recalls: "Since the pioneer work of Atkinson had already sug-
 gested a very rapid increase of energy-generation with temperature, this model was
 useful in indicating the properties of real stars".33

 2.5 The problem of fitting polytropes together

 As we have seen, even in those early days the idea was emerging that the inner and
 the outer regions of a star could be described by different models to be fitted to one

 another. It is useful for the fitting process to define the two following quantities U and
 V, that are homology-invariant, i.e. two homologous spheres have the same values for
 U and V:34

 dlogM(r) r dM(r) 4жг3р(г)
 dlogr M(r) d r M(r)

 У _ dlogP(r) _ r d P(r) Gp(r)M(r )

 dlogr P(r) dr rP(r)

 30 For completeness, it should be pointed out that, when using this method, Strömgren also relied on
 previous works by himself (Strömgren 1931a) and Cowling (Cowling 1931).

 31 Cowling (1934, 1935a); see also Cowling (1935b, 1966, pp. 131-132).

 32 In the following, I will always speak of "CNO cycle", whereas in the original papers this nuclear process
 is also labelled as "CN cycle", "carbon cycle" etc.

 33 Cowling ( 1 966, p. 131).

 34 Kippenhahn and Weigert (1990, p. 200); it should be pointed out that "the derivatives of the logarithm
 of any one of the variables with respect to any other logarithm can also be used." (Cowling 1966, p. 130).
 It was Milne who first introduced these homology-independent variables.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 2 1 3

 Such quantities can be used any time homologous models are constructed. This is

 the case for polytropes: two polytropes having the same index n are homologous. This

 is also the case for the point-source model if к depends upon p and T via a power-law,
 and provided radiation pressure is negligible.35

 As r varies from 0 to R, U and V vary accordingly and draw a curve in the U-V

 plane. It may be useful to discuss a stellar structure in that plane as all homologous
 models (e.g. all polytropes of a same index) are described by the same curve. Most
 interesting for us are the aforementioned cases in which we have polytropes with
 indexes 3/2, 3 and oo.36 All the corresponding curves have the stellar centre in U = 3
 and V = 0, but the n = 3/2 and n = 3 polytropes move towards U -> 0 and V oo
 as long as the star's surface is approached, whereas the curve spirals around the point
 U - 1 and V = 2 in the isothermal sphere case ( n = oo).

 As long as polytropes of different indexes are used to describe the inner and the

 outer regions of a star, it is convenient to investigate the possibility to fit different
 structures on the U-V plane. This, as we shall see, is a key point that scholars will
 develop to work out the structure of giant stars. In particular, the polytropic approx-
 imation was widely used before the computer age, when the hand-made numerical

 integration of the full stellar structure equations was excessively long.

 Consider then a star whose core and envelope are described by different models.

 At the interface between core and envelope the two solutions must be fitted together.

 Here T and P change continuously but this may not be the case for p. If subscripts
 "c" and "e" stand for "relative to the core solution" or "to the envelope solution",

 respectively, for the perfect-gas law (if radiation pressure is negligible) we have that
 at the interface:

 £ = ^ (15)
 pc ßc

 If there is no discontinuity in chemical composition, then we can suppose that,
 besides T and P, p is continuous at the interface, too. The fit between the two curves

 will then occur continuously in the U-V plane. But if a chemical discontinuity is
 assumed, then for Eq. 15 p passes through a discontinuity, too, and the U-V plane
 will display a sudden jump of the kind (UCi Vc ) (Ue, Ve), where the U- and
 V-values are calculated at the core-envelope interface. In other words, the values of

 U and V "just inside" and "just outside of" the interface will be different. As both U

 and V are directly proportional to p, this jump will occur along a straight line through

 the origin. Consequently two polytropes can be fitted together by starting at the point
 U = 3 and V = 0 and moving along the curve that represents the index n of the
 nucleus until the nucleus' mass is reached, and by subsequently moving (or possibly

 jumping) to a curve that has the index n of the envelope and by following it until the
 whole stellar mass is reached.37

 35 Chandrasekhar ( 1 939, pp. 234-239).

 3^ The curves corresponding to these cases can be found in Collins (1989, p. 49) and Kippenhahn and
 Weigert (1990, p. 201).

 37 See for example Fig. 2.3 in Collins (1989, p. 52). Such a process clearly requires fixed boundary con-
 ditions, such as the stellar and the core's mass, or other quantities that determine these ones.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 3 Historical background: a brief synopsis of stellar evolution theories

 214 D. Cenadelli

 up to the early 1930s

 3.1 Early theories

 Stellar evolution theories are as old as the first spectral classifications schemes.38 As

 astrophysicists began to identify differences in stellar spectra and to work out relations

 between spectra and temperatures, they started to wonder whether, and in what ways,

 stars could evolve from one kind to another, possibly by heating up or cooling down in

 the process. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, tentative theories interpreted

 the temperature sequence as an evolutionary path. Basically, stars were thought to gain
 energy in some unknown way and then to cool down, thereby changing colour. The
 idea was substantiated by the observation that hot blue stars were typically located in

 the neighbourhood of nebular regions, which in turn were suspected to be involved in
 stellar formation.

 Alternative theories speculated about a possible stage of contraction that heated
 up the star's gas, followed by a cooling phase when contraction stopped. Scholars
 consequently assumed that stars might overstep the spectral sequence twice - first in

 one direction, then in the opposite one. They guessed that the failure of the perfect
 gas law was the phenomenon responsible for the arrested contraction. Such a picture
 was quite useful, in that it explained where the star's thermal energy came from: a
 gravitational contraction along the Helmholtz-Kelvin timescale.

 3.2 Russell and Eddington on stellar evolution

 Further advances were not possible until accurate, quantitative measures of stellar tem-

 peratures and luminosities became available, i.e. until the H-R diagram was worked
 out and scholars realized the existence of giant and dwarf stars. That the heating-

 and-cooling theory turned out to be a very suitable interpretation key for the diagram
 itself is indeed noteworthy. Henry N. Russell suggested that the giant branch could

 correspond to the perfect-gas contraction stage, and the main sequence to the cooling
 one.39 His theory also accounted for such facts as the different masses of different stars.

 Russell reckoned that stars of different mass must follow different paths - correspond-
 ing to different luminosities - in the giant region:

 A large mass of gas will therefore arrive at a higher maximum temperature, upon
 reaching its critical density, than a small one. The highest temperatures will be
 attained only by the most massive bodies, and all through their career these will

 reach any given temperature at a lower density, on the ascent, and return to it at

 a higher density, on the descending scale, than a less massive body. They will

 38 In this section I will just briefly sketch the evolutionary theories to the 1920s, without dwelling too much
 on the details. For further elaboration see for example Sitterly (1970, pp. 357-362), Tassoul and Tassoul
 (2004, pp. 84-88), Leverington (1995, pp. 128-129), Celnikier (2006, pp. 69-73).

 39 Russell presented this theory in the very same paper in which he published his first diagram in graphical
 form (Russell 1914).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 2 1 5

 therefore be of much greater luminosity, for the same temperature, than bodies

 of small mass if both are rising towards their maximum temperature. On the

 descending side the difference will be less conspicuous. Bodies of very small
 mass will reach only a low temperature at maximum, which may not be sufficient
 to enable them to shine at all.40

 Russell's theory was a pretty natural step to take at the time. Nevertheless, it would

 be totally discarded within a few years. Reasons for this lie in Russell's lack of
 knowledge - not so much about the observational features of the stars (masses, lumi-

 nosities, temperatures), but rather about their internal structure, chemical composition

 and the phenomena involved in their energy supply. Generally speaking, what Russell

 really lacked was a theory of matter at the atomic and nuclear level. As time went by

 and progress was made in these fields, it became increasingly clear that new theories
 were needed.

 When Eddington developed the mass-luminosity law, Russell's theory could not
 but be abandoned. In fact, Eddington realized that both the giant and the dwarf stars

 are in a perfect gas condition, so no failure of this law actually occurred. Moreover,

 the only way to explain the huge difference in luminosity between a giant and a low

 main sequence star was to suppose that a star burned out almost its whole mass during

 evolution. Unfortunately, no known process was able to account for this. Eddington
 mulled over the problem and devised a new possible evolutionary path for a star:41 he

 guessed that the main sequence could be identified as a sequence of quasi-equilibrium

 structures of different masses, and that any evolutionary path would move almost hor-

 izontally through the diagram to account for the little (at most) changes in the star's

 mass. Whatever the yet unknown source of energy capable to fuel a star may be, such
 source must be activated when the star reaches the main sequence, be kept active for

 as long as the star remains there (allegedly for most of stellar life), to finally become

 exhausted and boost the star's departure from the main sequence. In this respect, the

 giant stage could be passed through both before and after the main sequence period.

 In 1925, Russell came back to the Stellarevolution topic 42 He could avail himself of

 the major breakthroughs in atomic physics and stellar structure theory achieved in the
 meantime. However, no clear evidence about the nature of the energy-supplying pro-

 cesses had emerged yet. Russell was reluctant to abandon the idea of evolution along
 the main sequence, so he - driven by Einstein's mass-energy equivalence principle -
 guessed that some kind of matter annihilation must be at work. Although he was not

 able to specify anything more about this, he kept thinking that mass loss caused a star
 to descend the main sequence during its life. Moreover, the increasing density and
 consequently increasing opacity of the stellar gases lowered the surface temperature,

 thus enhancing the process.

 Russell realized that this did not explain why the main sequence was where it

 actually is in the diagram, i.e. why certain luminosities - and not others - correspond
 to the different temperatures. Thus, relying on Eddington's stellar structure model,

 40 Russell (1914, p. 285).

 41 Eddington (1924b, pp. 325-328).

 42 Russell (1925). See also Hufbauer (2006, pp. 207-208).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 216 D. Cenadelli

 he calculated that an inclined line could be obtained in the position of the main sequence

 on the diagram by assuming that all stars of different masses had a same central tem-

 perature of about 30 million degrees. If - Russell argued - energy supply is enhanced

 at these temperatures for some unknown reason, this should explain the existence of

 the main sequence. In turn, giant stars corresponded to lower central temperatures.

 This theory was, to some extent, a mix between Russell's former one and Edding-

 ton's: it built on the major achievements of the British astronomer in describing stellar

 structure, but it still retained the idea that giant stars are younger (cooler inside) and

 that stars descend the main sequence as they burn out their mass.

 To explain the relative stability of giants, Russell guessed that they could go through

 a stage where a different energy-supplying process settled in. He spoke of "dwarf stuff"

 and "giant stuff', by which he meant the two kinds of matter undergoing energy-
 generating processes in the two cases. As we shall see, this idea of two different kinds

 of fuels would become very popular again in the following decades.

 Russell's 1925 theory displays a number of modern features. It explains the main

 sequence as a sequence of different masses and similar central temperature, and it
 argues that the energy output is due to a cause other than gravitational processes.
 However, it was to be abandoned when scholars realized that the timescale of evolu-

 tion would have to be incredibly long for that to be the case - for example, it would
 take the Sun some Mqc2/Lq ъ IO1 1 years to burn out most of its mass. This became

 untenable when, around 1930, the first estimates of the lifetime of the Universe yielded
 a value around IO10 years.43 It followed that no actual star could have evolved much
 and consequently low-mass dwarfs should not exist at all.

 3.3 Further developments up to the Thirties

 Meanwhile, other astronomers were getting involved in the evolution issue. In the

 years around 1920, Harlow Shapley and Robert J. Trumpler carried on important
 works on stellar clusters. In 1925 an analysis by Trumpler about stellar types in clus-
 ters appeared.44 Trumpler analysed about 50 open clusters and outlined the differences

 in their H-R diagrams, noticing how in some cases the whole main sequence (but no
 giants) appeared, while in others giants could be found and the main sequence was
 cut off above a well-defined brightness. To explain this variety Trumpler guessed that

 differences in the initial mass of the clusters could play a role, thus implying that it
 was not possible to figure out a definite evolutionary line among the different kinds.
 But, more importantly for us, he pointed out how "we are led to the conclusion that

 the open clusters are already of considerable age; otherwise we would not find the

 dwarf branch so well formed in all cases, nor could we explain the general scarcity
 or total absence of yellow and red giant stars".45 This conclusion is essentially the
 opposite of what we know today. The idea to rely on clusters as ideal laboratories was
 retrieved a decade later by Gerard R Kuiper, who speculated that clusters could be

 44 Trumpler (1925). On Trumpler's contributions, see also Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, d. 1 12).

 43 Hufbauer (2006, pp. 2 1 0-2 1 1 ).

 45 Trumpler (1925, pp. 317-318).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 2 1 7

 groups of stars of different hydrogen abundance.46 Kuiper came to this conclusion as

 he observed that the curves representing clusters in the H-R diagram were similar to

 curves of different hydrogen contents Strömgren had worked out in 1933.47 As for
 the evolutionary role of giants, Trumpler and Kuiper remained faithful to the most

 popular ideas of their times. Strömgren, however, would make a real step forward and

 would play a key role in the evolutionary theories of the thirties. His contribution is
 described in detail in the next section.

 4 The influence of chemical composition upon evolution

 4.1 Strömgren on the influence of changing chemical composition upon evolution

 If we consider the scenario of stellar evolution theories around 1930, we notice how,

 all in all, the idea of a varying chemical composition in stars was barely taken into
 account. This was natural to some extent, as only in the years 1929-1932 did scholars

 become aware of the great abundance of hydrogen. In 1 929, Russell reckoned that stars

 must be mainly made of hydrogen,48 and in 1932 both Strömgren and Eddington fig-

 ured out that stellar models matched real stars only if a great hydrogen abundance was

 taken into account.49 As they focused on it, astrophysicists began to wonder whether

 chemical composition had to play a role in evolution. The well-known Vogt-Russell
 theorem fostered this idea. This theorem states that under proper, reasonable assump-

 tions50 the structure of a star is entirely determined by its mass and composition to such

 an extent that stars of different masses but with the same chemical composition must

 lie along a continuous curve in the H-R diagram. This seemed to be a promising way

 to explain the main sequence and, possibly, giants as stars of different composition.

 It was Strömgren who tackled this issue.51 His starting points were the Vogt-Russell
 theorem on one side, and the ascertained influence of the hydrogen content upon the

 equilibrium structure of a star on the other. Instead of starting from a theoretical
 estimate of the hydrogen content to work out observable stellar features, Strömgren
 reversed the method. He began from known radii, masses and luminosities of stars

 to figure out their hydrogen content. He adopted a stellar composition made up of

 46 Kuiper (1937).

 47 Strömgren (1933).

 48 Russell (1929).

 49 Strömgren (1932) and Eddington (1932). While Russell assumed that hydrogen must be much more
 abundant than any other element, Strömgren's and Eddington's calculations pointed out that percentages
 around 30 and 99 were both suitable. They opted for the lower value just because they deemed it to be less

 extreme. In the following decades scholars realized that the higher values was indeed much closer to truth.

 The recognition of the influence of hydrogen content upon the stellar structure is a major step in the history
 of astrophysics. See for example DeVorkin and Kenat (1983b) and Cenadelli (2008).

 50 Namely, that "the compressibility, the opacity and the energy generation of an arbitrary volume element

 of the star depend only on its temperature, its density and its chemical constitution." (words by Strömgren,
 see Strömgren (1933), p. 239).

 51 Strömgren (1933).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 hydrogen plus a "Russell mixture"52 of other elements, and attempted to work out
 the abundances of these two components. Both Russell, and Strömgren after him,
 considered helium absent.

 218 D. Cenadelli

 The mean molecular weight, i.e. the parameter through which chemical composition

 appears in stellar structure equations, strongly depends upon the hydrogen abundance

 but is almost insensitive to the exact proportion of other elements in the mixture. This

 means that, at least as a first estimate, specifying how much hydrogen and how much

 other stuff is present is enough. Strömgren used the "standard model" as a basis, took

 into consideration both photon absorption and scattering as sources of opacity, and
 came to the significant conclusion that stars with the same mass but different radius

 must differ in hydrogen content. He stated:

 Comparing stars of equal mass but of appreciably unequal radius, we see that
 generally the hydrogen contents differ appreciably. Let us consider for instance
 Algol A and Capella A. The masses are about equal. Algol A is a B8-star with
 comparatively small radius, while Capella is a GO-star of comparatively large
 radius. Algol A according to our calculations contains 53% hydrogen, while
 Capella A contains only 30%. This difference in hydrogen content implies a dif-

 ference in the structure which may well influence the subatomic energy-sources

 in such a way that the equilibrium configurations have quite different radii. [. . .]

 Quite generally we see that for stars of the same mass the hydrogen content
 diminishes with increasing radius.53

 In fact, Strömgren's hydrogen content estimates are too low for both stars, but they

 are still noteworthy for that time. Strömgren worked out the hydrogen content of stars

 of different masses and radii. Secondly, he calculated their luminosities from the stellar

 structure equations, and finally their surface temperature via the Stefan-Boltzmann

 law. This allowed him to depict the curves corresponding to different hydrogen con-

 tents on a H-R diagram, with hydrogen-depleted stars lying high up and to the right
 (Fig. I).54

 Strömgren discussed the evolutionary implications of his work. Starting from the

 idea that a star could evolve following changes to both its hydrogen content and mass,

 he noticed that two different time scales could be devised for those changes - a shorter

 one that he called "intermediate time-scale" for hydrogen content, and a longer one
 that he called "long time-scale" for mass. Strömgren gave a satisfactory answer to the
 problem of the very long evolutionary time of stars that had bothered Russell, when
 he observed:

 52 This was the name given to the mixture of elements other than hydrogen, with the abundances that
 Russell had calculated in (1929).

 53 Strömgren (1933, pp. 239-240).

 54 As pointed out by Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, pp. 112-113), a basic reason for this can be found in

 Eddington's mass-luminosity relation, that is actually a M- L-ß-Te ff relation. At fixed M , it is possible
 to trace curves in a Teff-L plane for several /¿-values. A decrease in hydrogen content triggers a boost in д
 and, due to the positive (and large) exponent of the term д in the aforementioned relation, this causes - for
 a fixed 7e,T - a strong increase in L, i.e. a moderate increase in radius.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 2 1 9

 Fig. 1 The continuous lines in this H-R diagram correspond to equal hydrogen content (values are indi-
 cated as fractions of the total mass); the dotted lines correspond to equal mass and varying hydrogen content

 and are possible evolutionary trends. An evolutionary trend towards larger radii emerges, apart in the region

 of В stars where superpositions between different curves occur (from Strömgren 1933, p. 244). Reprinted
 with kind permission of the Springer Science and Business Media

 The hydrogen content may change during times of the order of the intermediate

 time-scale. Times of the order of the long time-scale must elapse before the mass

 changes appreciably. One would therefore expect that the tracks of evolution in

 the H.-R.-diagram are the lines of constant mass. One would further expect that

 the hydrogen content decreases, so that the stars expand.

 Perhaps the simplest hypothesis that can be made is that the stars start as pure-
 hydrogen stars in which, in the course of time, hydrogen is transformed to
 complex elements, the energy radiated away in the successive equilibrium con-
 figurations being equal to the energy set free by the transformation. On this

 hypothesis the rate at which hydrogen is used up is given by the luminosity, and
 the course of evolution can be followed.55

 4.2 The helium issue

 In those same years, Strömgren had also dealt with the helium issue.56 Helium was
 not a major problem at first for astrophysicists, as its spectral lines are only visible
 in the hottest stars. Russell disregarded this element in (1929), when determining the

 "Russell mixture" Strömgren referred to. On the other hand, its presence in stellar
 interiors does not significantly affect mean molecular weight and thus it was not a

 55 Strömgren (1933, p. 247).

 56 Strömgren (1938). For further information about this, and more generally about Strömgren's scientific
 personality and the tight relationship between his interests in stellar structure and spectroscopy, see also
 Rebsdorf (2007).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 220 D. Cenadelli

 great concern for Eddington or Strömgren himself when working on the inner com-

 position of stars. Nevertheless, as we shall see in the following sections, by the end

 of the 1930s knowledge about stellar energy-generating processes had improved con-
 siderably, and the role of helium had been clearly pointed out. This fostered interest

 in the astrophysical role of this element.

 Strömgren made explicit reference to this when tackling the helium problem. He

 noticed that it was necessary to account for helium in stellar interiors and to possibly

 work out its abundance through independent methods, to compare it to the theoretical
 predictions based on nuclear processes. Strömgren decided to carry on an analysis

 based upon the laws of stellar structure, in the same way he had done for hydrogen.

 Let us call the abundance of hydrogen (fraction of total mass) X, the abundance of

 helium Y , and the abundance of other (heavier) elements Z. If we consider a gas solely

 made of hydrogen plus other stuff, i.e. if no helium is present ( Y = 0), Strömgren
 observed that we have:

 X + Z='

 , 1 (16)

 ß =2X + -Z

 while in the actual case Y ф 0 we have:

 X + Y + Z = 1

 fi~l=2 Х + ^У + ìz (17)

 Both Eqs. 16 and 17 hold if we suppose that a very high (total) degree of ionization

 is present, as does the second equation in (1 7) if Z is supposed to be <3C 1 . In the former

 case there is but one degree of freedom, namely the parameter 'x that is derived from
 the mass-luminosity law applied to stars of known mass, luminosity and radius. In

 the latter case one further assumption is needed to solve the system. By exploiting the
 mass-luminosity relation and the hypotheses that Z <£ X and Z <$C К,57 Strömgren
 succeeded in determining X, Y and Z for several stars suitably distributed in the H-R
 diagram.

 He commented that the hydrogen abundance - which turned out to be between

 0.79 and 0. 19 for the different stars - was not very much affected by the hypothesis of
 helium presence. This is natural, as Y and Z have a similar coefficient in the second

 equation of (17), i.e. helium contributes to the mean molecular weight in a way that is

 similar to heavy elements and much more different from hydrogen. Helium abundance
 turned out to be between 0.19 and 0.74 - larger where hydrogen's was smaller, and
 vice versa. Heavy elements were always around a few percentage points. Although
 the helium abundance Strömgren deduced is admittedly tentative, his attempts show

 57 The hypothesis that helium is much more abundant than the heavy elements was deduced by Strömgren
 from considerations about nuclear reactions (see Strömgren 1938, pp. 520-521).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 22 1

 that hydrogen and helium are supposedly to be considered the main components of
 stars.58

 4.3 A focus shift from mass to chemical composition

 Strömgren's work is an early attempt to incorporate chemical composition changes
 into evolutionary models. Even if they were to be abandoned later on, his conclusions

 about hydrogen percentage had the merit to shift attention from mass to chemical
 composition changes when studying the evolutionary path of a star. Moreover, this

 was also the first time when the giant stage was reckoned to be a possible later stage

 in star evolution. This turned out to be a seminal issue in the following years, when
 scholars began to inquire into the role of changing chemical composition. On the
 other hand, at that time Strömgren could not but rely on the theoretical background

 constituted by Eddington's "standard model" and coeval theories (including his own).

 This means that his results were subject to some degree of speculation about the pos-

 sible distribution of energy sources within a star. When faced with the need to make a
 decision, Strömgren adopted the "standard model" as a basis to elaborate upon.59 To

 some extent, Strömgren pushed the speculations of the pre-nuclear era to their limit,
 but his achievements - remarkable as they are - cannot go beyond these limits and

 rather point out how a precise, quantitative description of such terms as £ and r] was

 growing necessary.60

 However, it is important to underline a meaningful fact: speaking of a changing
 chemical composition in a star as a whole is one thing, and speaking of changes
 occurring within a star (i.e. chemical inhomogeneities) is another. As we shall see
 in the sections below, this turned out to be a crucial point in the following decades.

 Strömgren focused only on the former case. According to him, stars evolved as long
 as their overall composition changed.

 5 The inclusion of nuclear reactions into stellar evolution theories

 5.1 A major advance: nuclear physics and the stars

 During the 1930s, focus shifted to the topic of energy generation in stars. This issue

 was beginning to get sound answers, but in stellar models the new achievements about

 58 It should be noticed, though, that the same conclusion was reached by Cecilia Payne in 1925, although
 it was called into question and thought to be spurious at the time. About this latter issue see Hearnshaw
 (1986, pp. 229-231) and DeVorkin and Kenat (1983a, pp. 124-127).

 59 Following Eddington, he opted for a model in which the concentration of the sources towards the centre
 corresponded to a = 2.5. See also note 18.

 60 As the main flaws of the Danish astronomer, Sitterly points out (Sitterly 1970, pp. 364-365) the fact
 that he relied on the standard model and did not account for other models (such as Cowling's, that had

 become available in the meantime); also, that he did not develop a real theory of evolution, although he

 gave important indications. Those underlined by Sitterly are real "flaws", as they were fully within reach in

 those years. On the other hand, the limits I previously pointed out as typically found in Strömgren's theories

 are - quite literally - natural "limits" for the time, i.e. they cannot be attributed to Strömgren but rather to
 the current lack of knowledge about crucial topics (e.g. nuclear reactions).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 222 D. Cenadelli

 nuclear reactions had not found any application yet. Stellar astrophysics was due to

 slip into a dead-end street if no details about the energy-supplying processes could be

 provided, as no further understanding of stellar structure and evolution would be pos-

 sible in that case. In the same way as the impressive growth of stellar astrophysics in
 the twenties was made possible by atomic physics, nuclear physics could yield major
 breakthroughs as well. As for the evolutionary role of giant stars, nuclear reactions
 provided the reason why - and the ways through which - stars' composition changed
 over time.

 The problem was first tackled by George Gamow, who focused on the details of

 nuclear processes when describing stellar structures. It is no mere coincidence that

 this scientist was skilled in both nuclear physics and astrophysics. Gamow worked out

 new stellar models that - although based upon simplified assumptions - gave remark-
 able results and paved the way for subsequent, more reliable theories. In this sense,
 Gamow's work really throws a bridge from nuclear physics to astrophysics - in a
 way somehow similar to what Saha had done a couple of decades before, when he

 linked atomic physics to stellar spectroscopy. Nuclear physics was at the forefront of

 theoretical physics research in the thirties, just like atomic physics had been in the

 previous 20 years. This analogy cannot be pushed too far, though. Saha's theory had

 been awaited for a long time and really constituted a discontinuity, as long as it pointed

 out that there exists a tight connection between atoms and stars. This achievement was

 epitomized better than elsewhere by Eddington's famous statement: "The road to a

 knowledge of the stars leads through the atom, and important knowledge of the atom
 has been reached through the stars".61 Eddington's words have a meaning that goes
 beyond any distinction between atomic and nuclear physics. They rather stress the
 way a new field of investigation - theoretical astrophysics - was born. On the other

 hand, we can rather figure out Gamow's contributions as major steps in a process that
 was still going on.

 5.2 Gamow's simplified stellar models

 Gamow retained the hypothesis that stars remain in an overall homogeneous state at
 each evolutionary stage, although their composition changes in time. His assumptions
 may be summarized as follows:

 (1) Stars evolve as hydrogen is burnt into helium; all the hydrogen in a star will

 (2) As evolution goes by, any stars goes through different, slowly varying equilibrium

 undergo this process;

 conditions that are homologous.

 As long as details about nuclear reactions became available, scholars could decide

 whether to lean towards one stellar model or the other more consciously than ever
 before. For example, a "point-source" model, i.e. a model in which stellar energy is
 produced in a very small region at the centre of the star (this is Cowling's case), is

 a suitable choice for any energy-generation process that is strongly dependent upon

 61 Eddington (1927, p. 10).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 223

 temperature. On the other hand, if that dependence is not so steep, a model with energy

 sources distributed throughout a wider zone is more suitable.

 Gamow considered both a "point-source" and a "shell-source" model, the latter

 being a model in which energy is generated in a shell surrounding an inert core. The

 former case is a good description if barrier penetration is at work - an exponential

 dependence is expected in this case - whereas the latter applies if there happens to be

 some nuclear resonance. If this is the case, once the resonance temperature is reached

 the nuclear reactions start and, as time goes by, they migrate towards the outer regions

 as the fuel in the inner is exhausted. Over time, the resonance temperature is reached

 at larger and larger radii. This is a suitable model to describe an isothermal, exhausted

 core surrounded by a thin shell of burning hydrogen.62

 In other words, Gamow pointed out how the exact location of the energy-supplying

 processes within a star had a strong influence upon its evolutionary pattern.

 Gamow started from the standard equations:63

 dP (r) _ GM (r)p(r)

 d r r 2

 ß/лН

 Prad(r) = P(r)(l - ß)
 d L(r) ,
 - - = 4лт p(r)e(r )

 d r

 (18)

 (where all symbols have their usual meaning).

 Moreover, Gamow adopted Kramer's Law for opacity (Eq. 10). To these equations,

 we must add an equation for energy transport. If radiative equilibrium settles in, it is
 Eq. 13. However, if convective equilibrium arises, Eq. 13 must be replaced by:

 dT(r) y-lfiHGM(r)

 dr ~ у Kr2 K }

 where у is the ratio of the specific heats in the gas cp/cv. Equation 19 holds as long
 as the convective cells are supposed to undergo quasi-adiabatical changes. Coupling

 it with the perfect gas law, it follows that:

 62 This is a likely occurrence in certain stages of stellar evolution. In fact, once the core-burning processes

 stop, if the core does not undergo abrupt stages of contraction and keeps an overall hydrostatic equilibrium,
 we have e « 0 and, as dL/dr % e, L = const. As the central luminosity is zero, we have L « 0 throughout

 the core. This prevents any major energy flow outside the core - at least in first approximation - so that
 hydrostatic equilibrium can be maintained without any need for a contraction. Moreover, as dTfdr « L,
 we have that T = const., i.e. the core is isothermal. Obviously enough, perfect isothermality must be seen

 as an idealization, because a slow gravitational contraction can settle it. But the energy production rate can
 be low enough not to remove the condition e % 0 in any significant way. See Beech (1988, p. 219).

 63 Gamow (1938a).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 224 D. Cenadelli

 PocpyoíT7^ (20)

 Gamow first considered a point-source model, for which the last of Eq. 1 8 must

 be replaced by L(r) = L = F(po , To) for any value of r {po and 7b are the central
 values of p and T and F is an appropriate function of such values). In this case,
 from Eq. 13 it follows that dTVdr increases indefinitely as r approaches 0, as long as
 other r -dependent quantities are expected to remain finite and ф 0. Consequently, as

 r diminishes and we approach the innermost region of the star, at a certain radius R*

 a superadiabatic gradient is reached and convection settles in. Thus, energy transport

 occurs by convection within this radius and by radiation outside of it, in such a way
 that Eq. 19 holds for r < R* and Eq. 13 for r > /?*.

 These equations allow a calculation of the stellar model, once the constant ко and
 the function F(po , 7b) are known, and a value for M is chosen. This means that for

 a given mass and chemical constitution everything is fixed, as chemical constitution
 determines both ко and F . Of course, the way in which it determines F should be
 explained: this is the main issue in Gamow's paper, as thermonuclear reactions actu-
 ally enter the model through F . Incidentally, we may notice that the idea to start

 from mass and composition and to work out R and L is a direct consequence of the

 possibility to describe the energy-generating processes. Before that became possible,

 it was rather a matter of taking L and R from observation, hence, introducing surface
 conditions in stellar models.64

 Gamow threw into the fray the newly discovered properties of nuclear reactions.65

 As far as it was known, at the temperatures typical of stellar interiors only reactions

 between very light nuclei were expected to occur, with hydrogen fusion being the
 most important of them. Therefore, Gamow considered the possible ways in which
 hydrogen could undergo fusion and concluded that, in the case of a "Russell mix-

 ture" composition, "the disappearance of 9 units of mass of hydrogen will lead to the
 formation of 8 units of mass of helium and 1 unit of mass of heavier elements".66

 Then Gamow focused on how hydrogen could be transformed into helium and on the

 resulting dependence of e upon 7' p and chemical composition. He accounted both

 for the case in which the reaction was made possible by barrier penetration, and the
 case in which there was some resonance at stellar thermal energies, and he worked
 out two possible expressions for e.

 In the former case (point-source), nuclear physics suggested how a changing chem-
 ical composition could affect the values of F and ко . All luminosity is produced in a
 small volume со around the centre and it can be expressed as follows:

 L % epooj % A"(l - X)PQTQ (21)

 where X is as usual the hydrogen abundance and n has a suitable value, rather approx-
 imately estimated to be ~7.

 64 About this, see for example Hoyle and Lyttleton (1942a, p. 177).

 65 Gamow relied (see Gamow 1938a, p. 598) on Atkinson and Houtermans (1929).

 66 Gamow (1938a, p. 599).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 225

 From this starting point, Gamow engaged in the calculations of stellar models for

 different values of X and M . Fixing a value of M, he calculated the expected variation
 in L and Tq{ f caused by a given variation in X , i.e. in ¡jl. Then, the role of X and
 M was reversed, and Gamow investigated the behaviour of stars of different masses

 when X was fixed. What is most important, he exploited the hypothesis that homology

 relation should hold , i.e he worked out the expected variations in L and Te ff triggered

 by changes in X (or M ) through homology relations.

 As for the case of variable X,67 once the functions L(X) and Ге ff(X) are devised,

 it is possible to work out a track on the H-R diagram corresponding to a changing X
 value. Gamow found:

 dL0g¿(X)~5 (22)
 dLognX)

 except for small values of X , where the value changes to 0.8. The value 5 is the approx-

 imate value along the main sequence, so that stars turned out to evolve along the main

 sequence as they burned out their hydrogen.

 On the other hand, in the case of a constant X68 and a variable mass, Gamow

 worked out an expression for dlogL/dlogM. The expression showed that stars of
 growing masses are placed in the top-left portion of the H-R diagram, as it happens
 along the main sequence.

 Such results were plotted in Fig. 2
 As for the evolutionary tracks at changing values of X , the conclusions are, in
 Gamow's own words, "extremely unsatisfactory".69 They are, of course. Gamow con-
 cluded that: "It seems that the real behaviour of stars cannot be interpreted in terms of

 ordinary thermonuclear sources of energy",70 and that this was possibly an indication

 that resonance temperature effects, rather than barrier penetration, were at work.

 A posteriori, it is clear what is wrong in Gamow' model - not the barrier pene-
 tration, but rather the homology hypothesis. Gamow did not realize that he had put
 forward the idea that main sequence and giant stars are not homologous. As it was

 discovered later, a red giant's overall structure is very different from that of a main

 sequence star.

 On the other hand, the conclusion Gamow arrived at in the X = const, case is a

 satisfactory explanation of the main sequence. More specifically, for main sequence
 stars of different masses the homology conditions apply much more closely than in

 the dwarfs-giants case.

 In an effort to find a better explanation for evolution at decreasing values of X,
 Gamow was forced to assume that a resonance temperature did indeed exist, to make a

 67 Gamow observed that, once a value for a stellar mass is chosen, any mass variations during stellar life

 are to be considered negligible (as nuclear reaction theories of the time discarded any former belief about
 matter annihilation within stars), and that the actual mass defect is almost null.

 68 As for the value of X, Gamow kept faithful to the commonly adopted value of 0.35. See also note 49.

 69 Gamow (1938a, p. 603). See also Gamow (1938b) on this.

 70 Gamow (1938a, p. 603).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 226 D. Cenadelli

 IMu H , •.
 IMu H , -
 ' '
 -Î.S" ' /

 Fig. 2 The heavy lines are
 evolutionary tracks for stars of
 masses 0.5, 1 and 2 in respect to
 the Sun (adjusted so that the
 curve for mass 1 matches the

 position of the Sun at X = 0.35);

 the full line that crosses the

 diagram from bottom right to top
 left (labelled by X = const.) is
 the line corresponding to
 different M values at the fixed

 value X = 0.35: it represents the
 main sequence (from Gamow
 1938a, p. 603). Reprinted with
 kind permission of the American
 Physical Society

 A'

 '

 *

 +7.S.

 +l° ' '

 ♦IS.S. ' j

 q-Л fcSL 4.0 3.8 5 b SI

 ! I '
 il V,

 shell-source model tenable, as we previously hinted.71 In such a model, an isothermal

 core is surrounded by a shell where hydrogen burning goes on, then by a convective

 region and finally by a radiative envelope. Gamow did not tackle the full calculations

 in this case, but he performed a preliminary analysis that led him to conclude that in
 this case a slow increase in L and a slow decrease of R (accompanied by an increase
 in reff ) were likely to take place. So the following picture of stellar evolution could

 be figured out: a star begins its life as a large contracting body whose central temper-

 ature is far below the resonance value. As times goes by, the star approaches the main
 sequence from the right side and can be described via a point-source model. When
 the resonance temperature is reached, the hydrogen-burning shell settles in. The star
 remains on the main sequence and its luminosity barely changes at all. When the
 hydrogen is exhausted, the star moves towards the white dwarf stage. At the end of
 the day, giant stars are young ones again.

 7 1 Gamow ( 1 938a, pp. 603-604), see also Gamow ( 1 938b).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 227

 5.3 Further progress in nuclear physics and its incorporation into stellar models

 Later on, Gamow learnt about a recent discovery by Hans A. Bethe and Charles
 L. Critchfield - namely that the energy in main sequence stars was very likely supplied

 by p-p collisions, a process that does not actually show any resonance temperature.
 Although yielding a better estimate for the exponent n(n ъ 3.5) in formula (21),72

 however, this implied only minor changes in the evolutionary path.

 In the meantime, von Weizsäcker and Bethe described the CNO cycle. Gamow

 immediately applied this achievement to his description of stars.73 Both Bethe and
 Gamow himself74 had suggested that in stars as massive as the Sun, whose central
 temperature was assessed to be ^ 2 x 107oC, the CNO cycle could be overriding, while
 in low-mass stars the p-p process must be dominant. Utilizing an improved version
 of Kramers' formula for opacity (namely к - ко p0'5 T~2J5) and leaving n undeter-
 mined to account for the two possible processes going on, Gamow again worked out
 evolutionary relations via homology transformations. The resulting evolutionary path
 was thus depicted in a R-L plane (see Fig. 3). When X becomes very small, both д
 and ко become independent from it and the evolutionary relations assume the simple
 form:

 UrÄU Lcx/r5/4 (23)

 R

 If a shell-source model is considered, a further analysis by Gamow together with

 Critchfield pointed out that no striking changes from this pattern could be expected.75
 Still, red giants are a problem. Main sequence stars do not evolve towards their
 region. In other words, Gamow 's model does not explain why a giant star should be
 brighter - if a strong temperature dependence is assumed for nuclear processes - as

 the idea that a main sequence and a giant star should be homologous implies that giants
 should be colder inside:

 In fact, because of comparatively low temperatures and densities in the central
 regions of these stars (To ъ 1 x 106oC, po ^ 0.001) the rate of the carbon-
 nitrogen reaction will be negligibly small, and cannot account for the observed

 high luminosities.76

 Hence, Gamow was forced to speculate whether other nuclear processes, possibly
 due to light nuclei like Li, Be or В , could settle in before the main sequence was
 reached.77

 72 Gamow (1938c). Reference to Bethe's and Critchfield's work is at p. 907.

 73 Gamow (1939b). Reference to Bethe is provided at p. 720. On this work by Bethe, see also Gingerich
 and Lang (1979, pp. 321-337).

 74 Gamow ( 1 939a).

 75 Critchfield and Gamow ( 1 939).

 76 Gamow (1939b, p. 724).

 "giant stuff" is here retrieved.

 77 See also Gamow and Teller (1939) on this. As we can see, Russell's old idea of a "dwarf stuff' and a

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 228 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 3 Evolutionary path on the R-L plane. The dotted line matches the Sun's position when crossing the
 main sequence. In its upper part , where X becomes small enough, it follows Eq. 23 (figure rehashed from
 Gamow 1939b, p. 721). Reprinted with kind permission of the American Physical Society

 A few years later, Schönberg and Chandrasekhar were to point out the main flaw

 of Gamow's approach:

 The assumption that the successive equilibrium configurations are homologous
 cannot be expected to be rigorously valid; for the nuclear reaction reduces the

 hydrogen content in the neighbourhood of the centre of the star, and therefore

 the molecular weight in this region becomes increasingly larger than that of the

 rest of the stellar material [. . .]78

 If we want to summarize Gamow's contributions till the end of the thirties, we

 can observe that his achievements, together with the work by other scholars like von
 Weizsäcker and Bethe, led to a sound description of the H -> He process, and to a
 satisfactory understanding of main sequence stars. Gamow pointed out how the main

 sequence could be explained like a collection of stars of different mass and equal chem-
 ical composition, in turn fuelled by the CNO cycle or the p-p process.79 But when
 the evolution following hydrogen depletion was investigated, a number of problems
 arose: a satisfactory understanding of giants was still lacking.

 This clarifies the pros and cons of Gamow's theory. It has the merit to search the

 evolutionary patterns for stars in a detailed description of nuclear processes, rather

 than adding an undefined parameter e as was the case before. At first, Gamow just
 claimed a process of hydrogen fusion must take place, but did not give any details
 about it. Later, as details became available, he carefully included them in a theory of

 78 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar ( 1 942, p. 161).

 79 Gamow (1939c); Gamow incorrectly thought the Sun to be mainly powered by the CNO cycle, but this
 is not relevant to our discussion. On the other hand, he correctly recognized that the p-p process must be
 overriding in lighter stars.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 229

 stellar evolution. After Gamow's work, it became clear that no evolutionary theory
 could disregard a full description of nuclear processes.

 As for the cons, Gamow focused only on a changing chemical composition that

 affected the star as a whole, rather than investigating the possible role played by chem-

 ical inhomogeneities that settle in within the star. This caused his attention to shift

 towards homologous states that are not correct in this case. However, Gamow's inves-

 tigations paved the way for further steps towards the first reliable pictures of giant
 stars.

 6 Early attempts to embed chemical inhomogeneities into stellar models

 6.1 Öpik's pioneering work

 It sometimes happens that remarkable work is published in inaccessible places and
 there it lies, almost unknown to coeval scholars. It is well known that this was the case

 for the first announcement of the relationship between star colour and brightness, made

 by Hertzsprung in 1905. The same happened with a work by Öpik on stellar evolution,

 that appeared in the Publications de Г Observatoire Astronomique de Г Université' de
 7ar/M,80 in Estonia in 1939 and proved to be a crucial contribution to the solution of

 the giants issue.

 Öpik admitted that "our discussion is but qualitative; a more definite picture can be
 obtained only with the aid of laborious calculations".81 Nevertheless, his conclusions

 proved to have striking insight, in that he observed that a star for which mixing is very

 effective (i.e. a fully convective star), is expected to remain in the main sequence stage
 for its whole lifetime. However, if such mixing does not occur, hydrogen burning and

 exhaustion will cause the star to develop a composite structure that will drive it to a

 completely different stage. The nucleus will then begin to contract in the Helmholtz-
 Kelvin timescale. As for the envelope:

 Outside the nucleus the material is not exhausted; with the progress of the central

 condensation the temperature of the shell adjacent to the nucleus rises, and sub-

 atomic energy is released in an intermediate shell; the rapid increase of energy

 generation with increasing temperature and density in the intermediate shell pre-

 vents it and the rest of the star from being drawn into the overdense nucleus; on

 the contrary, if the outmost shell is in radiative equilibrium [...] it is forced to

 expand, and a giant star is formed.82

 The main argument in favour of expansion was that a radiative envelope was unable

 to carry all of the energy flow from the star's interior. Consequently, structural changes

 were to be expected.

 In other words, Öpik explained giants by developing a model consisting of three
 different zones, a decade before models of this kind became customary. In the inner-

 80 Öpik (1939); On Öpik's contribution, see also Gingerich and Lang (1979, pp. 342-348).

 81 Öpik (1939, p. 70).

 82 Öpik (1939, p. 64).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 230 D. Ce nadei li

 most part we find a superdense, hydrogen-depleted, convective core collapsing under

 gravity. Then we have an intermediate, convective shell surrounding the core, where
 hydrogen is converted into helium. This nuclear process takes place at an acceler-
 ated rate due to the very high temperature triggered by the core collapse. Finally, the

 enclosing, radiative envelope is inert, hydrogen-rich and very extended, since it has to

 radiate all the energy produced by the star.

 Öpik pointed out that Russell's idea of a "giant stuff' could be discarded: no exotic

 processes were at work in the build-up of a giant star. Such a star is fuelled by grav-
 itational collapse and hydrogen burning in a shell outside the nucleus. The relative
 paucity of red giants can be explained by admitting that they burn up all available

 energy sources very quickly, as their huge brightness testifies.

 The importance of Öpik's work has been emphasized in the literature.83 On the

 one side, he made tentative speculations and proved to possess deep physical insight,
 more than the ability to make detailed calculations. However, his conclusions relied

 on sound, basic physical consideration. In particular, he underlined the role played by
 a discontinuity of д, as well as the fact that evolution was not expected to go across
 homologous states.

 6.2 Hoyle and Lyttleton: a first attempt to recover Öpik's work

 At the beginning of the 1940s, it was Fred Hoyle's and Raymond A. Lyttleton's turn
 to give interesting contributions. First, they stressed the importance of details about

 nuclear processes in a paper entitled "On the internal constitution of the stars", pub-

 lished in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .84 Hoyle and Lyttleton
 showed once more that if a strong temperature dependence for e is advocated, then a

 structure composed of a convective core and a radiative envelope should be expected.
 Holding on to the hypothesis that fi = const, across the star, they focused on main
 sequence stars. They exploited the homology hypothesis and achieved satisfactory
 relations for mass, luminosity, radius and composition, thereby contributing to "put
 the structure of main-sequence stars on a secure physical basis".85

 In the same issue of the Monthly Notices , a further paper by the same two authors

 appeared. Its title was "On the nature of red giant stars".86 In it, Hoyle and Lyttle-
 ton introduced the idea that /л could vary within a star, and namely that it assumed
 two possible values in the inner and the outer regions. They supposed the д value
 to change discontinuously; although, "a continuous change in a layer of small depth
 could equally be discussed, but it can be verified that this case leads to no essential

 83 According to Amy ( Amy 1990, p. 221) "E. Öpik had successfully built red giants models"; Longair
 (Longair 2007, p. 61) states that "the solution to the red giant problem was discovered in 1938 by the
 Estonian astrophysicist Ernst öpik"; Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, p. 148) reckon that "the first decisive step
 towards the resolution of the red-giant problem was made by öpik".

 84 Hoyle and Lyttleton ( 1 942a).

 85 Longair (2007, p. 188).

 86 Hoyle and Lyttleton ( 1 942b).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 difference from that of a sudden change."87 In doing this, they went back to Öpik's
 work.

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 23 1

 The two scholars correctly identified the changes of /1 occurring in a star as
 Öpik's main contribution. An approximate numerical integration gave evidence that
 "a decrease in /x in the outer part of the star will lead to a considerable increase in

 the actual radius".88 It was a remarkable achievement - the first time, after Öpik, the
 role of chemical inhomogeneities was highlighted. However, Hoy le and Lyttleton's
 calculations showed that, to obtain large radii, "the regions of lower fi [must] contain

 only a minor part of the mass, say less than 25%."89 This seemed to rule out an expla-

 nation à la Öpik, that the discontinuity in ¡1 could be due to the H -» He transmutation
 occurring in the core. It rather drove Hoyle and Lyttleton to focus on processes of

 hydrogen accretion in the stellar atmospheres, possibly from interstellar matter hitting
 the star's surface. The idea of focusing on the changing /x value in the envelope was

 quite original, and to some extent it can be claimed to be a precursor to current studies

 about surface accretion (e.g. blue horizontal branch stars). However, this was not how

 the red giants problem could be solved.90 Rather, the д value at the core-envelope
 interface would have to be investigated.

 7 Inhomogeneous models and the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit

 7.1 Henrich and Chandrasekhar on homogeneous stars

 In the same period another major astrophysicist, Chandrasekhar, was focusing on that
 very problem and published two important papers on stellar evolution in the early
 1940s.

 Chandrasekhar's first paper was written together with Louis R. Henrich and

 appeared in 1941. 91 Henrich and Chandrasekhar focused on stellar models in which
 the core and the envelope were supposed to have different constitutions, i.e. they had
 to be described via different models to be further fitted for the values of the state

 parameters to coincide at the boundary between them. Henrich and Chandrasekhar
 considered two models. Both were endowed with an isothermal core that, as Gamow

 had shown, could indeed be there if resonance hydrogen burning or processes involving

 light nuclei occurred.92

 The first case they discussed had a poly tropic envelope with n = 3. The second
 featured a radiative point-source envelope with opacity given by (10) holding true
 anywhere in the star, although kq was supposed to change as a function of chem-

 87 Hoyle and Lyttleton ( 1 942b, p. 2 1 9).

 88 Hoyle and Lyttleton (1942b, p. 223).

 89 Hoyle and Lyttleton (1942b, pp. 223-224).

 90 Amy states that "it was not at all easy to see why there should be a sharp change in the molecular weight
 within the envelope" and that Hoyle and Lyttleton's model was "a dead end for models of red giants." (1990,
 p. 223).

 91 Henrich and Chandrasekhar (1941); a reference paper on Chandrasekhar's contributions is Srinivasan
 (1996).

 92 Gamow ( 1 938a, b).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 232 D. Cenadelli

 ical composition. Henrich and Chandrasekhar described the envelope via standard

 theories - the aforementioned cases are just the models by Eddington and Cowling -
 Strömgren. What is most important to us, ¡i was supposed to be the same in the core

 and the envelope. In fact, this work was published before Hoyle and Lyttleton's 1942

 paper, in which the д variation played a key role.

 In the first case the authors considered, T = Го (7b = central temperature) every-

 where in the isothermal core (a n = oo polytrope). It follows that:

 P(r) = ^T^r)+'aTt (24)

 In the n = 3 polytropic envelope, the two scientists employed Eq. 6.93 These equa-

 tions can be numerically integrated, the only constraint being that P(r), p(r ), and

 M (r) must be identical at the interface between the core and the envelope.

 In short, Henrich and Chandrasekhar had to fit a n = oo to a n = 3 polytrope

 together. They decided to exploit the homology invariant quantities (14), and to write
 the fitting conditions as follows:

 Uocin) = í/3(r¡)

 Voc (r¡) = V3(r¡)

 where

 r' = radius of the interface;

 Uqo and Vœ = U and V calculated in the core (n = oo polytrope);
 U3 and V3 = U and V calculated in the envelope (n = 3 polytrope).

 In other words, Henrich and Chandrasekhar opted for a continuous link in the U-V

 plane.

 The second investigated case was a point-source envelope, which the authors
 assumed to be physically sounder as more akin to "the physical circumstances under

 which we might expect isothermal cores"94 - those circumstances being, as we saw, an

 exhausted core surrounded by a very thin, hydrogen-burning shell. In this case, Eq. 24

 still held for the core, whereas (6) was replaced by standard hydrostatic-equilibrium
 and energy-transport equations that were supposed to hold true:

 Î + jam4) =

 In the second of Eqs. 26, L is a constant as L(r) = L at any value of r in the
 envelope, and к is supposed to obey formula (10). The fitting conditions were similar

 93 As is customary when solving polytropes, Henrich and Chandrasekhar replaced p and r with dimen-

 sionless quantities and used these variables for their equations. From a conceptual viewpoint, this makes
 no difference whatsoever.

 94 Henrich and Chandrasekhar ( 1 94 1 , p. 529).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 233

 to (25) but, since in this case the envelope wasn't described by a polytrope having a
 well-defined index, Eqs. 25 were written as follows:

 '(mL  (27)

 К ' i"7"

 It should be noted that such equations have a clearly defined meaning only if the
 core and the envelope are described by homologous models. This is surely the case

 for polytropes, but it can also be the case for point-source if к is made to depend upon

 p and T via a power-law, and provided radiation pressure is negligible. Consequently,
 Henrich and Chandrasekhar restricted their investigation to this case.

 Please notice that it is not the star as a whole to be treated as a structure undergoing

 homologous transformation, but rather the two different parts it consists of. This was

 a major step forward compared to the simple models Gamow developed a few years
 before.

 Henrich and Chandrasekhar could exploit Strömgren's integrations for the point-

 source envelope.95 These calculations had been performed only for a few possible
 values of L, Л/, R and /со, with ¡i = 1, and much more general integrations were

 certainly desirable. Nevertheless, this was not a priority for the two scientists, who
 were rather interested in developing a new method to describe a star as consisting of

 two different parts to be treated separately and then fitted together by means of the

 homology-invariants U and V . Integration was merely a calculus problem that could

 be tackled separately.

 Henrich and Chandrasekhar reached two important conclusions:

 (1) There exists a maximum core mass expressed as a fraction of the whole stellar
 mass. Its value in the two models considered is around 0.38 or 0.35, respectively;

 (2) Hydrogen burning is accompanied by a core contraction and an envelope expan-
 sion. Although brightness and radius only increase by a few units, it is clear that
 this is "a promising way to create giants".96

 However, the two scholars stuck to the unrealistic hypothesis that ß remained con-

 stant throughout the star - an approach that would be discarded a year later in a further

 paper by Schönberg and Chandrasekhar.

 95 Strömgren( 193 lb); Henrich and Chandrasekhar also relied on integrations performed by Nielsen under
 Strömgren's supervision (see Henrich and Chandrasekhar (1941, p. 531)).

 96 Amy (1990, p. 222).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 234 D. Cenadelli

 7.2 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar on inhomogeneous stars: the

 Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit

 Published in 1942, 97 the paper by Schönberg and Chandrasekhar is widely recognized

 as a milestone in the development of stellar astrophysics. The starting point for the two
 scientists was the overcoming of Gamow's homogeneous and homologous models.
 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar developed a model in which an inhomogeneity settles
 in between the core (where ß = ßc ) and the envelope (where ß = ßc ф дс). The
 idea to treat the core and the envelope as two separate parts is fully applied here. The

 two astrophysicists considered two cases, namely a convective (Cowling) core and an
 isothermal one, both topped by a radiative point-source envelope. This decision was

 consistent with the standard evolutionary picture of the time, according to which a

 main sequence star has a convective, hydrogen-rich core that over time gets replaced
 with an isothermal, helium-rich one as hydrogen is burnt and fusion moves outwards
 in a thin shell.

 Radiation pressure was neglected in both cases. Furthermore, P(r ), T(r) and M (r)

 were assumed to have the same interface values both in the core and in the envelope

 solution but, from the new assumption ße ф ßCi it followed that p(r) passed through
 a discontinuity:

 PM) = P e(r i)

 Tcin) = Ге(Г;)
 Mc(r¡) = Me(r¡) * '
 Pc(r') ф Peiri)

 In Eqs. 28 the subscript "c" stands for "calculated via the core equations" and "e"
 for "calculated via the envelope equations". The subsequent fitting equations take the
 following form:98

 (/„(„, =

 ,, V3/2(r¡) = 2

 ,, V3/2(r¡) = 7

 7 5

 V„(rJ=4„rjMÈ!± I
 e ri ße isothermal

 I/ / ч _ CAfefri) ßc

 vooU i; _ - -

 К r''Tt(r -, i) ße

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In turn, the term ßc/ßc is a function of time, as its initial value is 1 and it increases

 as nuclear processes take place. The key idea here was to get an understanding of

 97 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar ( 1 942) .

 8 Instead of using the authors' notation, I labelled the core quantities with the polytropic index (3/2 for
 a convective core and oo for an isothermal core) to preserve the previously used notation. Note that a
 non-relativistic degenerate core also fits the condition n = 3/2.

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 235

 how the size and mass of the core, as well as the star's radius and luminosity, change

 as a function of /хс/Де» as this ratio increases from 1 to 2 (which corresponds to a

 transmutation from a hydrogen-rich to a helium-rich mixture).99

 In the convective core case, the relation:

 з/2=(Ё!21Г) ' =(W| ' (30)
 ' 'dlog7/c 'd'ogT'r=rJe

 was assumed to hold. In other words, the effective polytropic index of the envelope

 at the interface was supposed to equal the core's.100 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar
 found that both the radius and the mass of the core decreased over time, whereas the

 star's radius and luminosity increased by a factor of approximately 1.5 when central

 temperature remained constant.

 However, in the isothermal case the hydrogen-burning shell moves outwards and

 the core's radius grows, with its mass first increasing and then oscillating around a
 maximum value. As a consequence, the radius and luminosity of the star increase by
 a factor of about 2 and then start oscillating, too. Actual temperature keeps constant

 for a while, then starts decreasing. Fig. 4 depicts the evolution on a L-Tç ff plane.

 In the isothermal core case, the authors came to a crucial conclusion. They found

 that for any value of ßc/ße there exists a definite core mass fraction above which no
 connection with the envelope is possible. The core mass uppermost value is a decreas-

 ing function of ßc/ßt and reaches the maximum value for a homogeneous star, i.e.
 ßc/ßt = 1 . When ßc/ße increases to 2, the value gets as low as 10% ca. of the stellar
 mass. Today the maximum mass (expressed as the core mass/total stellar mass ratio)
 that an isothermal, non-fusing, non-degenerate core can have to sustain the weight of

 the overlying layers is known as the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit.

 This limit can be expressed as:101

 99 In case of pure hydrogen being converted into helium, д should change from 1/2 to 4/3, and conse-

 quently the core-to-envelope ratio should increase from 1 to 8/3. However, the presence of a certain amount
 of helium in the initial mixture, as well as a slight amount of heavier elements, smoothes out this difference

 and makes a transition from 1 to 2 an acceptable choice.

 100 About the definition of the "effective polytropic index" see Eddington (1938), see also Hoyle and

 Lyttleton (1946, p. 525). In this latter paper, Hoyle and Lyttleton questioned that such an index was contin-
 uous at the interface.

 101 Collins (1989, p. 131); the existence of such a limit can be intuitively understood on the basis of plau-
 sibility arguments. In fact, the aforementioned core configuration is described by a n = oo polytrope, for
 which P depends upon the first power of p, i.e. the minimum possible power. This means that an increase in

 the gravitational pressure by the envelope yields a maximum increase in p, which in turn entails a maximum
 increase in gravity. Consequently, one can argue that there must be a limit beyond which an increase in

 gravitational pressure is no longer sustainable by the core. See Smith (1995, p. 261). In more recent times it
 was recognized that stars with a mass between 1 , 5 and 6 solar masses approximately develop an isothermal
 core at the end of the main sequence stage. Below 1 , 5 Mq degeneracy settles in, whereas above 6 Mq the

 mass is so high that even a slight contraction turns into a large release of energy and isothermality does not

 actually hold. See Beech (1988, p. 219). This means that for stars within this range, the isothermal core
 mass grows while hydrogen burns in the shell, but when the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit is reached,
 the core can no longer sustain the pressure of the upper layers and begins to contract towards the helium

 ignition phase. The Schönberg - Chandrasekhar limit is a major feature of stellar evolutionary models. It

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 236 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 4 Evolution on a L-Tc ff
 plane in the isothermal core
 case. Despite some evolutionary
 inconsistencies, this pattern
 begins to show some similarity

 0.06 -

 with an evolution upwards and

 to the right. Notice the wrong

 labelling of a point on the
 vertical axis (0.06 instead of 0.6)

 (from Schönberg and
 Chandrasekhar 1942, p. 171).
 Reprinted with kind permission
 of the American Astronomical

 О

 Society

 Iм - '
 ' '

 ol

 0.4 0.2 0

 ■*- A I09IÌ+ const

 qs-c = -г. - = - TT - = 0.37 I

 Mcore A/(r¡) I I /01Ч
 ^star M 'ßc /

 However, if gas degeneracy happens to play a major role, the Schönberg-Chandra-

 sekhar limit disappears.102

 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar once again found a "promising way to create giants".

 Similar arguments were put forth by Marjorie Hall Harrison a couple of years later.103
 To summarize, Schönberg's and Chandrasekhar's key achievement was the idea that

 the core and envelope must be treated differently due to chemical inhomogeneities.
 This allows a dynamical uncoupling between the two. Furthermore, Schönberg and
 Chandrasekhar (together with Henrich) introduced the idea of transferring the prob-

 lem to the U-V plane to investigate it for different stellar configurations - something
 that would become a standard choice in the following years. They also estimated the
 maximum mass of the isothermal core by introducing the mass limit that bears their

 Footnote 101 continued

 would be beyond the historical perspective of the present paper to conduct a far-reaching analysis of this
 topic. I just cross-refer to Collins ( 1 989, pp. 1 30- 1 32), Kippenhahn and Weigert ( 1 990, pp. 285-290) and
 Srinivasan (1996, pp. 64-68).

 Kippenhahn and Weigert (1990, p. 289). If degeneracy settles is, no Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit
 exists anymore: degenerate electron pressure contributes greatly to support gravitational pressure. This
 issue will be discussed later on in the present paper.

 ^ Hall Harrison (1944). Plots of the variation of R and L as functions of ßc/ßc can be found at p. 345.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 237

 name. In so doing, the two scientists were entering uncharted territory and changing the

 background of the whole issue. In Amy's words: "From that point on, inhomogeneity

 became a basic ingredient in stellar models".104

 On the other hand, their evolved configurations were still very small compared to

 actual giants. This is not surprising, as they considered the possible evolution of stars

 at the limit of the main sequence stage, but didn't fully account for further evolution
 along collapsing core stages. Schönberg and Chandrasekhar were perfectly aware of
 this:

 So far we have discussed the evolution of a star during the relatively early stages

 of the exhaustion of hydrogen in its central regions. The question now arises as
 to what can be said concerning the evolution during the later stages, i.e., after
 the isothermal core has grown to include the maximum possible mass. When

 this stage has been reached, the liberation of energy from the carbon cycle must
 cease, and we should expect the star to adjust itself to a contractive model [...]

 and evolve according to the Helmholtz-Kelvin time scale.105

 It was becoming clear that the life of a star on the main sequence is limited to the

 time required to burn out about 1 0% of its hydrogen, after which it must evolve through

 a collapsing core stage - an issue that would be retrieved and further developed by
 Allan R. Sandage and Martin Schwarzschild a decade later (see Sect. 9.2).

 Furthermore, Schönberg and Chandrasekhar did not fully account for other crucial

 issues such as any mixing of material within a star106 or the settling in of degeneracies

 within the core. Finally, the choice of an abrupt discontinuity in the value of (i could

 be further refined into a steep (but continuous) change of its value.

 8 Giant stars models with partially degenerate cores

 8.1 Gamow's discontent with the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit

 As we discussed in the previous section, some of the main ingredients required to build

 giants became available in the early 1940s. Others were still lacking, though. Among
 these was the possible degeneracy in the stellar core. Once again, it was Gamow who
 tackled this issue. Gamow felt uncomfortable with the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar

 limit. He commented upon it in two papers published on the Physical Review in 1944
 and 1945. 107

 104 Amy (1990, p. 223).

 105 Schönberg and Chandrasekhar ( 1 942, p. 1 72). The two authors further speculated that the gravitational
 contraction and temperature rise could trigger a re-ignition of the carbon cycle at the border of the core,
 which would cause the core to become isothermal once again. But since the core was now expected to

 exceed the limiting mass fraction, the star was assumed to evolve through non-equilibrium configurations.

 106 por further details about this issue see Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, p. 150).

 107 Gamow (1944, 1945).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 238 D. Cenadelli

 Gamow remarked that:

 [...] the exact mathematical treatment of the isothermal core model108 seemed

 to lead to the conclusion that no such model is possible if more than ten percent
 of total stellar mass is to be contained in the core.

 It must be indicated here that the above paradoxical result is entirely owing to
 the arbitrary assumption that the isothermal core of the star must be governed

 by the ideal gas law, and disappears at once if we take into account the possibil-

 ity of degeneracy near the centre of the core. Indeed the impossibility of fitting
 in a massive isothermal core of ideal gas (polytrope n = oo) rests on the fact
 that above a certain density limit, the gas pressure in the centre of the core is

 unable to support the weight of the core thus leading to an unlimited contraction.
 Physically, however, such a contraction will be rapidly stopped because of the
 decreased compressibility of gas in the degenerated region. The stable state of
 a star with a core exceeding ten percent of the total mass, will thus consist of

 three different regions: (1) degenerate nucleus, (2) isothermal layer of ideal gas,
 and (3) radiative envelope.109

 Gamow investigated this argument further with G. Keller in 1945. The two scien-

 tists made an attempt to insert degeneracy into the core of an inhomogeneous star.1 10

 The scenario they depicted starts from the assumption that main sequence stars burn

 out hydrogen via the CNO cycle. This is described through a Cowling's point source
 model, where convection takes place solely in the innermost part of the stars and the
 envelope is fully radiative. As time goes by, nuclear fusion increases the value of

 Дс/Ме from 1 to 2 and the core mass fraction grows, as Schönberg and Chandrase-
 khar (and Harrison after them) had shown. Gamow and Keller pointed out that stuff

 mixing within the core should be efficient to let it evolve as a whole. When hydrogen

 begins to be in short supply, the core starts shrinking and increasing in temperature.
 This in turn ignites nuclear fusion in a thin shell outside the core, and the core tends

 to become isothermal. The transition to a shell source model is complete by now. So
 a star should experience both cases Schönberg and Chandrasekhar had dealt with,
 in subsequent stages of evolution. When the energy-producing shell is established, it
 cannot but move outwards towards the surface. However, in so doing it is bound to
 exceed the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit that is expected to hold in the isothermal

 case. Schönberg and Chandrasekhar claimed that the star must enter a non-equilibrium
 state and eventually evolve towards explosion, but, as stated before, this outcome can

 be avoided by bringing into the equation another feature, namely gas degeneracy in
 the core.

 Gamow and Keller declared their aim to be the investigation of:

 [. . .] the fitting of partially degenerate cores of fixed temperature T* = 2 x 107oK

 (corresponding to the C-N cycle in the energy producing shell) and molecular

 08 In the original text, reference is made to Henrich and Chandrasekhar (1941) and Schönberg and Chan-
 drasekhar (1942).

 109 Gamow (1945, p. 120).

 1 10 Gamow and Keller (1945).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 239

 weight дСоге = 2 to radiative envelopes of molecular weight депу = 1 and [a

 proper value for /со]. The value of the molecular weight chosen for the envelope

 corresponds to a hydrogen content of 35 percent. [... ] The fitting conditions
 are that the gas pressure and temperature must be continuous at the interface

 between the isothermal and radiative parts.1 1 1

 As for the radiative envelope, the two scholars exploited custom equations and

 relied on the ever-present Strömgren's and Cowling's integrations, as well as on oth-

 ers they developed themselves. But their real focus point was the core. By calling the
 core radius and mass r* and M* (with p* being the core density at the boundary), in

 the isothermal, perfect-gas case they found results in agreement with the findings of

 Chandrasekhar and colleagues (once again, radiation pressure was neglected). Gamow
 and Keller developed a logr* - log p* relation for a given mass value M* = 0.1 A/0.
 The resulting curve did not extend into the small radii region:

 Physically this means that it is impossible to construct an isothermal core of an

 ideal gas with a radius smaller than a certain value determined by its mass. This
 fact underlies the above mentioned result of Chandrasekhar and his collaborators

 concerning the impossibility of building a stellar model with a core containing

 more than 10 percent of the mass. In fact [...] the fitting curves form the enve-
 lopes [... ] cease to intersect the core curves when the mass of the envelope
 becomes smaller than 9 times the mass of the core.1 12

 But when Gamow and Keller considered a partially degenerate core, the curve did

 extend towards small radii and a fitting to the envelope proved to be possible. 1 13 Here is

 another way to put it. Let us consider the given value M * =0.1 Af© and let us assume

 the core is in perfect gas state. If curves corresponding to envelopes of different stellar

 (core + envelope) masses - e.g. 0.4 and 1 .6 Л/© - are drawn in the logr*-log/o* plane,
 it can be said that the core's curve fits the second one, but not the first one. In fact, in

 the latter case the core's mass exceeds the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit. However,

 if a partial degeneration of the core is taken into account, it turns out that the fitting
 becomes possible without limitations (Fig. 5).

 More generally, Gamow and Keller depicted curves corresponding to different core

 and envelope masses in the logr*-log/o* plane. For a given stellar mass (core + enve-

 lope) they investigated the values of logr* and log p* at which the curves met for
 different relative values of the core's and envelope's mass (e.g. for a core containing
 12.5, 25 and 50% of the whole stellar mass). This allowed them to determine how r*

 and p * changed as the core mass increased, i.e. with advancing evolution.

 As a last step in drawing the evolutionary path on the H-R diagram, the values
 of r* and p* had to be linked to L and 7eff , or L and R. The authors did this in an

 approximate manner, by exploiting homology relations that, strictly speaking, did not

 1 1 1 Gamow and Keller ( 1 945, p. 1 26).

 112 Gamow and Keller (1945, p. 128).

 113 Gamow and Keller exploited actual physical formulae based upon the Fermi-Dirac functions as well
 as the numerical integrations already performed by Gordon W. Wares (1944).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 240 D. Cenadelli

 H b ^

 i< 'Х n .t„. О.ч Me
 V JÈ (25% -cure)

 M S*04« I. b M©

 (b. 95 fc -«*"•?)

 Oj 3 - *

 20 2S" то TS" o

 Fig. 5 Core-envelope fitting in the logr*-log/o* plane. The thick line corresponds to a perfect-gas core
 and it does not intersect the 0.4 Mq line because of the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit. If degeneracy is
 brought into the equations, it unwinds the core line ( thin line ) and the intersection is possible (from Gamow
 and Keller 1945, p. 127). Reprinted with kind permission of the American Physical Society

 really hold. It is interesting to notice that they justified this by claiming that integrating

 the equilibrium equations into every single case would require a huge amount of work.

 This is a typical feature of many coeval works. The integration problem was but

 a mere calculus issue, and scholars tried to keep it as simple as possible. All in all,
 scientist focused on physical issues and did not much care about integration processes.

 They relied on existing calculations or, if they did new ones, they basically considered

 that a boring - albeit necessary - task. They tried to keep equations as simple as pos-
 sible to avoid time-consuming manual calculations. A much sharper focus was placed
 on the issue of laying down physical giant stars models. Things would change later
 on, when basic giant models became available and the life-changing development of
 computers would remove most calculus-related barriers.

 8.2 Evolution on the H-R diagram

 Gamow and Keller drew the evolutionary path for stars of different masses on a R-L
 diagram (that is equivalent to an H-R diagram as long as stars are considered to be
 black bodies) (see Fig. 6). The two scientists figured out that, in the case of a stel-
 lar mass M = 0, lAf0, fitting solutions did exist even for a core mass = 0.5 M or

 more, and that as the core mass increased its radius became steadily larger, too. This

 implied that the hydrogen-burning shell would actually approach the surface during
 later stages of evolution. This caused an increase - rather than a decrease - in surface

 temperature. If M is assumed to be 0, 4 Af©, then fitting solutions exist only for a

 core mass of about 1/3 and as the core mass increases, its radius first becomes larger,
 then begins to shrink. Again, this seemed to be a promising way to create giants, since
 both stellar radius and luminosity increased by a factor 40 and 10 ca., respectively
 (see Fig. 6). In the 4 Af© case calculations were performed, too, although they were
 reckoned to be rather uncertain.

 Finally, Gamow and Keller remarked that, based on their explanation, red giants

 are evolved stars and the previous idea of young, contracting stars could be entirely

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 24 1

 Fig. 6 Evolution of stars of
 different mass on a R-L

 diagram. The percentage of the
 core's mass is indicated along

 the evolutionary paths (from
 Gamow and Keller 1945, p.

 135). Reprinted with kind

 permission of the American
 Physical Society

 , . ¿J "1П© , M
 4-3 , 4 . "1П©

 I LA. #Vftpp.»
 Ч*ТГ ¿J , M J
 j *** _ 1 *,

 +i . / УИ1в^Саре1иГ _ "

 "WS íRiuS

 4-1 < /

 / /ss S X

 4 4 / уг
 А« 60 Ь Ъ

 < 04

 J b 2 %

 -з < /
 < /

 A US %
 - s 4 s%

 / i Цз rT

 - - v ^ v ,

 Го O +-IO +*2 О

 i R A»

 dismissed due to the very short timescale it implies. Moreover, they discarded the

 former idea by Teller and Gamow itself, that light element (Li, Be, B) fusion was a

 possible energy source for giants, as it yielded different bands that ran parallel to the
 main sequence in the H-R diagram.1 14

 Although Gamow's and Keller's paper undoubtedly established some important

 facts, Harrison found an error by a factor of eight in the degenerate gas pressure
 formula soon afterwards.115 More generally, she described a model similar to those
 of Gamow and Keller, but she failed to enlarge the radius enough to produce actual

 giants. One noteworthy point she made was that the Gamow- Keller star enlarged its
 nucleus so much as to exceed Chandrasekhar's mass for a degenerate autogravitating

 structure, and this led Gamow and Keller to wrong conclusions. White dwarfs - she

 argued - have no links to giant stars. After Harrison's contribution, the core of evolving
 stars seemed to be constrained between Chandrasekhar's mass and the Schönberg-

 Chandrasekhar limit, so that its mass could not grow too much either in the perfect or

 in the degenerate gas case.

 were ripe for that at least.

 To recap, up to that time scholars had often come up with crucial insights into the

 problem, but no accurate, reliable giant star models were yet available. However, times

 1 1 4 Gamow and Teller ( 1 939).

 115 Hall Harrison (1946, p. 195), see also Amy (1990, p. 223).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 242 D. Cenadelli

 9 The first reliable giant star models

 The scenario finally changed in the years around 1950. A lot of ingredients to explain
 giant stars were available, and that growing knowledge eventually саше together to
 form a satisfactory picture - "satisfactory" in the sense that scientists succeeded in

 laying a sound physical basis that they used to build evolutionary models in which stars

 did evolve towards the red giant stage after the main sequence age, and the calculated

 features of the giants actually matched the observational features of these stars. These
 models cannot be considered conclusive in the light of today's knowledge (further
 progress would be made by scholars in the following decades). However, they con-
 stituted the valuable basis subsequent models would be built upon. Papers from this

 period are still mentioned today as key steps towards the understanding of giant stars.

 Obviously enough, those results were made possible by the significant contribu-

 tions of the previous decades. As discussed above, the great names of twentieth century

 astrophysics (namely Strömgren, Gamow, Chandrasekhar) played a major role. Unsur-

 prisingly, the theory of red giants finally came to solid ground when other great names,
 notably Hoyle, Sandage and Schwarzschild, focused on it.

 9.1 Inhomogeneous models in the years around 1950

 We already saw Hoyle hard at work, trying to introduce inhomogeneity into stellar

 models together with Lyttleton at the beginning of the fourties. The two scholars gave
 another noteworthy contribution in 1949. 116

 They developed a stellar model by identifying a hydrogen-poor inner region and

 a hydrogen-rich outer one, as usual. However, they made a step ahead in that the

 hydrogen-poor region was further divided into a convective central zone that supplied
 the whole star with energy via the CNO cycle, and a surrounding radiative one (see
 Fig. 7).

 Hoyle's and Littleton's model consisted of an H-poor core, an H-poor intermediate
 zone and an H-rich envelope. Degeneracy was not considered and radiation pressure
 was supposed to be negligible, as "the parameter ß is always near unity for the mod-
 els of chief interest."117 Discontinuity in chemical composition was described by a
 sudden change:

 №, У и Z i) (Xe, Yq, Ze)

 Mi - ► ße = 0, 5 ßi

 where "i" stands for the inner zone (core + intermediate zone) and "e" stands for

 the envelope. As for the absorption coefficient, Hoyle and Lyttleton assumed electron

 scattering to be the dominant source of opacity in the inner region. In the envelope they
 considered two possible cases, namely electron scattering and a photoelectric model.

 1 1 6 Hoyle and Lyttleton ( 1 949).

 1 17 Hoyle and Lyttleton (1949, p. 616). Hoyle and Lyttleton restricted their investigation to stars of a few
 solar masses.

 Ф Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 243

 I hydrogen-rich envelope

 intermediate zone: ( j

 radiative, hydrogen-poor y * ' S J / ,
 layer surrounding the core ' '/ y j /

 convective, hydrogen-poor core; /
 it supplies the whole stellar energy

 Fig. 7 Structure of an evolved star according to Hoyle and Lyttleton

 In the latter case, opacity was supposed to change discontinuously, just like chemical
 composition.

 Hoyle and Lyttleton integrated stellar structure equations into those basic assump-

 tions. For both possible absorption coefficients, they found that an increase of the д

 value in the inner region boosted a large growth of both radius and brightness. In the
 H-R diagram (see Fig. 8), homogeneous stars having a ubiquitously uniform value
 of /X = 1/2 make up a sequence that lies close to the left of the main sequence. In
 the photoelectric model, as inhomogeneities settle in and д rises to 2/3 in the inner

 region, stars move to a sequence that lies close to the right of the main sequence, only

 to move again to the far right side as д reaches 4/3. Meanwhile, brightness increases

 significantly. A similar overall behaviour is still valid in the electron scattering model,

 despite somehow different values.

 These results were thus commented by the authors:

 It is a satisfactory result of the theory that the main sequence is well-contained
 between the points corresponding to д = 1/2 and those for д = 2/3. As the
 time required for д to change, owing to the conversion of hydrogen to helium

 by nuclear reactions, from 1/2 to 2/3 is considerably greater than the time for an

 increase from 2/3 to 4/3, it follows that the position of a star in the diagram must

 be in the main sequence throughout most of its lifetime.1 18

 The values found are in fair agreement with observational values. When plotting

 them, a distinction was made between population-I and -II giant stars.1 19

 Hoyle and Lyttleton investigated physical processes that could cause inner chem-
 ical inhomogeneities. Clearly, they advocated nuclear processes as a major reason,

 provided no strong mixing occurred in the star's interior. If that was not the case and

 1 1 8 Hoyle and Lyttleton ( 1 949, p. 628).

 1 ^ As is well-known, in 1944 Baade introduced the idea of the existence of two populations of stars after

 observing the Andromeda Galaxy and its two elliptical companions M32 and NGC 205 (see Baade (1994)).
 This is a collateral topic to the main argument of this paper and I shall not elaborate upon it.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 - 2L- x». * ' < /

 ' ' ' *Er < / /'*

 * ' . P- ' TL / 1 -

 ' . P- Vi ' TL / • 1 « - '</!
 ' • -е. / X / E4>* • «
 ' * pa/i / /Т .

 244 D. Cenadelli

 -e e-..p„ C П e-..p„ C 4/1 П

 • Er е;л

 -<t- "f

 •p5
 ' • r«i

 •ř;.

 О- x¿-'

 +2 - x^l

 "" Main StQuCNCE

 Bo Ao Fo Go Ko Mo

 Fig. 8 Hoyle and Lyttleton's results depicted on the H-R diagram. The full lines represent the main
 sequence and the giant branches for population-I and -II stars, as observed by Baade in (1994, p. 143).

 The points X j/2* *1/2» *1/2 an(* *7/2 starM* f°r stars of different masses with 'i = 1/2 everywhere. The
 masses considered range between 2 and 5 Mq. The unevolved stars lie close to the main sequence, lower
 and to the left. The points P stand for the evolved stars in the photoelectric model, while the points E stand

 for the evolved stars in the electron scattering model. P and E have the same mass as X, P* and E! as X' P"

 and E" as X", P"' and Ef" as X,n . The subscripts of the P and E points are the 'i values in the inner region.
 Hence, a star of a given mass evolves across the points with growing ц values. The dashed line in the figure
 is an example of evolution (it is by the author of this paper and is not found in the original figure) (from
 Hoyle and Lyttleton 1949, p. 627). Reprinted with kind permission of Wiley-Blackwell

 mixing did occur, then an accretion of hydrogen at the surface was a possible expla-
 nation. This is the same idea they advocated in their 1942 paper. However, the 1949

 paper goes well beyond that, in that the role of inner changes due to nuclear processes

 is much more emphasized, and the radii of the calculated giant models are much larger
 than those previously obtained in 1942.

 A paper by Li Hen and Schwarzschild was published in the very same issue of the
 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.120 It was the first in a series of

 papers written by Schwarzschild together with several colleagues - notably Sandage

 and Hoyle himself - that greatly contributed to a satisfactory explanation of the whole
 giants issue.

 Hen and Schwarzschild summarized previous achievements by pointing out how

 inhomogeneity was a key factor:

 1 20 Hen and Schwarzschild ( 1 949).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 245

 When these [= inhomogeneous] models were applied to stars with a given mass
 and central temperature, the resulting radii were generally found to be larger
 than those obtained for chemically homogeneous stars. Thus it appeared possi-
 ble that these models should represent giants of intermediate spectral type. In
 all the cases which had been computed through in detail, however, the increase

 in radius was less than a factor four and hence insufficient to represent late-type

 The variables of differential stellar structure equations were replaced by the dimen-

 sionless quantities p, t, q, x, /, j:

 giants.121

 In their paper, they succeeded in elaborating models with "stellar radii sufficiently

 large for moderate red giants".122

 Similarly to Hoyle and Lyttleton, they adopted a tripartite model like the one

 depicted in Fig. 7: a convective, hydrogen-poor core; a radiative, hydrogen-poor inter-

 mediate region; and an radiative, hydrogen-rich enclosing envelope. Discontinuity in
 chemical composition is expressed by a jump (X¡, Y', Z¡) -> (Xe, Ye, Ze). Again,
 radiation pressure and degeneracy were neglected. The convective core was supposed
 to be a polytrope of index n = 3/2. The discontinuity in chemical composition was
 described as a sudden change де-

 As for the absorption coefficient, it was assumed to be:

 k = koPOJ5T~3-5

 2S 0 7S (33)
 ко = 1025Z(1 2S +X)0-75 0 7S

 GM 2
 nr) = P(r)-A

 T(r) = t(r

 H GM

 M(r ) = q(r)M

 l(r) и ^ =
 l(r) и ^ =
 Me

 _ Z(r) Í [1 +X(r)lM(r)]°-75

 J{r) _ Ze j [l+Xe]Me

 r = x{r)R (34)

 121 Hen and Schwarzschild (1949, p. 631); interestingly enough, the authors added a reference to Öpik

 in a note, pointing out how his models, although capable of accounting for larger giants, could actually be

 neglected, as they assumed too large a difference in chemical composition between the core and the enve-
 lope. In other words, Hen and Schwarzschild realized the pioneering nature of Öpik's work, but they also
 pointed out that so significant a result was premature for his time. Moreover, Hen and Schwarzschild did
 not appear to be aware of the aforementioned results by Hoyle and Lyttleton, whose paper is not mentioned
 and does not appear in the reference list. This is hardly surprising as that paper had been submitted only a
 few months earlier.

 122 Hen and Schwarzschild (1949, p. 63 1).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In Eqs. 34 it has been stressed that д, Z, X , and consequently / and j , depend on r,

 although their dependence is rather simple as they only assume two different values

 in the inner and the outer part of the star. In particular, in the envelope /e = jt = 1 . As

 usual, the stellar mass M and radius R are to be considered constant for integration

 purposes, but from a physical viewpoint they are rather free parameters describing dif-

 ferent stellar configurations. The standard equations for the radiative part (hydrostatic

 equilibrium, mass continuity, radiative transfer) take the following form:

 246 D. Cenadelli

 ¿p _ j РЯ
 dx tx2
 d q , px2

 dx 1 №Хг

 sHV d q , px2 (35)

 where parameter С is constant throughout the star and is expressed as follows:

 зко* /к_Ул Ш2"75 Mlf i36i ( )
 4ac'neHGj '4тг j Л/5-7 5 i36i ( )

 The standard quantities U, V are written as follows:

 У __ dlogAf(r) _ r dM(r) ^рхъ

 dlogr M(r) dr tq

 v = dlogP(r) _ r dP(r) _ ^q_

 dlogr P(r) dr tx

 It should be noticed that, due to the supposed inhomogeneity, U and V go through
 a discontinuity at the interface between the intermediate zone and the envelope. As a

 matter of fact, all quantities in their expressions are continuous except /. On the other
 hand, no discontinuity occurs at the interface between the core and the intermediate
 zone.

 Moreover, the polytropic index is n = 1.5 in the convective core, whereas in the

 intermediate zone and envelope the effective index was written by Hen and Schwarz-
 schild as being:

 , T(r) dP(r) 1 qt 8 25

 " + , | = T(r) рйад dP(r) = lb* 1 qt <3S)

 The introduction of the "intermediate zone", first by Hoyle and Lyttleton and later

 by Hen and Schwarzschild, was a real novelty. Then, it is not surprising that they
 could rely on former integrations for the other two regions123 but had to integrate the

 ^ Solutions of Eqs. 35 with the condition /e = y'e == 1 were available for the radiative envelope, as
 Schwarzschild himself together with Richardson had already numerically integrated them for different
 values of С (Richardson and Schwarzschild 1948).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 247

 equations in that zone themselves. The authors had the integration start at an arbitrary

 point £1 , that is the point where the core ends and the intermediate zone begins.124 So

 they found a single-parameter family of solutions.

 Then those solutions were fitted to the envelope. If we call the values of U "just
 inside" and "just outside" the interface U' and £/e, respectively, and do the same for

 Vi, Ve and ni, ne, fitting at the intermediate zone/envelope interface requires that:

 Hl - - L _ - /• h
 Uc - - le _ - /• h U' _ Ue
 YL - - L - - г ^ v Kl ~~ _ V» Ke
 Ve - - /с - - ' г v Kl V» Ke (39)
 fte + 1 _ 7i_ _ .
 П' "fi je

 Then, as a consequence of the discontinuity of U and V at the interface, it follows

 that the point representing stellar status at the interface must "jump" between ( [U', V¡)

 and (ř/e, Ve) along a straight line passing through the origin.

 Figure 9 shows the results of the fitting process.

 Based on Fig. 9, a stellar model can be constructed as follows. Start from the centre

 (U = 3, V = 0), then follow the curve corresponding to the core. At an arbitrary

 point continuously switch to the intermediate zone curve, and follow it all the way
 to another arbitrary point, where you will need to jump to the corresponding point
 of an envelope curve where С = arbitrary. Finally follow this curve to the surface.
 Therefore three arbitrary choices must be pursued. From a physical viewpoint, this
 means that the amount of change in composition, the point at which such change

 occurs and the amount of change in the absorption coefficient can be set at will. Once

 a model is chosen, the dimensionless quantities defined in (34) and consequently the

 state parameters can be computed for any value of r. If the stellar mass M, central
 temperature Го and chemical composition of the core and envelope are fixed, then a
 clearly defined model can be calculated. Hen and Schwarzschild chose M = ЮЛ/©
 and set 7o = 3 X 107K in order for the CNO cycle to be sustainable. They then
 calculated the stellar models and especially the resulting radii for 15 different values
 of (X¡, Yu Zi) and (Xe, Ye, Ze), and consequently of /¿¡ and /xe- The resulting radii

 turned out to be approximately between 10 and 70 solar radii, which led the authors
 to conclude that "for the majority of the 1 5 cases, the computed radii are smaller than

 the radii of heavy red giants", although in the best-case scenarios "the radii approach

 the right size".125 If we take a close look at Hen's and Schwarzschild's results126 we
 can see that the largest radii (43.2 and 66.0/?o) correspond to low hydrogen and high
 helium abundance in the innermost part, and vice versa in the outer.

 124 f is the adimensional variable tied to r that is usually exploited when integrating polytropes (it appears
 as an independent variable in the Lane-Emden equation). Its use is justified by the fact that the core is a
 n - 3/2 polytrope.

 125 Hen and Schwarzschild (1949, p. 643).

 126 Hen and Schwarzschild (1949, pp. 644-645).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 248 D- Cenadelli

 Fig. 9 Fitting in the U-V
 plane. Different values of log С
 are shown for the envelope.

 Similarly, several values of £ '
 are shown for the intermediate

 zone. Only one curve represents

 the core, namely the one

 corresponding to a polytrope of
 index 1.5. The straight lines
 indicate some possible "jumps"
 connecting the intermediate
 zone to the envelope (from Hen
 and Schwarzschild 1949, p.
 639). Reprinted with kind
 permission of Wiley-Blackwell

 Total mass 10 Mq 5Mq 3 Mq

 Mass of convective core 0.3 Mq 0.2 Mq 0. 1 Mq

 Mass inside chemical discontinuity 2.0 Mq 1 .0 Mq 0.6 Mq

 Total radius 66 Rq 33 Rq 20 Rq

 Radius of convective core 0.3 Rq 0.2Rq 0. 1 Rq

 Radius of chemical discontinuity 1.0/?q 0.5/?© 0.3 Rq

 Bolometric magnitude -5.1 -1.8 +0.8

 Effective temperature 6500 4300 3 1 00

 Spectral type F5 gKO gM2

 Reprinted with kind permission of Wiley-Blackwell

 The two scientists further tried to vary the stellar mass for a fixed composition con-
 sisting of 0% hydrogen-90% helium inside and 90% hydrogen-0% helium outside.
 Their results are summarized in Table 1 .

 It is obvious that all three models in Table 1 have a rather small and dense core and

 an extended, thin envelope. Nevertheless, the resulting radii are still not large enough.
 In conclusion, the method developed by Hen and Schwarzschild was promising in that

 it showed it was indeed possible to regard red giants as evolved stars. Inhomogeneity

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Table 1 Physical structure of giant stars of different masses (from Hen and Schwarzschild 1949, p. 645)

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 249

 with a strong hydrogen difference was proved to be a key factor, and radius enlarge-

 ment was proved to follow hydrogen depletion in the core. However, the method had

 to be perfected. Schwarzschild and his associates engaged in this task in the following
 years. They dealt with changes in central temperature, degree of inhomogeneity and

 absorption coefficient, and also tried to account for possible degeneracy effects and a
 gravitational collapse of the core.

 In 1952, the absorption coefficient issue got perfected in a paper by John В. Оке
 and Schwarzschild.127 The two scholars constructed models much in the same way
 as Hen and Schwarzschild had done, but they introduced a more precise description

 of the absorption coefficient. They investigated two different cases for the stellar inte-
 rior: a dependence к ос р1~а with a = 0.25 and a = 0. As for the envelope, they
 only considered a = 0. The a = 0.25 case had already been developed by Hen and
 Schwarzschild, while the a = 0 case went back to the Kramers' Law and still needed

 to be integrated. Thus, in the a = 0 case Оке and Schwarzschild had to focus on
 integration both for the envelope - where further values of С were considered - and

 for the core. The authors finally obtained two series of solutions corresponding to the

 two possible values of a that they depicted in the U-V plane (Fig. 10, left).

 Оке and Schwarzschild found that, following changes in £i , the mass fraction lying

 in the core varied within a large range of values (from 14% to 70% approximately).
 On the other hand, the core radius hardly exceeded a few percents, and this implied
 that the constructed models were much denser in the centre, just like the one shown
 in Table 1 .

 By choosing stellar mass, chemical composition and central temperature, it is pos-

 sible to derive the value of R from the second of Eq. 34 if applied to the centre of the

 star, and the value of L from (36). 128 Consequently, any stellar model can be depicted

 in the H-R diagram (Fig. 10, right).

 In the diagram, possible variations of £i and M are both accounted for. The heavy

 lines represent models of equal mass, while the dashed ones represent models of equal
 £i values (for the a = 0.25 case). More specifically, these values decrease mono-
 tonically as the roman numerals increase, and such a decrease is faster at first and
 slows down afterwards. As the mass value of the hydrogen-poor region depends on

 £i, and increases as £i decreases, following the heavy lines from left to right means

 following the evolution of a star as its core burns out hydrogen and shrinks, quickly
 at first and more slowly afterwards. After making comparisons with the position of

 actual giants, the authors concluded that "the models here considered amply cover
 the territory in the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram occupied by the red giants. Indeed,
 the most extreme models [...] give effective temperatures probably lower than that

 1 27 Оке and Schwarzschild ( 1 952).

 128 It should be pointed out that the equations exploited by Оке and Schwarzschild in (1952) differ slightly
 from (34) and (36), which Hen and Schwarzschild used in 1949. This is due to the differences assumed for

 the absorption coefficient. However, from a conceptual viewpoint they can be regarded as equivalent. More
 generally, the same consideration also applies to the subsequent papers by Schwarzschild and associates
 that are discussed later in this section. The method used is always based upon equations similar to (34), (35),

 (36) and (37). However such equations take different forms according to the underlying physical models.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 10 Left - fitting in the U-V plane, similar to the one shown in Fig. 9, for the a = 0.25 case (a similar
 figure is supplied in the original paper for the a = 0 case). As for the envelope, different values for log
 С are shown. Similarly, several values of £i are shown for the intermediate zone. The curve representing

 the core is outside the right bottom corner. The straight lines indicate some possible "jumps" connecting
 the intermediate zone to the envelope (from Оке and Schwarzschild 1952, p. 320). Right - corresponding
 evolution in the H-R diagram. The full lines stand for fixed stellar mass values (1 A/©, 2Mq and 4 Mq
 from bottom to top, respectively) and a variable percentage of the total mass in the hydrogen-poor zone.
 The shaded areas indicate the actual position of main sequence, subgiant and giant stars in the diagram
 (from Оке and Schwarzschild 1952, p. 327). Reprinted with kind permission of the American Astronomical
 Society

 250 D. Cenadelli

 of any observed star".129 This final remark is hardly surprising, as convection in the
 envelope was not taken into consideration at that time.

 The line corresponding to 2 Af0, which turns back once temperature drops to

 approximately 3,500 K, represents the evolution of a star in the a = 0 case. This
 highlights the great influence the inner absorption coefficients has on the structure of

 an evolved star. Furthermore, the diagram indicates the possible evolution of homo-

 geneous models. It appears evident how the evolution of a star where strong mixing
 occurs is expected to be very different from the evolution of a star where mixing is
 not so effective and inhomogeneities settle in.

 However, Оке and Schwarzschild felt that their models were still work in progress.

 They stated so at the end of their paper:

 Stellar models like the present ones must still be considered as exploratory, owing
 to the arbitrariness with which the character of the chemical inhomogeneity is
 assumed. If, indeed, a chemical inhomogeneity is an essential feature in the
 internal structure of the red giants, as now appears likely, it will be possible to

 129 Оке and Schwarzschild ( 1 952, p. 326).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 25 1

 derive definite models for red giants only after the physical mechanisms which

 govern the degree and character of the internal mixing have been determined.130

 9.2 Sandage and Schwarzschild: inhomogeneous stars with a collapsing core

 A work by Sandage and Schwarzschild131 appeared in the sam с Astrophysical Journal
 issue that contained the paper by Оке and Schwarzschild. Sandage and Schwarzs-

 child's work turned out to be a milestone on the way to solving the giants issue. It was

 the first paper ever to lay down a sound model in which an inhomogeneous structure

 was investigated after reaching the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar limit and consequently
 experiencing a core collapse.132

 Sandage's interest in this kind of theoretical speculations was fostered by his own
 work under Baade on the observational features of globular clusters. In particular, he

 studied the H-R diagram for the two globular clusters M3 and M92133 and observed

 that the giant branch was tied to the mid main sequence through a continuous distri-

 bution of stars. This pointed towards the need to explain the evolutionary stages of a

 star that moves from the main sequence to the giant branch.

 The paper by Оке and Schwarzschild had described a point-source, convective core,

 under the assumption that a certain reservoir of hydrogen, big enough as to sustain
 nuclear reactions, was still present. Sandage and Schwarzschild described the core as

 exhausted, isothermal, in a radiative quasi-equilibrium state. In other words, the core
 was considered to be exhausted and to have reached the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar

 limit (hence the gravitational collapse), with an extremely (infinitely) thin shell at the

 temperature of 3 x 107 К where the CNO cycle occurs, and a radiative envelope:

 This paper considers a model whose inhomogeneity arises from the follow-
 ing evolutionary process. An initially homogeneous star with a convective core
 and radiative envelope (Cowling model) which experiences no mixing between
 the core and envelope starts exhausting its hydrogen supply in the core. The

 subsequent early stages of the evolution follow those computed by Schön-

 berg and Chandrasekhar134 (reference is given to Schönberg and Chandrasekhar
 1942), with the core finally exhausted of hydrogen and therefore isothermal.

 The nuclear-energy production is then confined to a shell between the exhausted
 core and the radiative envelope. The assumption of no mixing creates a chem-
 ical discontinuity between the core and the shell. When the shell has burned
 outward until it reaches the Schönberg - Chandrasekhar limit for an isothermal

 core, a new evolutionary process must take place, which is most likely a gravita-

 130 Оке and Schwarzschild (1952, p. 330).

 1 3 1 Sandage and Schwarzschild ( 1 952).

 132 The importance of the 1952 paper by Sandage and Schwarzschild is emphasized in literature. See Amy
 (1990, p. 224); Longair (2007, p. 188); Tassoul and Tassoul (2004, p. 150). Moreover, Gingerich and Lang,
 in their selected bibliography of astronomy in the years 1900-1975, chose this paper as representative of
 the solution of the giants problem (1979, pp. 353-363).

 133 Arp et al. (1952). A further work on the same subject is on 1953.

 134 In the original paper reference is here given to Schönberg and Chandrasekhar (1942).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 252 D. Cenadelli

 tional contraction of the core. This paper is concerned with the quasi-equilibrium

 states through which an unmixed model passes after reaching the Schönberg -
 Chandrasekhar limit.135

 Sandage and Schwarzschild assumed that the energy e supplied by gravitational

 contraction was equally distributed throughout the core (an admittedly unrealistic
 assumption) and that degeneracy and radiation pressure were negligible. They further
 made a reasonable assumption we will not discuss about the shift from Kramer's to

 the electron-scattering regime for the absorption coefficient. Finally, they relied on the

 hypothesis that the inhomogeneities could be described by a sudden jump from the
 core to the envelope, such as:

 (X¡, Yh Zi) = (0, 0.98, 0.02) -> (Xe, Y e, Ze) = (0.596, 0.384, 0.02)

 ß' -> Me = n 0.5/Zi с

 n с (40)

 The two scientists followed the U-V fitting method and plotted a graph similar

 to the one in Fig. 10 - left. In particular, the luminosity Lg due to gravitational con-
 traction was estimated and included in the integration process. This term obviously
 depends on time. Consequently, the evolution of a star of a given mass had a further
 time-dependence, beyond the one implicitly contained in the variation of the ß value.

 Once the fitting process was done, the physical features of three model stars of

 1 Af0, 2 Mq and 4 Af0 could be determined in a way similar to the one used in the
 paper by Оке and Schwarzschild (via the second of Eqs. 34 and Eq. 36). As a result,
 the core contracts and the envelope expands dramatically:

 The star must pump energy into the expansion of the outer layers so as to over-

 come the gravitational potential. This energy is supplied by the outgoing flux
 produced by the nuclear and gravitational sources closer in.136

 The authors also observed that central temperature rose up from 30 to 170 million

 degrees, and they correctly pointed out that this was due to the fact that only a portion of

 the gravitational energy was radiated away - a noteworthy feature, since in the point-
 source model Оке and Schwarzschild had previously developed, central temperature
 was assumed to be constantly equal to 3 x 107 К as hydrogen was supposed to be
 continuously burning in the star's interior. Sandage and Schwarzschi Id's paper gives

 a more reliable description of a giant star, in that it describes a further evolutionary

 stage in which the core begins to shrink and to heat up. The associated evolutionary
 tracks are depicted in the H-R diagram (see Fig. 11).

 The first part of the evolutionary track shows a moderate brightness increase at an

 almost constant surface temperature, as Schönberg and Chandrasekhar had already
 pointed out. This corresponds to a transition from the Cowling configuration on the

 main sequence to the isothermal core, that is still close by in the diagram. When it sets

 in, the core collapse boosts the envelope expansion and a quick shift to the red giant
 zone.

 1 35 Sandage and Schwarzschild ( 1 952, p. 463).

 1 36 Sandage and Schwarzschild ( 1 952, p. 47 1 ).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 253

 Fig. 11 Evolutionary tracks in
 the H-R diagram. The main
 sequence (based on Cowling's
 model) is shown on the left. The

 full and dashed lines have the
 same meaning as in

 Fig. 10 - right. No comparison
 with observational data is

 present (from Sandage and
 Schwarzschild 1952, p. 473).
 Reprinted with kind permission
 of the American Astronomical

 Society

 This conclusion proves to be a powerful tool for interpreting the H-R diagram

 of globular clusters. The fainter stars have not reached the Schönberg-Chandrasekhar

 limit yet, but the brighter ones have, moving to the right in the process. Some stars

 caught in their expansion stage link the main sequence to the giant branch.

 The work by Sandage and Schwarzschild is a major achievement. However, it is not
 flawless. The evolutionary tracks move towards large radii but they fail to account for

 the increase in luminosity that is observed in actual giants. Sandage and Schwarzschild
 commented:

 A [. . .] difficulty arises when the extent of the envelope expansion is considered.

 Under the present assumptions there is no reason why the envelope expansion
 should stop at or before [the point labelled as] VII, while the observed H-R dia-

 grams of globular clusters seem to indicate that the expansion should essentially

 stop about at [the point labelled as] V, and then mainly a brightening [. . .] and only
 little further expansion [...] should occur. One may speculate that around [the

 point labelled as] V a physical process not included in the present computations
 should start to play an essential role.137

 The two authors considered two tentative explanations for the "physical process not

 included in the present computations": (1) helium ignition and burning in the central

 regions and (2) a certain amount of mixing near the shell due to stellar rotation, which

 might reduce the degree of inhomogeneity.

 As for helium ignition, the central temperature Sandage and Schwarzschild came

 up with was too low if compared to Salpeter's coeval estimates.138 Nevertheless, it
 was of the same order of magnitude, which implied that helium fusion could not

 1 37 Sandage and Schwarzschild ( 1 952, p. 475).

 138 Salpeter (1952).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 254 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 12 Evolutionary tracks
 (which the authors defined
 "speculative") in the H-R
 diagram for stars of different
 masses, according to the
 helium-burning model. The
 heavy line is the expected

 distribution of a globular cluster

 3.5 billion years in age (from
 Sandage and Schwarzschild
 1952, p. 475). Reprinted with
 kind permission of the American
 Astronomical Society

 be thoroughly ruled out. Assuming helium actually underwent the fusion process,
 preliminary estimates were made for stars constituted by "a hydrogen-rich envelope,
 a shell in which hydrogen burns, a helium-rich intermediate zone, a shell in which
 helium burns, and an inert core of heavy elements."139 These led to an H-R diagram
 (see Fig. 12) more closely matching the diagram of globular clusters.

 Noticeably, the idea that convection could settle in the envelope was not considered

 as a possible explanation of why the tracks in Fig. 1 1 move far to the right without

 bending upwards.

 More generally, we can identify three critical assumptions in Sandage and Schwarzs-

 child's models: (1) a lack of gas degeneracy, (2) an abrupt discontinuity in the ц, value

 and (3) obviously enough, the absence of convection in the envelope.

 All the three assumptions were further investigated by Schwarzschild and associates

 in the following years, and the whole issue of the giant stars was finally solved.

 9.3 Gas degeneracy and continuous mixing

 The degeneracy issue was addressed in 1953 by Schwarzschild, together with I. Rabi-
 nowitz and R. Härm.140 Core degeneracy was not considered in the previous models,
 and Sandage and Schwarzschild had actually discussed whether such an assumption
 was tenable. It turned out that in fact it was, although some degeneration could be
 present in the innermost zones of less massive stars.

 Then Schwarzschild, Rabinowitz and Härm focused on a more detailed investi-

 gation of possible, partial degeneracy in the stellar core, following in Gamow and
 Keller's footsteps. They considered a shell-source model with an isothermal core sur-

 rounded by an inert envelope. Composition was again thought to change abruptly at
 the envelope-core interface (i.e. in the infinitesimally thin shell). The basic equations
 remained similar to (35) and (37) for the envelope, but were changed for the core.

 1 39 Sandage and Schwarzschild ( 1 952, p. 475).

 140 Schwarzschild et al. (1953).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 255

 As had been the case with Gamow and Keller, Wares' solutions141 were adopted for
 integration purposes. The resulting stellar models happened to fit the red giant region
 of the H-R diagram well:

 [...] the present models cover well the area occupied by the red giants. Hence the

 present detailed computations appear to substantiate the earlier tentative conclu-

 sions by Gamow and Keller142 that models with partially degenerate isothermal

 cores may under certain circumstances have very large radii.143

 Once again, however, some models turned out to have huge (larger than expected)

 radii and very low (around 103 K) surface temperatures, as no convection in the enve-
 lope was considered.

 This issue was further investigated in a paper by Härm and Schwarzschild,144 who

 assumed a continuously changing chemical composition, with ¡i varying by a factor
 2.5 from the core to the surface. Their models were constructed as follows: /z = fi'

 (constant) in the core and fi = де = 0.4/¿¡ (constant) in the envelope, /¿(r) continu-

 ously varying from ßc to де in an intermediate zone. Degeneracy and (as in all previous
 papers) radiation pressure were neglected. Both convective-core (point-source) and
 isothermal-core (shell-source) models were investigated. Equations 39 were replaced

 to meet the requirement that U and V be continuous throughout the star. The resulting

 numerical integrations showed that, for stars having the same mass, central temper-
 ature and overall chemical compositions, no great differences in brightness were to

 be expected when moving from the discontinuous to the continuous case. As for the
 radii, Härm and Schwarzschild observed that red giants were well described and that,
 once more, "for the more extended stars, however, the discontinuous models appear

 to exaggerate the radius."145

 The issue of the continuous variation of 'x was also tackled by Roger J. Tayler

 in 1954. 146 The English astrophysicist pointed out that, as the core retreats during
 evolution, a region of continuously varying composition must exist. Consequently,
 he calculated some models for a massive star of 9.9 Af© - *n which electron opacity

 dominates and radiation pressure is taken into account - with a diminishing hydrogen

 content in the interior and a shrinking core. Following hydrogen depletion in the core,
 the star's radius increases and its surface temperature decreases. Although the evolu-

 tionary track for this star is somewhat different from the ones developed by Sandage
 and Schwarzschild for the stage preceding the collapse of the core, overall evolution
 was not much different and the resulting H-R diagram for a globular cluster of a

 given age proved to be quite similar.

 141 Wares (1944).

 14^ In the original paper reference is here given to Gamow and Keller (1945).

 143 Schwarzschild et al. (1953, p. 333).

 144 Härm and Schwarzschild ( 1 955).

 145 Härm and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 453).

 146 Tayler (1954).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 256 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 13 H-R diagram (colour
 index versus visual magnitude)
 for a globular cluster (from
 Hoyle and Schwarzschild 1955,
 p. 2). Reprinted with kind
 permission of the American
 Astronomical Society

 o-

 Mvis

 .4 1

 - с ;

 -.4 0 *.4 *8 *12 46

 CI

 9.4 Hoyle, Schwarzschild and the first reliable giant stars models

 In 1955, Hoyle and Schwarzschild published a landmark paper entitled "On the evolu-
 tion of Type II stars". 147 Hoyle and Schwarzschild were awarded the International Bal-

 zan Prize for Astrophysics in 1994 for, as the formal citation stated, "their pioneering

 contributions to the theory of stellar evolution, upon which the modern development

 of the field is founded."148 The prize was actually giving credit to their 1955 paper. It

 is always a little risky to identify a single work as the one that brought a long-debated
 scientific issue to an end. However, the 1955 paper by Hoyle and Schwarzschild defi-

 nitely stands out among coeval works, both for the results it yielded and for the physical

 insight it showed, and can be identified as the one that finally solved the giants issue,
 at least for low-mass stars.

 Hoyle and Schwarzschild's aim is to study stars approaching the turning-point in the

 H-R diagram of globular clusters, i.e. with masses around 1 . 1-1 .2 M0 and belonging
 to population II. Such a choice was fostered by Arp, Baum and Sandage's recent work

 upon globular clusters M3 and M92 mentioned above, as well as by another paper by
 Sandage published in 1954. 149

 Hoyle and Schwarzschild started by drawing an H-R diagram for a globular cluster

 (Fig. 13).

 They observed that:

 The latter line [i.e. the line occupied by the stars in the diagram] is the locus for
 stars of various masses at one time, while an evolutionary track is the locus for

 stars of the same mass at various times. This difference, however, is in practice
 rather small [because] all the stars in globular clusters which are now observed
 between points M and P [of fig. 13] have started their evolution within a short

 147 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955).

 148 See http://www.balzan.it/en'Cprizewinners'FredHoyleeMartinSchwarzschild.aspx (as of October
 2009).

 149 Sandage (1954).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 257

 section of the main sequence, have therefore nearly the same masses, and are

 evolving along a tight family of tracks which closely hug the observed sequence

 in the colour-magnitude diagram.150

 Hence, it was a matter explaining the different sections of the path for a star of

 1.1-1.2 M0.

 First, the authors investigated the path from LioM. They considered energy supply

 as mainly due to the CNO cycle.151 As the core gets exhausted, it must become iso-
 thermal due to the electron conduction that occurs as degeneracy settles in. The whole

 issue then boils down to investigating what happens to an isothermal, partially degen-

 erate core surrounded by a layer of negligible thickness where hydrogen transmutation
 takes place.152 Hoyle and Schwarzschild's also assumed no relativistic degeneracy,
 a negligible radiation pressure, an abrupt change in chemical composition between
 the core and the envelope. This means that initially /xc = 0.533 (mainly hydrogen)

 anywhere in the star. Then a discontinuity is established: /¿c changes to the value 4/3
 (pure helium), while де remains equal to 0.533.

 Furthermore, the envelope was supposed to be in radiative equilibrium, but "this

 assumption applies only to the evolution from Lio M [and it will] be dropped when
 we come to consider the later stages of the evolution."153 One of the paper's key points

 was clear right from the outset, namely the introduction of convection in the envelope

 in later stages of evolution. Finally, the envelope was split into two parts as a conse-

 quence of two opacity regimes: free-free in the outer part (obeying Kramers' formula
 (10)) and electron scattering in the inner one - opacity always being continuous, but

 with an abrupt change from one formula to the other.

 The method of the homology invariants U and V had become a standard technique

 by then, and Hoyle and Schwarzschild introduced them as set out in Eq. 14. They also
 used as a further homology invariant the effective polytropic index:

 dlogP(r) T(r)dP(r) 16тг acGT(r)4M(r) , , ч

 n + 1 = -

 - dlogr(r)

 n = oo - > (core)

 (the expression of n + 1 in (41) follows directly from Eqs. 1 and 13; Eq. 13 holds

 as long as the envelope is supposed to be in radiative equilibrium).

 They estimated an abundance of С and N around 0.0005, that seemed appropriate

 for type-II stars.

 The results of the integration process are illustrated in Fig. 14, in which a star is

 placed in the H-R diagram as a function of the increasing core mass.

 150 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 2).

 151 Although the authors reckoned that such an assumption "is not correct for the early part of the evolution
 near L'' they nevertheless adopted it, as "the present work has been undertaken by way of a preliminary
 reconnaissance of the problem" (Hoyle and Schwarzschild 1955, p. 3 and 1).

 152 The authors explicitly referred to Schwarzschild et al. (1953), claiming they would essentially follow
 the same procedure.

 153 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 4).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 258 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 14 A comparison between
 the observational H-R diagram
 for a globular cluster (shaded
 area ) and the calculated models

 with exhausted, partially
 degenerate, isothermal cores and

 radiative envelopes (filled
 circles). The numbers indicate

 the mass fraction of the core,

 which grows over time (from
 Hoy le and Schwarzschild 1955,
 p. 10). Reprinted with kind
 permission of the American

 Astronomical Society

 The tendency of the calculated points to lie on the left side of the shaded area can

 be easily explained in the light of the approximations made. However, this is not true

 for the 0.22 point, and even less so for a 0.25 point that lies so far to the right as to

 fall outside the diagram. This evolution to the right at an almost constant luminosity

 is exactly the same result Hoyle and Lyttleton got in 1949 (see Fig. 8), with Sandage
 and Schwarzschild following suit in 1952 (see Fig. 1 1). As we saw above, Sandage
 and Schwarzschild investigated possible ways to get rid of this discrepancy, but they
 did not consider the possibility that convection might arise in the envelope. Hoyle
 and Schwarzschild realized that and commented that "radiative-envelope solutions
 integrated to the mathematical boundary condition of zero pressure and temperature

 at the surface of the star cease to give a satisfactory expression of the actual physical
 boundary condition."154 Consequently, at the surface T must approach and p must
 approach a value consistent with the fact that light escapes from the star. In their late

 models, Hoyle and Schwarzschild found that density fell off too soon, i.e. reached a

 value that was acceptable for the photosphere before T decreased to Tta .

 Other scholars had already suggested that red stars must possess a convective zone

 in the outer envelope. In 1951, J. G. Gardiner attempted to build a red giant model

 moving inwards from the surface of the star.155 Although he stuck to the assumption

 of a fully radiative envelope in his calculations, he found that "the outer regions of the
 atmosphere, as calculated for this model, will probably possess convectively unstable
 zones ,15^ In 1953, following detailed calculations, Donald E. Osterbrock suggested
 that red dwarf stars might have an outer convective zone extending inwards for about
 1/3 of the stellar radius.157

 Convection in the envelope could well be the solution to the discrepancies Hoyle

 and Schwarzschild had found. This played a crucial role in explaining the increase in
 luminosity that occurred in the MN track of Fig. 13.

 154 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 12).

 155 Gardiner (1951).

 156 Gardiner (1951, p. 102).

 157 Osterbrock (1953).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 259

 Consequently, the two scholars introduced convection in the outer envelope, replac-

 ing Eq. 13 with P = kT2 5 (Eq. 20 with y = 5/3 and к to be determined by surface
 conditions). The equations for the core remained unchanged. It was then a matter of

 integrating the different zones: core, radiative envelope and convective envelope.

 Let us begin with the core. Its uniform temperature, that had been shown by previ-

 ous calculation to rise from about 13-20 million degrees along the LM path, was now
 supposed to keep constant at 20 x 106K throughout the evolution from M to N9 so
 as to sustain the CNO cycle in the burning shell. However, Hoyle and Schwarzschild
 found that such an assumption could not be extended to the N О path - if it had been,

 the growing core mass would have triggered too large a decrease in the density of the

 burning shell. In order for the correct rate of energy production to be secured, this
 density decrease had to be balanced by a temperature boost. This implies a stage when

 the core warms up:

 Stellar models for the portion N-0 of the evolutionary track may be defined as

 the portion of the evolution where the core begins to warm up. Along the portion
 L-M there was some degree of heating of the core, from about 13 x 106oK to
 about 20 x 106oK. This rise was occasioned mainly by the proton-proton chain's

 being the main source of energy production for stellar models near L. Once the

 carbon cycle becomes the main source of energy production, as it is near M, the

 value of Ti [= temperature in the core] stays nearly constant at 20 x 106oK until

 the neighbourhood at N is reached. Then a further stage of heating sets in.158

 The computations for the inner zone of the star showed that, along with a core
 mass increase from approximately 0.3 to 0.6, temperature also grew from about 20
 to 50 x 106K, and the star's luminosity underwent a huge boost from a few tens
 to about ten thousand solar luminosities. As for the radius, it could not be deduced

 from the configurations of the core as it depended upon the boundary conditions of

 the star. More specifically, luminosity turned out to be determined by the core's mass

 during evolution and to be scarcely dependent upon surface temperature and radius,
 whereas surface temperature and (for a given luminosity) the radius itself resulted

 scarcely dependent upon the mass content of the core but strongly dependent upon the
 boundary conditions.

 As for surface conditions, with special emphasis on the newly introduced convec-
 tive zone, Hoyle and Schwarzschild carefully described the structure of the stellar
 atmosphere by dividing it into three regions:

 (1) an upper photospheric region with isothermal equilibrium; (2) a lower photo-

 spheric region in which energy flow is predominantly by radiation (convection
 may occur in this region but is unable to convey the whole energy flux); and
 (3) a convection zone in which the energy flow is predominantly by convec-
 tion. The convection is divided into two parts, a thin outer shell in which the
 ionization of hydrogen is incomplete and the deeper zone that runs into the
 interior solution.159

 158 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 19).

 159 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 21).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 260 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 15 Comparison between
 the observational H-R diagram
 for a globular cluster (shaded
 area ) and the calculated models

 overtopped by a convective
 envelope. The numbers indicate
 the mass fraction of the core

 (which grows over time). Circles

 refer to type-II giants, crosses to

 type-I giants (from Hoyle and
 Schwarzschild 1955, p. 27).
 Reprinted with kind permission
 of the American Astronomical

 Society

 An elaborate analysis of this multi-layered atmosphere and of the way it fitted the

 interior led to estimate the value of R/Rq as determined by L/L0 • I* turned out that, as

 luminosity increased up to values of the order of 7000L©, radius enlargement reached
 values of the order of 160/?о- The representative points were depicted in the H-R
 diagram (Fig. 15).

 A comparison between Figs. 14 and 15 shows that a core mass ratio around 0.20

 acts as the "turning point" in the steepness of the giant branch. "For earlier models

 (i.e. with the mass ratio below 0.2) - the authors commented - it seems highly likely
 that convection in the envelope plays only a minor role".160

 From Fig. 15, there appears to be a fair agreement between calculated models and

 observations, except for the models with a larger core/mass ratio, e.g. 0.55. According
 to Hoyle and Schwarzschild, this could be due to an assumption they made while

 discussing the atmosphere, namely that the supply of free electrons was mainly due to

 hydrogen. Clearly, at decreasing Te ff the contribution by metals is expected to exceed

 the contribution by hydrogen at some point, even if metals are supposed to be present in

 a very small amount. According to the calculations, the hydrogen-metal ratio required
 to overcome the discrepancy and to shift the 0.55 point downwards to meet the giant
 branch must be of the order of % 105, in fair agreement with coeval spectroscopic
 data.

 Moreover, this observation fostered Hoyle and Schwarzschild's interest in metal-

 richer stars, like Type-I giants. Assuming a hydrogen-to-metals ratio of the order of
 ъ 104, the resulting models for type-I giant turned out to be less luminous than for

 type II, in good agreement with the observations: "in the photospheric regions [...]
 the metal content [. . .] greatly affects the extent of the tenuous envelope, i.e. the radius
 of the star." 161

 One final issue still remains open: what happens after the star has reached the

 topmost point О of its evolutionary curve? Why does not brightness get any larger?

 100 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 27).

 161 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 30).

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 261

 All models constructed so far rested upon the isothermal core assumption. The

 steady boost in its temperature along the NO track goes hand in hand with the increase

 in energy generation and in brightness. But at some point the isothermal condition

 begins to fade. As more and more material is added to the core, gravitational energy is

 released. This generates a temperature gradient capable of triggering a flux of energy

 out of the core. Such en energy flux is proportional to the rate at which helium is added
 to the core, i.e. to the star's brightness.162 As a consequence of that, the isothermal

 condition becomes increasingly questionable as the star climbs the NO track.

 But what is the effect of a rising temperature in the innermost part of the core? As

 long as the inner part of the core maintains an essentially degenerate structure, the

 temperature increase has little effect on pressure and consequently on core structure:

 "it therefore appears that a really marked deviation from the models discussed is con-

 tingent on the core's assuming a non-degenerate structure, even in its inner part."163
 It remained to be decided what process could remove the core's degeneracy.

 That process was probably - Hoyle and Schwarzschild argued - helium ignition,
 as suggested by Salpeter in 1952 and by Hoyle himself in 1954. 164 Helium fusion
 can cause problems when it takes place in a degenerate material. As is well known,
 a degenerate gas cannot balance itself by expanding if the energy production ratio is

 too high. Provided the star does not explode altogether, degeneracy must be removed

 at some point. According to the two scholars, this was the reason why the star stopped

 its ascent along the giant branch. Hoyle and Schwarzschild performed a quantitative

 analysis to tackle that issue. The helium ignition temperature was assumed to lie at
 1 .2 ж 108 K. This led to estimate that the luminosity at which such a temperature was

 achieved in the centre must be around 5000 L0 - the same order of magnitude of point

 О in the diagram. This conclusion was the same for both type-I and -II giants.165

 These considerations made an analysis of the OP track of Fig. 13 finally possible.

 The authors considered these stars to have a non-degenerate core, a double nuclear

 energy source resulting from helium burning in the core and hydrogen burning in the
 shell, and an enclosing radiative envelope (convection in the envelope was no longer

 considered). Due to the strong dependence of helium fusion on temperature, a convec-
 tive innermost zone could be expected. Calculations were carried out in a way similar

 to previous investigations, and results (shown in Fig. 16) were reckoned to be "not
 entirely discouraging".166

 At first, these stars began to slip down the giant branch, then moved mainly to the

 left, parallel to the О P path, although, roughly one order of magnitude above it. Hoyle

 162 Provided £ continues to be mainly sustained by nuclear reactions in the shell, i.e. provided the con-

 tribution of gravitational energy to L is minor. Hoyle and Schwarzschild reckoned this assumption to be
 valid, as they thought that the release of gravitational energy had the main effect to heat up the core.

 163 Hoyie an(j Schwarzschild (1955, p.31).

 164 Salpeter (1952) and Hoyle (1954).

 165 Due to the fact that their work is, in the authors' words, "a preliminary reconnaissance of the problem"

 (see also note 151), small discrepancies between the estimated value of 5000 Lq and the actual position of

 the point О should not be overrated. A greater problem seems to arise from the fact that the points associ-
 ated to type-I giants lie much lower down. Hoyle and Schwarzschild ascribed this to different bolometric
 corrections for the two star types.

 166 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 37).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 262 D. Cenadelli

 Fig. 16 H-R diagram with the
 whole evolution of type-II stars.
 The squares stand for the
 helium-burning calculated
 models (with core to total mass

 ratios equal to 0.60, 0.70 and
 0.80); filled and open circles
 have the same meaning as in
 Figs. 14 and 15 respectively
 (from Hoyle and Schwarzschild
 1955, p. 36). Reprinted with
 kind permission of the American
 Astronomical Society

 and Schwarzschild regarded this as possibly due to the fact that all helium had to burn

 up before the cores attained a mass ratio of 0.7. This led to an even more complicated
 model, with an inner (perhaps partially degenerate and isothermal) carbon core and a

 helium-burning shell. But the integration of such a model was judged by the authors
 to be beyond the scope of their paper.

 The paper by Hoyle and Schwarzschild is rightfully considered to be a pivotal work

 in the history of twentieth-century stellar astrophysics, especially when it comes to the

 giants issue. As we said, it provided the first sound model of red giant stars. Moreover,

 it depicted a grand scenario that brought together contributions from different fields:

 the concepts developed by Hoyle and Schwarzschild themselves and their colleagues
 regarding giant stars, as well as suggestions from the theory of stellar atmospheres
 and recent insights from nuclear physics about the helium ignition stage.

 Moreover, Hoyle and Schwarzschilďs paper plays a symbolic role, in that it "marks

 the end of the older era of stellar models, when models were generated one at a time
 by incredibly tedious work using hand-operated office desk calculators. This allowed

 snap-shot views of a star's history, but conveyed only a rough sense of evolution".167
 Here and there this difficulty surfaces in the words of the scientists involved as a vindi-

 cation for making reasonable approximations. For example Hoyle and Schwarzschild
 stated that "the arithmetical work was found to be so heavy that it seemed desirable,

 always remembering that the present investigation is only a preliminary reconnais-
 sance, to introduce an approximation into the calculations."168 The two scientists also

 remarked, towards the end of their 1955 paper, that the huge difficulties they met in
 carrying on the calculations possibly were "an indication that an entirely new line of

 attack is desirable. In this case, we feel that the new line may turn out to be a fully
 automatic representation, using large electrical machines".169

 167 Amy (1990, p. 225).

 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, p. 15).

 Hoyle and Schwarzschild (1955, pp. 39-40).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 263

 1955 was also the year when the first computer-based stellar models appeared.170

 This opened up an era of much easier calculations and the subsequent possibility to
 develop more complex stellar models. The research fields involved in stellar evolu-
 tion that benefited from it include convection in stellar envelopes, nuclear reactions

 beyond hydrogen fusion (helium ignition, helium flash, further reactions up to iron
 formation), post-giant evolution, mass loss.171 Clearly, some of them were already
 included in Hoyle' and Schwarzschilďs work.

 10 Conclusions

 All things considered, the road that led to the recognition of giants as evolved stars and

 to a satisfactory description of their structure was long but not excessively winding.
 The discontinuity of the twenties was followed by a period of "normal science"172
 that lasted at least until the 1950s, during which a number of scholars focused on

 explaining the evolutionary role played by giant stars.

 What was the interplay of theory and observation in solving the giants issue, and

 how did progress in both fields influence the search for a solution?

 Major advances were made in observational astronomy during the decades con-
 sidered. In fields of astrophysics such as cosmology, ground-breaking achievements

 opened up new scenarios for the structure of the universe. On the other hand, if we
 restrict our analysis to the field we are dealing with, namely stellar astrophysics, we

 can easily spot a number of significant results like the study of the H-R diagram of

 globular clusters and the discovery of the existence of two populations of stars. Obvi-
 ously enough, these achievements had an impact on the giants issue in the final part
 of the timeframe investigated in this paper. However, in our opinion they cannot be

 considered ground-breaking observations: from an observational viewpoint, the giants

 issue was already well established in the 1910s. The new observational data gathered

 afterwards provided additional insights that had to be incorporated in the theories, but
 did not have an impact on the basic features of the issue as a whole.

 The issue was mainly a theoretical one. The final breakthroughs that led to a sat-

 isfactory explanation of the giants' structure came in steps. The ideas put forth by
 Strömgren, Gamow, etc. laid the foundations for further speculations. Of course, one
 should not forget that scientists went down a number of blind alleys as well. Some

 of them unveiled new possible paths to be pursued, others did not. Furthermore, the
 scientists involved depicted evolutionary paths on the H-R diagram that were to be
 discarded afterwards. But this was fully to be expected. These considerations do by
 no means affect the conclusion that, all in all, the solution to the giants issue should

 be regarded as "normal science".

 170 Henyey et al. ( 1955a, b).

 171 For a first-level elaboration about these topics see Amy (1990, pp. 225-227), Tassoul and Tassoul
 (2004, pp. 152-158).

 172 Such a term is to be put in quotes, as it is not meant in a fully Kuhnian sense. For the same reason,
 the birth of theoretical astrophysics can more accurately be described as a discontinuity rather than as a
 revolution. See also note 1.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 264 D. Cenadelli

 The issue was mainly a theoretical one, as I said. At a closer inspection, although the

 onset of nuclear physics obviously played a crucial role, the description of degenerate

 gas behaviour and the rejection of electron-proton annihilation (in turn an outcome
 of the mass-energy equivalence principle) were also important. However, although
 the inclusion of nuclear physics theories into astrophysics was a necessary and huge

 step, it was rather different in character from the discontinuity that the ground-break-

 ing inclusion of atomic physics had brought about in a previous period. It was only

 natural that the theories about the nucleus should enter the existing field of theoretical

 astrophysics and provide scientists with new tools to look deeper into the mysteries of

 stellar matter, building on a picture of stellar structure that was already available. From

 nuclear physics scholars took what they needed to integrate stellar structure equations.

 Having reached the end of the long road that led to a satisfactory understanding

 of red-giants structure, it might be appropriate to hint at an issue that has basically

 remained in the background so far. What does physically cause red giants to be formed?

 Answering this question is by no means a straightforward task. As we saw, the descrip-

 tion of the structure of red giants resulted from a huge number of time-consuming

 numerical integrations. Clearly, there is no other way to try and figure out the steps of

 stellar evolution. But telling the technical aspects of integration apart from the essen-

 tial underlying physics is not easy. If there is but one message to take home from the

 quest for an explanation of giants, it is that a complex interplay of several primary
 causes is at work here.

 The difficulty of developing a simple physical explanation of red giants becomes
 apparent when reading books about their nature. Entry-level books point to the core
 collapse and core-envelope uncoupling as main factors that cause giants to puff up.
 Which they are, of course. But the other factors are seldom mentioned. Higher-level
 books are obviously very accurate, but usually much more focused on integration. I
 think it fair to conclude by highlighting this issue, as well as the existence of consider-

 able literature about it.173 This might be an interesting topic for further investigation
 work.

 References

 33:211-233.

 Applegate, J.H. 1988. Why stars become red giants. Astrophysical Journal 329:803-807.
 Amy, T. 1 990. The star makers: a history of the theories of stellar structure and evolution. Vistas in Astronomy

 Arp, H.C., Baum, W.A., and Sandage, A.S. 1952. The HR diagrams for the globular clusters M 92 and M

 Arp, H.C., Baum, W.A., and Sandage, A.S. 1953. The color-magnitude diagram of the globular cluster M

 Atkinson, R.d'E., and Houtermans, G. 1929. Zur Frage der Aufbaumöglichkeit der Elemente in Sterne.

 Baade, W. 1944. The resolution of Messier 32, NGC 205, and the central region of the Andromeda Nebula.

 3. Astronomical Journal 57:4-5.

 92. Astronomical Journal 58:4-9.

 Zeitschrift für Physik 54:656-665.

 Astrophysical Journal 1 00: 1 37- 1 46.

 173 This topic is discussed, for example, in Yahil and van der Horn (1985), Applegate (1988), Celnikier
 (1990), Renzini et al. (1992), Faulkner (1997), Eggleton et al. (1998). Whitworth stated that "a simple
 explanation of giantness simply does not exist." (Whitworth 1989, p. 505). This list of references is just a
 tentative suggestion for further elaboration and should not be regarded as exhaustive.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Beech, M. 1988. The Schoenberg-Chandrasekhar limit: a polytropic approximation. Astrophysics and Space

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 265

 58:169-177.

 Publishing.

 Press.

 91:92-108.

 94:768-782.

 Science 147:219-227.

 Celnikier, L.M. 1990. A simple way to assess the structure of red giants. American Journal of Physics

 Celnikier, L.M. 2006. Find a hotter place! A history of nuclear astrophysics. Singapore: World Scientific

 Cenadelli, D. 2008. The hydrogen abundance in stars: a first major step for quantitative astrophysics. Journal

 of Astronomical History and Heritage 11:1 34-145.

 Chandrasekhar, S. 1939. An introduction to the study of stellar structure. Chicago: University of Chicago

 Collins, G.W. II. 1989. The fundamentals of stellar astrophysics. New York: W H Freeman & Co.
 Cowling, T.G. 1930. On a point-source model of a star. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 Cowling, T.G. 1931. Note on the fitting of polytropic models in the theory of stellar structure. Monthly

 Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 9 1 :472-478.

 Cowling, T.G. 1934. The stability of gaseous stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 Cowling, T.G. 1935a. The stability of gaseous stars (Second paper). Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-

 nomical Society 96:42-60.

 Cowling, T.G. 1935b. Convection in stars. Observatory 58:243-247.
 Cowling, T.G. 1966. The development of the theory of stellar structure. Quarterly Journal of the Royal

 Astronomical Society 7: 121-137.

 Critchfiled, C.L., and Gamow, G. 1939. The shell-source stellar model. Astrophysical Journal 89:244-254.
 DeVorkin, D.H., and Kenat, R. 1983a. Quantum physics and the stars (I): the establishment of a stellar

 temperature scale. Journal for the History of Astronomy 14: 102-132.

 DeVorkin, D.H., and Kenat, R. 1983b. Quantum physics and the stars (II): Henry Noms Russell and the
 abundances of the elements in the atmospheres of the Sun and stars. Journal for the History of Astronomy
 14:180-222.

 Dingle, H. 1 963. A hundred years of spectroscopy. The British Journal for the History of Science 1 : 1 99-2 1 6.

 Eddington, A.S. 1916. On the radiative equilibrium of the stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

 Eddington, A.S. 1917. Further notes on the radiative equilibrium or the stars. Monthly Notices oj the Royal

 Eddington, A.S. 1924a. The absorption of radiation inside a star. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

 Society 77:16-35.

 Astronomical Society 77:596-612.

 Society 84:104-123.

 Eddington, A.S. 1924b. On the relation between the masses and luminosities of the stars. Monthly Notices

 of the Royal Astronomical Society 84:308-332.

 Eddington, A.S. 1927. Stars and atoms. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Eddington, A.S. 1 932. The hydrogen content of the stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 Eddington, A.S. 1938. Star models with variable polytropic index. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronom-

 92:471-481.

 ical Society 99:4-13.

 Eggleton, P.P., Faulkner, J., and Cannon, R.C. 1998. A small contribution to the giant problem. Monthly

 Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 298:83 1-834.

 Faulkner, J. 1997. Why stars don't become red giants - and why they DO! Advances in Stellar Evolution,
 Proceedings of the Workshop Stellar Ecology, held in Marciana Marina, Elba, Italy, 23-29 June 1 996 ,
 9-10.

 Gamow, G. 1938a. Nuclear energy sources and stellar evolution. Physical Review 53:595-604.
 Gamow, G. 1938b. A star model with selective thermo-nuclear source. Astrophysical Journal 87:206-208.
 Gamow, G. 1938c. Tracks of stellar evolution. Physical Review 53:907-908.
 Gamow, G. 1939a. The energy-producing reaction in the Sun. Astrophysical Journal 89:130-133.
 Gamow, G. 1939b. Physical possibilities of stellar evolution. Physical Review 55:718-725.
 Gamow, G. 1939c. Nuclear reactions in stellar evolution. Nature 144:575-577.
 Gamow, G. 1944. The evolution of contracting stars. Physical Review 65:20-32.
 Gamow, G. 1945. The red-giant stage of stellar evolution. Physical Review 67: 120-121 .
 Gamow, G., and Keller, G. 1945. A shell source model for red giant stars. Reviews of Modern Physics

 17:125-137.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Gamow, G., and Teller, E. 1939. Energy production in red giants. Physical Review 55:791.
 Gardiner, J.G. 1951. A model of a red giant star. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 266 D. Cenadelli

 Gingerich, O., and Lang, K. (eds.). 1979. Л source book in astronomy and astrophysics, 1900-1975 . Cam-

 111:102-110

 bridge: Harvard University Press.

 Goldberg, L. 1988. Atomic spectroscopy and astrophysics. Physics Today 41:38-45.
 Hall Harrison, M. 1944. The generalized Cowling Model. Astrophysical Journal 100:343-346.
 Hall Harrison, M. 1946. Stellar models with partially degenerate isothermal cores and point-source enve-

 lopes. Astrophysical Journal 103: 193-206.

 Härm, R., and Schwarzschild, M. 1955. Inhomogeneous stellar models. IV. Models with continuously

 varying chemical composition. Astrophysical Journal 121 :445-453.

 Hearnshaw, J.B. 1986. The analysis of starlight: one hundred and fifty years of astronomical spectroscopy.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Hen, L., and Schwarzschild, M. 1949. Red-giant models with chemical inhomogeneities. Monthly Notices

 of the Royal Astronomical Society 109:631-646.

 Henrich, L.R., and Chandrasekhar, S. 1941. Stellar models with isothermal cores. Astrophysical Journal

 94:525-536.

 Henyey, L.G., Lelevier, R., and Levée, R.D. 1955a. The early phases of stellar evolution. Publications of

 the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 67: 154-160.

 Henyey, L.G., Lelevier, R., and Levée, R.D. 1955b. Evolution of Sirius. Publications of the Astronomical

 Society of the Pacific 67:341-342.

 Herrmann, D.B. 1984. The history of astronomy from Herschel to Hertzsprung. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Press.

 Hoskin, M. (ed.). 1999. The Cambridge concise history of astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University

 Hoyle, F. 1954. On nuclear reactions occuring in very hot stars. I. The synthesis of elements from carbon

 to nickel. Astrophysical Journal Supplement 1:121-146.

 Hoyle, F., and Lyttleton, R.A. 1942a. On the internal constitution of the stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal

 Hoyle, F., and Lyttleton, R.A. 1942b. On the nature of red giant stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-

 Hoyle, F., and Lyttleton, R.A. 1946. Note on stellar structure. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

 Astronomical Society 1 02: 1 77- 1 93 .

 nomical Society 102:218-225.

 Society 106:525-530.

 Hoyle, F., and Lyttleton, R.A. 1949. The structure of stars of non-uniform composition. Monthly Notices of

 the Royal Astronomical Society 109:614-630.

 Hoyle, F., and Schwarzschild, M. 1955. On the evolution of type II stars. Astrophysical Journal Supplement

 2:1-40.

 227.

 Hufbauer, K. 2006. Stellar structure and evolution, 1924-39. Journal for the History of Astronomy 37:203-

 Kippenhahn, R., and Weigert, A. 1990. Stellar structure and evolution. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer.
 Kuiper, G.P. 1937. On the hydrogen content of clusters. Astrophysical Journal 86:176-197.
 Leverington, D. 1995. A history of astronomy from 1890 to the present. London: Springer.

 Longair, M.S. 2007. The cosmic century: a history of astrophysics and cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Masani, A. 1984. Astrofisica. Roma: Editori Riuniti.

 Meadows, J. 1984. The origins of astrophysics. American Scientist 72:269-274.

 Menzel, D.H. 1972. The history of astronomical spectroscopy I: qualitative chemical analysis and radial
 velocities and The history of astronomical spectroscopy II: quantitative chemical analysis and the struc-
 ture of the solar atmosphere. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 198:225-244.

 Mestel, L. 2004. Arthur Stanley Eddington: pioneer of stellar structure theory. Journal of Astronomical

 History and Heritage 7:65-73.

 91:4-55.

 Milne, E.A. 1930. The analysis of stellar structure. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 Оке, J. В., and Schwarzschild, M. 1952. Inhomogeneous stellar models. I. Models with a convective core

 and a discontinuity in the chemical composition. Astrophysical Journal 1 16:317-330.

 Öpik, E. 1939. Stellar structure, source of energy, and evolution. Publications de l'Observatoire Astrono-

 mique de Г Université' de Tartu 30:1-1 15.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solving the Giant Stars Problem 267

 Osterbrock, D.E. 1953. The internal structure of red dwarf stars. Astrophysical Journal 1 18:529-546.

 Payne, C.H. 1925. Stellar atmospheres; a contribution to the observational study of high temperature in the

 reversing layers of stars. Harvard Observatory Monographs, no. 1 . Cambridge.

 Prialnik, D. 2000. An introduction to the theory of stellar structure and evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge

 Rebsdorf, S.O. 2007. Bengt Strömgren: interstellar glow, helium content, and solar life supply, 1932-1940.

 Univerity Press.

 Centaurus 49:56-79.

 Renzini, A., Greggio, L., Ritossa, С., and Ferrario, L. 1992. Why stars inflate to and deflate from red giant

 dimensions. Astrophysical Journal 400:280-303.

 Richardson, R.S., and Schwarzschild, M. 1948. A stellar model for red giants of high central temperature.

 Russell, H.N. 1914. Relations between the spectra and other characteristics of the stars. Nature 93, 227-23 1 ,

 Astrophysical Journal 108:373-387.

 252-258 and 281-286.

 Russell, H.N. 1925. The problem of stellar evolution. Nature 1 16:209-212.
 Russell, H.N. 1929. On the composition of the Sun's atmosphere. Astrophysical Journal 70:1 1-82.
 Salpeter, E.E. 1952. Nuclear reactions in stars without hydrogen. Astrophysical Journal 1 15:326-328.
 Sandage, A.R. 1954. A survey of present knowledge of globular clusters and its significance for stellar evo-
 lution. Les Processus Nucléaires dans les Astres, Communications présentées au cinquième Colloque
 International d'Astrophysique tenu à Liège les 10-12 Septembre, 1953 , 254-274.

 Sandage, A.R., and Schwarzschild, M. 1952. Inhomogeneous stellar models. II. Models with exhausted

 cores in gravitational contraction. Astrophysical Journal 1 16:463-476.

 Schönberg, M., and Chandrasekhar, S. 1942. On the evolution of the main-sequence star. Astrophysical

 Journal 96:161-172.

 Schwarzschild, M., Rabinowitz, I., and Härm, R. 1953. Inhomogeneous stellar models. III. Models with

 partially degenerate isothermal cores. Astrophysical Journal 1 1 8:326-334.

 Sitterly, B.W. 1970. Changing interpretations of the Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram, 1910-1940: a historical

 note. Vistas in Astronomy 12:357-366.

 Smith, R.C. 1995. Observational astrophysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Srinivasan, G. 1996. Stars: their structure and evolution. Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 17:53-76.
 Strömgren, В. 1931a. The possible solutions of the "equations of fit" on the Standard Model. Monthly

 Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 9 1 :466-472.

 Strömgren, В. 1931b. The point-source model with coefficient of opacity к = kjpT J . Zeitschrift fir

 Strömgren, В. 1932. The opacity of stellar matter and the hydrogen content of the stars. Zeitschrift fir

 Strömgren, В. 1933. On the interpretation of the Hertzsprung-Russell-Diagram. Zeitschrift fir Astrophysik

 Strömgren, В. 1938. On the helium and hydrogen content of the interior of the stars. Astrophysical Journal

 Strömgren, В. 1972. The rise of astrophysics. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 198:245-254.
 Tassoul, J.-L., and Tassoul, M. 2004. A concise history of solar and stellar physics. Princeton: Princeton

 Tayler, R.J. 1954. Evolution of massive stars. Astrophysical Journal 120:332-341.

 Trumpler, R.J. 1925. Spectral types in open clusters. Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific

 Wares, G.W. 1944. Partially degenerate stellar models. Astrophysical Journal 100:158-175.
 Whitworth, A.P. 1989. Why red giants are giant. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society

 Yahil, A., and van der Horn, L. 1985. Why do giants puff up? Astrophysical Journal 296:554-564.

 Astrophysik 2:345-369.

 Astrophysik 4: 1 1 8-152.

 7:222-248.

 87:520-534.

 University Press.

 37:307-318.

 236:505-544.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:41:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

