 

 

 

 

Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff: approaching a qualitative definition
Author(s): Tatiana Roque
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 3 (May 2011), pp. 295-342
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134349
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:24 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (201 1) 65:295-342
 DOI 10.1007/800407-011-0079-0

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff:
 approaching a qualitative definition

 Tatiana Roque

 Received: 14 July 2010 / Published online: 9 April 201 1
 © The Authors) 201 1. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

 Abstract The article investigates the different conceptions of stability found in

 qualitative studies on the solutions of differential equations. We start from the defini-

 tions proposed by Poincaré and criticized by Birkhoff for not being fully qualitative,

 and show that the clarification of the criterion for stating that a property is qualitative

 comes precisely with Birkhoff. In addition, we note that the stability conceptions of

 Lyapunov and Levi-Civita are also important in this transition from the appearance

 of the first qualitative tools in the study of differential equations to the definition of

 stability in use in dynamical systems theory. The history of stability can help to explain

 the meaning of the word "qualitative" in this context.

 1 Introduction

 At the end of the nineteenth century, Henri Poincaré proposed a qualitative approach

 for the analysis of the solutions of differential equations. His article "Sur les courbes

 définies par une équation différentielle"1 is well known as a starting point in this kind

 of treatment (Poincaré 1881, 1882, 1885a, 1886). Its third and fourth parts, published,

 respectively, in 1 885 and 1 886, introduce some conceptual tools that would later prove
 useful for his research on celestial mechanics, and in the 1890s he wrote two further

 works on this same topic, (Poincaré 1890) and (Poincaré 1892-1899). As we will see

 later in this article, one of the main features of a qualitative treatment is to regard

 1 "Sur les courbes" from now onwards in this article.

 Communicated by : Jeremy Gray.

 T. Roque (S)
 Instituto de Matemática, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, P.O. Box 68530,
 Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21941-909, Brazil

 e-mail: tati@im.ufrj.br

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 differential equation solutions as trajectories of a moving body. In this context, the

 term "trajectory" designates a solution.

 Today, the qualitative analysis of differential equations is defined as the direct study

 of the geometry or topology of the set of solutions. This treatment has replaced the

 search for the properties of individual solution given by means of series developments.

 However, this is merely the current mathematical interpretation. The different mean-

 ings that the word "qualitative" has assumed throughout history still need a proper

 296 T. Roque

 investigation.

 It is worth noticing that Poincaré did not oppose qualitative and quantitative

 approaches. One important historical question thus arises: when did mathematicians

 start to distinguish qualitative from quantitative methods? It is our intention to answer

 the question in the particular context of stability. In our perspective, an inquiry into

 the development of the different definitions of stability emerges as an occasion to

 understand the exact meaning of the adjective "qualitative" when associated with the
 new methods introduced by Poincaré.

 Several historians of mathematics have already studied the works of Poincaré on the

 qualitative theory of differential equations, but not with the same concerns as ours.2

 One of the first works on the topic was written by Christian Gilain in 1977. In Gilain

 (1977), he analyzes the paper "Sur les courbes" in detail, showing its relationship
 with traditional research works on differential equations. Gilain (1991), relates the
 methods that Poincaré uses to describe the global aspect of two dimensional trajecto-

 ries to the theory of algebraic curves and some aspects of his treatment of solutions

 are compared with those of other mathematicians. Jeremy Gray (1992) offers a wide
 account of how Poincaré uses the mathematics of his time, especially topology, in his

 qualitative works, and explains their application to different topics such as planetary

 astronomy, dynamics, and celestial mechanics.

 Jean-Luc Chabert and Amy-Dahan Dalmedico (1992) study in the new methods

 introduced by Poincaré in "Sur les courbes" and in his works on celestial mechanics,

 highlighting their geometrical nature. In a historical research more concerned with
 the heritage of Poincaré, Dahan-Dalmedico (1996) summarizes his most important

 qualitative results, focusing on their reception by different mathematicians in differ-

 ent countries. Special attention is given to Birkhoff, considered "the only true disciple
 of Henri Poincaré in the West" (Dahan-Dalmedico 1996, p. 24). Poincaré's articles on

 the three body problem are discussed in depth in the book of Barrow-Green Poincaré
 and the Three Body Problem (Barrow-Green 1997). In Barrow-Green (1994), she had

 already analyzed the erroneous paper that Poincaré presented to the competition that
 celebrated the 60th birthday of King Oscar of Sweden and Norway in 1889 (Poincaré
 1889). The efforts made to correct the error gave rise to another paper published in
 1890 (Poincaré 1890). Barrow-Green compares both versions explaining the context

 in which they appeared.

 All these works mention the question of stability, but their goal is not to proceed

 into a deep investigation of the different mathematical ways in which this concept
 can be defined. More recently, in a PhD thesis about the conception of "general" in

 2 Nabonnand (2000) gives an account of the historical studies about Poincaré in various domains, and in

 particular in the qualitative theory of differential equations.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 297

 the works of Poincaré, Robadey (2006) notes that there are two different notions of

 stability in the two versions of the paper submitted to the competition. We will return

 later to her remarks on the subject in order to stress the different notions of stability

 found in the qualitative works of Poincaré and some of his followers. Other research

 works related to stability problems, treated from a qualitative point of view, will also

 be studied, such as the work of Aleksandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov.

 Mawhin (1994) discusses the novelty of Lyapunov's works on differential equa-

 tions and the theory of stability, paying special attention to the new fields he opened
 in mathematics and in applied domains (such as control theory). He also makes a

 comparison between Lyapunov and Poincaré and comments on the reception of their

 works by the French research community on differential equations. This last topic is
 analyzed in detail in (Mawhin 1996). In the context of Italian mathematics, we will
 look at Tullio Levi-Civita's works on stability and qualitative analysis, which have
 already been studied in Dell'Aglio and Israel (1989, 1987). These authors highlight
 the innovative character of Levi-Civita's approach to the three body problem, but also
 what he owes to tradition.

 In all these historical texts, the definitions of stability proposed by each of the
 mathematicians appear as part of a whole analysis of their works. Here, we aim to

 draw on all these references, returning to the primary sources whenever necessary, but

 focusing on the mathematical definitions of stability. Our question is not to analyze
 the work of a particular mathematician. Rather, we seek the relations between the

 different stability definitions proposed by each mathematician, trying to identify to

 which cultural context the definition of stability belongs.

 This article thus differs from the works cited above as it does not aim to study a

 particular mathematician, stressing the originality of his work. We propose a history

 of the mathematical definitions that the concept of stability has been associated with,

 presenting the different meanings it has assumed at the hands of different mathema-

 ticians, which were all recognized as belonging to the same field. Nor do we wish to

 analyze a particular problem concerning stability, such as the problems of the stability

 of the solar system or the stability of equilibria. They give rise to different mathemati-

 cal definitions of stability, and our goal is only to inquire into the links between them,

 instead of describing stability results in a specific problem.3

 Why this special interest on the question of stability? The topic has particular rel-

 evance for the constitution of the new mathematical discipline now called dynamical

 systems theory. As often occurs in the history of mathematics, a new field gains an
 identity when some procedures already in use are isolated and discussed. The first
 mathematician to propose a reflection on the nature of qualitative methods and the
 novelty they represent was George David Birkhoff. These questions emerged in his
 works in the 1910s in connection with a discussion of the most adequate stability
 definition to be used in a qualitative treatment.

 A brief description of some stability conceptions found in the works of Lagrange, Poincaré, and Lyapunov,
 and related to dynamical systems and modern control theory, is given by Leine (2010). Notwithstanding
 the legitimate goal of showing the differences between the definitions put forward by each mathematician,
 the article is not concerned with historical analysis.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 298 T. Roque

 The expression "dynamical systems" - in the context of mathematical studies on

 differential equations - appears for the first time in the title of one of his articles "Quel-

 ques théorèmes sur le mouvement des systèmes dynamiques", presented in 1909 to the

 American Mathematical Society and published in 1912 (Birkhoff 1912). He defined a

 dynamical system as any system of ordinary differential equations in which the inde-

 pendent variable is interpreted as being the time, while other variables are coordinates

 of a "movement". Birkhoff (1927a) published the first treatise on the domain called

 Dynamical Systems, aiming to present to a large public the main definitions and con-

 ceptual tools that distinguish this new discipline from the traditional field of research

 devoted to differential equations.

 We do not deny that Poincaré was the true creator of the qualitative approach, since

 he proposed key methods for a new treatment of differential equations. However, in

 order to identify the birth of a new theory, it is necessary to go beyond the search for

 methods now recognized as pertaining to this theory. Indeed, we can say that the field

 of dynamical systems was not created until its methods were explicitly defined as qual-

 itative as opposed to the older ones. From this standpoint, the theory as such started

 with the works of Birkhoff, in particular those in which he discussed the appropriate

 qualitative definition for stability. A criterion for distinguishing different definitions

 of stability and their role in the characterization of qualitative methods became clear in

 Birkhoff 's works from the 1920s on. Eventually, he (Birkhoff 1935, p. 310) explicitly

 affirmed that the term "stability", once applied to the property of Poisson periodicity
 (defined below) that had been taken into consideration by Poincaré 50 years before,
 was "unfortunate".

 Therefore, we have a twofold goal. First, we want to show that the works of Poin-

 caré do not represent a break with the classical research in differential equations and
 celestial mechanics. His writings on these topics combine, in an indifferent manner,

 traditional and original methods proposed by him for the first time. The task of the

 historian is not only to identify what is new in his works, but also what they take from

 the previous tradition. Our second goal is a consequence of the first, as we seek to
 show that a criterion for distinguishing a qualitative approach appears previously in
 the work of Levi-Civita, and then in Birkhoff 's, in connection with the discussion on

 the many ways stability can be defined.

 This distinguishes our case study of stability from other historical studies on qual-

 itative methods. By elucidating the many different concepts of stability, particularly
 in the work of Birkhoff, it became possible for dynamical systems to emerge as
 a mathematical theory - more precisely as a mathematical theory of a qualitative
 nature.

 Our choice of the texts to be analyzed follows Birkhoff 's suggestions. He mentioned

 several texts of Poincaré and questioned his definitions of stability. Some works by

 Levi-Civita, in particular an article of 1901, were mentioned by Birkhoff as having

 provided a more adequate stability conception for a qualitative treatment. This mathe-
 matician made reference to Lyapunov's work on the stability of movements, although

 most of his texts had not yet been translated at that time.

 We start in the following section by examining the traditional conceptions of sta-

 bility in use in the treatment of solar system and problems concerning the stability of

 equilibria during the second half of the nineteenth century, which directly influenced

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 299

 Poincaré and Lyapunov. We close the section with a list of the stability definitions to

 be analyzed.

 The third section describes the context in which Poincaré defined stability in

 the article "Sur les courbes" and shows how this definition is used in his works

 on celestial mechanics. Stability appears there in association with a special kind of

 periodicity for an individual trajectory, connected with its long term behavior. None-

 theless, there is an implicit conception of stability throughout his works, which is

 revealed when he requires the trajectories to be confined within some region in their
 domain.

 We consider this conception to be implicit because the mathematical field of dynam-

 ical systems did not exist at that time. From the moment the qualitative theory was
 isolated as a specific approach, we claim that a stability conception proper to this
 domain had already been present in the works of Poincaré, but only in retrospect.
 We will explore the different definitions of stability in those works. An important
 example is the stability of a periodic solution, which will play a central role in our
 analysis.

 The notion of stability used in the three body problem is very different from the

 one employed in problems involving the stability of equilibria, even though both
 are formulated by the same mathematicians. The question in the stability of equi-
 libria is to investigate what happens when the initial conditions are perturbed, and
 therefore it engages in an analysis of the entire set of trajectories. A definition of
 the same kind for an arbitrary trajectory has been called "perturbative" stability by
 Birkhoff.

 In the fourth section, we consider the differences between stability definitions used

 for an individual trajectory and the ones proposed directly for the whole set of tra-
 jectories. In this context, Lyapunov introduced a new mathematical characterization
 of stability. Such step is fundamental inasmuch as it allows a clarification of the

 meaning of "qualitative" when it appears associated with a mathematical definition of

 stability.

 An analogous definition was employed by Levi-Civita in his works on the three

 body problem. By making an innovative use of the methods proposed by Poincaré, he

 applied the stability of equilibria to the study of a neighborhood of a periodic trajec-

 tory. Our fifth section is devoted to his synthesis of the two contexts in which stability
 was developed: the stability of equilibria and the three body problem.

 Finally, in the sixth section, we explain what Birkhoff calls "qualitative stability".
 He identified different types of stability. One of them, formal stability, reveals the
 remains of a strong influence of analytical methods; another one is perturbative by
 nature and can adequately be called "qualitative". In the particular case of periodic
 solutions, Birkhoff showed that the situation named "stable" by Poincaré is in fact
 unstable, when a more appropriate stability definition is employed.

 The new field of dynamical systems became autonomous in relation to the classical

 domain of differential equations with Birkhoff. Our conclusion briefly analyzes how

 this domain is inseparably linked to a general study of the different possible types
 of trajectories that are solutions of general systems. The problem of stability in a
 qualitative approach becomes a sub-problem of this more global one.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 300 T. Roque

 2 Stability problems and the traditional methods to treat them

 Physical-mathematical problems concerning stability were very common in the second

 half of the nineteenth century and covered a wide range of fields: elasticity, principles of

 mechanics, engineering mechanics, hydrodynamics, potential theory, thermodynam-

 ics, economic equilibrium, etc.4 It is not our intention to analyze stability conceptions
 in all these domains. We are only interested in the stability definitions of celestial
 mechanics, in particular those related to two problems: stability of the solar system

 and stability of the equilibrium figures of rotating fluids.

 2.1 Stability of the solar system

 Efforts to study the stability of the solar system, or more precisely the stability in

 the three body problem, motivated the development of specific analytical methods for

 the solution of differential equations. In the eighteenth century, Euler, Clairaut, and

 D' Alembert had already applied series developments of the solutions in order to study

 the perturbations in Keplerian movements of two bodies caused by the attraction of a

 third body. Lagrange and Laplace gave a sophisticated mathematical treatment to the

 problem, studying the variations of elliptical orbit elements under the effect of those
 perturbations (Lagrange 1774, 1781-1782; Laplace 1796, 1891-1904).

 Lagrange started from the fact that the motion of a planet remains close to a

 Keplerian ellipse over a short duration. He could then use the ellipse as the basis for

 a coordinate system and write the differential equations that determine the variations

 of orbital elements in the elliptic motion, under the effect of perturbations caused by

 other planets, in order to show that they should be confined within fixed limits. These

 variations may be periodic - this implies that the planetary system will return to the

 neighborhood of its initial situation - or secular. In this case, there are long-term vari-

 ations in the planets' semi-major axes that can accumulate with increasing time, thus

 producing great changes in the original aspect of the orbits. The traditional treatment

 of stability tried to eliminate the secular terms in order to demonstrate that the variation

 in elements of the planets' orbits would be confined within well-determined limits.
 Therefore, complete stability, in the sense of Lagrange and Laplace, was equivalent
 to the confinement of the variations of the orbital elements within certain limits.

 If we consider first order terms in the masses and first degree terms of eccentricities

 and inclinations, the orbits of the planets are described by means of a linear differential

 system with constant coefficients. It was necessary to solve a characteristic equation
 and to find its roots (now called the "eigenvalues" of the matrix that defines the sys-

 tem). The numerical determination of these values was not an easy task, as there was
 a considerable number of variables. But stability was defined by means of some con-
 ditions that these values under consideration took. For instance, the existence of two

 4 For a broad panoramic description of research works on stability in different countries in this period see
 Chap. 14 of (Grattan-Guinness 1997) named An era of stability: mechanics, 1860-1900. Stability criteria
 in hydrodynamics are deeply studied in (Darrigol 2002).

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 301

 equal roots indicated the possibility of a collision between two planets, thus preventing

 a system from being stable.5

 The calculations made by Lagrange and Laplace showed that, up to first order in

 the planets' masses, the secular variations vanish. On the other hand, considering not

 only linear terms but also the squares and cubes of the masses in the series develop-
 ment, Poisson (1808) showed that the series could contain terms in which the sine

 is multiplied by time, implying that the amplitudes of variations of the semi-major

 axis can grow indefinitely with time. So, the system returns to the neighborhood of its

 initial configuration but can also go far away from it. Stability had thus a new meaning

 according to Poisson. While for Lagrange, the approximate solutions must be bounded

 in the neighborhood of the elliptical orbits in order to guarantee stability, for Poisson,

 the solutions can go far away from the periodic orbit, but at some time they return to
 its neighborhood. Poisson stability conception implies a special kind of periodicity
 for solutions that we will call, from now on, "Poisson periodicity".6

 The two conceptions of stability - as confinement and as Poisson periodicity - also

 appear in the works of Poincaré. Before that, in the middle of the nineteenth century,

 the astronomer Le Verrier went back to the calculations of Lagrange and Laplace and
 considered the effects of higher order terms in the series. Le Verrier (1856) showed

 that these terms led to significant alterations in the orbits, and that the previous calcu-

 lations could not be used for an indefinite amount of time. The astronomer improved
 the precision of the former methods by considering non-linear terms in the series

 developments that depend on a parameter (such as mass, eccentricity, or inclination).
 Laskar (1992) explains Le Verrier's methods in detail and shows how he found that

 other phenomena than non-periodic secular terms can also harm stability. Second (or

 higher) order terms in the solutions may have large coefficients that render them more

 important than first order terms. This phenomenon, known as the problem of "small
 divisors", is caused by very small quantities appearing in the denominator of some
 terms in the solution. The complications due to these small divisors revealed that the

 convergence of the series depends on initial conditions. In Le Verrier's treatment, if the

 first terms of the series representing an element of the orbit decrease rapidly enough,
 one can infer stability. So, for him, the question of stability had to do with some kind
 of astronomical convergence.

 From the second half of the nineteenth century to the beginning of the twentieth

 century, there was a proliferation of essays trying to improve Le Verrier's approach.
 Astronomers such as Newcomb, Lindstedt, and Gyldén proposed new methods that

 took into account higher order terms and prevented time from appearing outside trigo-

 nometric terms. A history of these methods is still to be done, but it is out of our scope
 in this paper to analyze these works in detail. A detailed description of perturbation

 The methods developed to demonstrate stability included not just techniques of series development, but
 also algebraic methods that did their way far beyond celestial mechanics. As Brechenmacher (2007) shows,

 Lagrange's method to determine these characteristic values was an algebraic practice used by a network of
 mathematicians in the period.

 6 We use this expression to prevent associating the conception with the mathematical definition it acquires
 later as "Poisson stability".

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 methods in celestial mechanics in this period can be found in (Tisserand 1 889-1 896).7

 For our purposes, the only germane point is the common approach according to which

 the secular terms should be excluded from the series development. This implied an
 identification of the criterion of stability with the reduction of series development to

 strictly trigonometric terms.

 302 T. Roque

 The main mathematical tools used in the astronomical works mentioned above are

 perturbation methods. They consist of mathematical methods that start from the exact

 solution of a related problem in order to find an approximate solution to a problem that

 cannot be solved exactly. In our case, the three body problem is described by means

 of a perturbation of an elliptical movement.

 The simplified form of the problem is a Keplerian ellipse, which is correct when

 there are only two gravitating bodies (as, for e.g., the Earth and the Moon). The resolved

 but simplified problem is then perturbed by considering the gravitational attraction of

 a third body (the Sun). The conditions met by the corrected solution do not match the

 equation required by reality (the law of attraction, in the example), but the correction

 aims to provide a better approximate answer.

 If one of the masses is considered to be much smaller than the other two, the

 three body problem can be formulated by adding a "small" term to the mathematical
 description of the two-body problem. The procedure leads to an expression of the
 desired solution in terms of a power series (or trigonometric series) in some "small"

 parameter that quantifies the deviation from the solvable problem. The leading term
 in this power series is the solution of the solvable problem whereas further terms
 describe the deviation in the solution due to another deviation from the initial prob-

 lem. Formally speaking, the full solution approximation X is given by a series in a
 small parameter (here called e):

 X = Xo + éX1+é2X2 + ...

 In this example, Xo is the known solution of the Keplerian problem and X'9 X2,

 . . .are higher order terms that may be found iteratively by means of some systematic

 procedure. If for small e these terms become successively smaller, the approximate
 solution of the non-exact problem does not differ too much from the exact solution of
 the solvable problem (periodic solution). The approximate solution may differ con-

 siderably from the periodic solution at some instant of time, but then returns infinitely

 often to its neighborhood. In short, if we analyze the behavior of higher order terms

 in the series development of a solution and conclude that this implies confinement or

 Poisson periodicity of the approximate solution, we say that this solution is stable.

 2.2 Stability of equilibria

 For our purposes in this article, we can say that the question of the stability of equilib-

 ria starts with Lagrange, as he was the first one to formulate precise criteria to verify
 stability in a mechanical system. In the Méchanique Analytique (Lagrange 1788), he

 7 More recent references are cited in Taton et al. (2009).

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 303

 affirmed that an equilibrium position is stable if the system, assumed in equilibrium and

 displaced by a small amount, tends to return to this position by itself. The most prom-

 inent result of Lagrange's treatment consisted of his statement that the equilibrium is

 stable if the potential function is in a minimum when the system is in equilibrium.

 From a mathematical point of view, there is an important difference between the

 definition of the stability of equilibria and the one employed to study the stability of

 the solar system. In the latter case, the perturbation methods give an approximate solu-

 tion of a perturbed system, and we would like to investigate the long-term stability of

 this individual solution. In the first case, as in the problems treated in this section, the

 stability is a property of a solution (equilibrium point) that is verified by an analysis

 of the behavior of other solutions in its neighborhood. These solutions are obtained

 by a perturbation of the initial conditions.

 Using a power series approximation of the potential function up to the second
 order, Lagrange showed that the equilibrium is stable when first-order terms vanish

 and second-order terms are positive, which corresponds to a minimum of the potential

 function. Lejeune-Dirichlet (1846) improved the proof by showing that higher order

 terms might also correspond to a minimum of the potential function (Lagrange's earlier

 proof based upon linearization was not sufficient). The stability result is now known
 as "Lagrange-Dirichlet theorem".

 Concerning the stability of equilibrium figures of a rotating mass of fluid in the
 nineteenth century, we should mention the works of several mathematicians, such as

 Jacobi, Liouville and Riemann, as discussed in Liitzen (1984). However, in the period

 we are analyzing here, the second half of the nineteenth century, the most influential

 reference, for stability of equilibrium, is Thomson and Tait's treatise, published in
 1867. In its second edition, which appeared between 1879 and 1883 (Thomson and

 Tait 1879-1883), they added a more complete discussion of the stability of equilibrium

 figures of a rotating fluid. The authors analyzed the stability of Jacobi and Maclaurin

 ellipsoids using a criterion based on the energy function.

 As Norton Wise points out, Thomson and Tait's book is "the first major work in any

 language to transform Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics into the new dynamics

 of energy in the second half of the 19th century" (Wise 2005, p. 521). Motion stability,
 more particularly that of equilibrium, was one of their main concerns:

 There is scarcely any question in dynamics more important for Natural
 Philosophy than the stability and the instability of motion. We therefore (...)

 propose to give some general explanations and leading principles regarding it
 (Thomson and Tait 1879-1883, Sect. 346, p. 416).

 Thomson and Tait's intuitive definition of the stability of equilibria proposed just
 afterwards was analogous to Lagrange's. If a material system, under the influence of

 internal and applied forces, and varying according to some definite law, is displaced
 infinitely little in any direction from a particular position of equilibrium, and left to

 itself; and if then it commences and continues to vibrate, without ever experiencing

 more than an infinitely small deviation in any of its parts from the position of equilib-
 rium, then the equilibrium in this position is said to be stable. But this definition does

 not indicate how to verify stability, and a mathematical criterion was then enunciated.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 304 T. Roque

 A mass of fluid is in a stable equilibrium if the potential energy function has a mini-

 mum in this state. Similarly, when viscosity is disregarded, the equilibrium is stable if

 the kinetic energy attains a maximum. This criterion was largely known before Thom-
 son and Tait, but their treatise made this method popular. Of particular importance

 was the redefinition of the criterion in the context of Hamiltonian dynamics.

 Although Hamilton had reformulated mechanics long before, his approach was not

 taken up in mathematical physics until it appeared in Thomson and Tait's book, as
 Wise (2005, p. 528) remarks. The equations of motion were derived from the energy

 principle, written in variational form. This implied several theorems about minimum

 and maximum properties of the kinetic energy of mechanical systems. Thus, as their

 approach to the problem was based on Hamiltonian dynamics, the principle of stability

 outlined by Lagrange was developed in this new context. The behavior of the system

 was determined by means of the roots of the characteristic equation. If its roots are all

 real and negative, the equilibrium is stable.

 A remarkable point to observe in Thomson and Tait's treatise is the introduction

 of considerations on the stability of general motions, not necessarily in equilibrium.
 In Section 347 of Thomson and Tait (1879-1883), they asserted that an actual motion

 of the system is said to be stable if every possible infinitely small conservative dis-

 turbance of this motion gives rise to an alteration bringing the system again near the

 undisturbed path. This must also happen in a finite time and without more than an

 infinitely small digression. If these conditions are not fulfilled, the motion is said to
 be unstable.

 Soon afterwards, in Sect. 356, Thomson and Tait assumed the need for a mathemat-

 ical criterion for stability, which must be based on the principle of varying action. The

 problem of investigating the effect of an infinitely small disturbance, produced at any
 instant in the motion of any conservative system, may then be reduced to a practical

 problem of mathematical analysis.

 In fact, in the following years, the definition of stability and the mathematical con-

 dition founded on properties of the kinetic energy were mixed up. A stable equilibrium

 then started to be defined as an extrémům point of the energy function. The intuitive

 definition based on perturbed and unperturbed motions could not be transformed into
 a mathematical definition as these notions (of motions, perturbed and unperturbed)

 were not mathematically defined. While the space of motions was not defined as a

 mathematical object, the condition for stability served as its definition.8

 Poincaré and Lyapunov had declared that their own works on the stability of equi-
 libria departed from Thomson and Tait's treatment, by aiming to go beyond their
 unjustified use of linear approximations. But while Poincaré used the same definition
 based on an energy function, as we will later see Lyapunov proposed a new definition,

 implying a direct consideration of the space of motions. He thus proceeded to give
 a stability definition that is independent from the mathematical condition involving

 properties of the energy function. The question of qualitative stability has to do with

 8 This question has to do with the history of the conception of "phase space", or "space of configurations".
 It is not our goal here to trace the history of this notion, but if it were the case, we would have to mention
 the work of Liouville that probably inspired Poincaré and Lyapunov, see Liitzen (1984).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 305

 a definition that can be stated directly in the space of motions, and does not involve

 analytical expressions for integrals or approximate solutions.

 2.3 Sketch of Poincaré and Lyapunov stability definitions

 In order to make the distinctions clear before placing them in their historical context,

 we list below the definitions of stability to be considered later. In the works of Poincaré,

 stability considerations appear from 1885, when the problem of solving a differential

 system of equations was restated to bring out its intimate connection with the problems
 of celestial mechanics (Poincaré 1885a). As an example, from this moment onwards
 the solutions of the system were called "trajectories". The stability of a trajectory in

 three dimensions was defined as a kind of periodicity.

 Stability as Poisson periodicity (Poincaré): Let M be the point of the trajectory cor-

 responding to an instant t. If we trace a circle of radius r around M, this trajectory is

 stable if the points in the trajectory of M enter this circle infinitely many times, even

 if r is made arbitrarily small.

 This property was later called "Poisson stability", as the system can go far away

 from the initial state but it returns to its neighborhood in the future. This is the explicit
 definition stated by Poincaré in the paper "Sur les courbes". But there is another

 implicit conception of stability, as we will see in the third section, implying that the

 trajectories remain confined in a limited region of space.

 In his works on celestial mechanics, these two conceptions appear again, and a third

 definition was introduced. Periodic solutions become central and Poincaré defined their

 stability by reducing the analysis of the solutions of a system of differential equations

 in the neighborhood of a periodic solution x¿ = <p¡ (t) to the study of the linear system:

 where <p¡ (t) + ft (t) are perturbations of the periodic solution. The numbers a¡ in

 at - ¿* 3xj*j

 ft =^'51.*,...,$* =*""%,*

 are called "characteristic exponents" (S,-,* are periodic solutions with the same period
 of <pi (t) that can be written as absolutely and uniformly convergent trigonometric
 series).

 Stability of periodic solutions (Poincaré): The periodic solution (p¿ (t) is stable if all
 characteristic exponents a¡ = a¿ + b¡i are purely imaginary numbers. This works as

 a guarantee that all ft remain finite, since ft = (cos(6,-i) + / sin(¿,-f))5|,¿, where «S,-f*
 are periodic functions.

 We observe that the stability has to do with the possibility of expressing the solu-

 tions by means of trigonometric functions, as in the classical treatment of celestial

 mechanics. However, this definition is not for an individual trajectory. The stability

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 306 T. Roque

 neighborhood.

 of a periodic solution takes into consideration the behavior of other solutions in its

 Whereas Poincaré presented the first definition of stability in the third part of "Sur

 les courbes", in the same year of 1885, he also published an important paper on the

 stability of rotating figures of a fluid. The stability definition in there follows the

 traditional form used by Lagrange, Thomson, and Tait.

 Stability of equilibrium (Poincaré): Let the position of a system be defined by n quan-

 tities x' , JC2, . . . , xn and assume the existence of a force function F(x' , JC2, . . . , xn).

 We have an equilibrium position when the derivatives of this function vanish and this

 equilibrium is stable when this function has a maximum.

 Lyapunov considered the domain of application of this approach quite limited, as

 it is only valid when an integral (the force function) is given. It was thus necessary to

 develop methods that enable this problem to be solved without integrating. He defined

 stability in another manner that takes the behavior of perturbed and non perturbed
 motions into consideration.

 Stability of equilibrium (Lyapunov): Let (x' , . . . , xn) = (0, . . . , 0) be an equilibrium

 solution of a differential system

 |^ = Xi(*,0
 '<^ = Xn(x,t)

 This solution is stable if, for each positive number /, arbitrarily small, there is another

 positive number € such that ||jci (t) || </,..., ||jcn (t) '' < I for all positive values of í ,

 provided that ||xi(ío)ll < é, . • . , Ik* (to) II < *•

 So, if the initial conditions of a trajectory are near the equilibrium state, the

 trajectory will always remain within a small neighborhood of this point. The sta-
 bility of a general solution (/i (i), /¿(O, • • • , fn(0) is analyzed by departing from the
 above definition. The transformation

 (JC1, JC2, ...,*„)-> (/i(0, flit), . . . , fn(t)) + (*i, *2, . . . , Xn)

 is used in order to reduce the question about the stability of the general solution to the

 stability of the equilibrium solution as defined above for a differential system that fulfils

 (Xi(0, 0, *2(0, 0, - - . , Xn(0, 0) = (0, 0, . . . , 0)

 Intuitively speaking, a general solution is stable if the solutions obtained by an

 € -perturbation of its initial condition remain close.

 Both definitions proposed by Poincaré in the context of the three body prob-
 lem - that of stability as Poisson periodicity of an individual trajectory and the one

 of a periodic trajectory stability - were criticized by Birkhoff. In the article "Quel-
 ques théorèmes sur le mouvement des systèmes dynamiques" (Birkhoff 1912), he
 introduced special solutions called "recurrent movements", which are useful for the

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 307

 description of the whole set of trajectories. This definition ends up by calling into

 question, a few years later, the first definition of stability proposed by Poincaré. The

 property of Poisson periodicity should be used, according to Birkhoff, to characterize

 a recurrent movement, while stability should be defined in terms of other criteria.

 The way Poincaré defined stability of a periodic solution was also questioned.
 In Birkhoff's view, a definition that demands a series development to contain only

 trigonometric terms must be considered as a kind of "formal" or "astronomical" sta-

 bility. Still employing Birkhoff's designations, the true "qualitative" stability is the

 one defined directly on the set of trajectories, which establishes stability for a solution

 in terms of the behavior of other solutions in its neighborhood. He called a definition

 of this kind "perturbative" (as opposed to formal), or "mathematical" (as opposed to

 astronomical) stability.

 What Birkhoff called "perturbative" stability has essentially the same nature as the

 definition put forward by Lyapunov.9 Yet it has been used in the study of stability in the

 three body problem. Levi-Civita defined stability of a periodic trajectory by means of

 the same criterion of Lyapunov's equilibrium stability. In his turn, Birkhoff departed
 from the works of Levi-Civita to show that it is necessary to go beyond Poincaré's
 definition.

 It is important to stress the fact that the word "perturbative" is employed here with

 a different meaning from the one it used to have in the so-called "perturbative methods

 of celestial mechanics". There, the conception of stability is formal, as the criterion

 applied lies in the possibility of writing the solution as a specific series. As we have
 already explained, perturbative methods of celestial mechanics deal with the actual

 problem as a perturbation of an exact solvable problem and attempt to investigate
 the stability of a solution of the perturbed problem in terms of the properties of its

 series expansion. The notion of perturbation is not employed to define stability. In
 Lyapunov's definition, the stability of a solution is defined in terms of the behavior

 of a perturbed solution of the same differential problem. As Birkhoff finally made

 explicit, the perturbative character of the stability criterion is what renders its defini-

 tion properly qualitative.

 3 The context of Poincaré stability definitions

 3.1 The qualitative methods of Poincaré

 In his paper "Sur les courbes", Poincaré started with a study of the solutions of a real

 differential equation of the first order and first degree with polynomial coefficients:

 dx _dy
 Y " T

 where X and Y are polynomial functions in x and y.

 9 Birkhoff did not quote Lyapunov as the first to propose this definition, but we will see later that his works

 were indirectly influenced by the Russian's through the intermediation of Levi-Civita.

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the third part, published in 1885, this same equation was written considering the

 independent variable as time:

 308 T. Roque

 at at

 and x and y as the coordinates of a moving point. From this moment on, the solu-

 tions of the system received the name of "trajectories", which expresses an intimate

 relationship with the problems of celestial mechanics. After this reformulation, the set
 of solutions could be conceived as a family of trajectories of a mobile point with the

 variable time implicitly taken into consideration.

 In the first two parts of the memoir "Sur les courbes", the problem of stability

 was already considered, in relation with the description of the global aspect of tra-

 jectories in two dimensions. The results obtained for two dimensional solutions are
 highlighted as being of a topological nature by Gray (1992). By means of the clas-
 sification theorem10 we can conclude that, either a trajectory is closed (stable), or it

 tends asymptotically to a singularity without ever getting back near to its initial state
 (unstable).

 Poincaré shows it is true by means of the definition of what he calls "cycles without

 contact". These are closed curves that are not solutions of the equation, but curves that

 solutions can cross only once. Hence, if a trajectory crosses a cycle without contact

 it cannot return to a neighborhood of the initial point and we can say it is unstable.

 The verification of instability is easier than that of stability, since it is possible to test,

 by means of the cycles without contact, if a solution definitely leaves a region of the

 domain. Stability arises when a solution remains indefinitely in a region of the domain,

 what is much more complicated to establish.

 In order to investigate the neighborhood of periodic trajectories in three dimensions,

 Poincaré introduced, in the fourth part of "Sur les courbes", what we call the section

 method.11 We explain here how this procedure allowed him to reduce the problem to
 two dimensions.

 One supposes that s is a closed curve representing a periodic solution and one draws

 a plane normal to the trajectory that intercepts it at a point P. A system of coordinates
 can be defined (Poincaré 1886, p. 199) in this plane, that is called "plane of section".

 The periodic solution is represented by a fixed point P, and if Po is a point in the
 normal plane, the trajectory that passes through Po will intersect the normal plane
 once again at a point Pi (Fig. I).12

 Poincaré studied the transformation (T in the figure) that takes Po(= x in the figure)

 to Pi (= T(x) in the figure). He showed that this transformation is holomorphic, and

 then he analyzed its development in series.

 10 Nowadays known as "Poincaré-Bendixon theorem", see also Gilain (1991). In the case of the solar
 system, the problems need larger dimensions.

 1 1 Poincaré himself had given no special name to this method.

 12 Poincaré supposed the continuity of solutions with respect to the initial conditions.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 309

 Fig. 1 Transformation T
 (defined on the section plane)
 taking x to T(x)

 Fig. 2 The four types of

 singularity

 col noeud

 centre foyer

 The terms of first order have the form:

 I x = Aie^'cpiit) + A2eX2t(p2(t)
 1 y = Aie^Ý'(t) + A2ek2tÝ2(t)

 where A¡ are constants and the functions (p and ý are trigonometric series. The k¿ are

 given by the equation S2 - (a + 8) S + (a8 - ßy ) = 0, with S = e2Xm . The possible
 situations were then examined using the values Ài and k2.

 If these values are real and positive, one of them greater and the other less than one,

 then Poincaré demonstrated that, in the plane of section, there are two invariant curves

 K and K' which means that if a point Po is on one of the curves, the next intersection
 P' will also be on the same curve. Such a conclusion, later generalized by Hadamard,

 Lattès and Birkhoff, was extremely important for later research works.13

 It is possible to study what happens in the neighborhood of the point P using the
 same methods that were employed to analyze the neighborhood of the singularities in

 13 Hadamard (1901) extended Poincaré's outgoing results to non-analytic cases. Lattès (1906) showed that

 the characteristic exponents are essential elements for the problem, and that the study of invariant curves is

 possible and useful for more generic cases than those examined by Poincaré. The exact definition of surface
 of section and that of invariant curves was given in (Birkhoff 1920b). For a history of the section method
 and the consequences of its application to the definition of a dynamical system, see Roque (2007).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 310 T.Roque

 Fig. 3 Surface without contact
 (dotted line) with a closed curve
 as intersection with the section

 plane

 two dimensions. These singularities had been classified in terms of nodes (noeuds),
 centers (centres), focuses (foyers) and saddle-points (cols) (Fig.2).14

 The intersection points in the plane of section behave in a manner analogous to

 these four possible neighborhoods of singularities in two dimensions.15

 Instead of cycles without contact there will now be surfaces without contact. If we

 have, in the plane of section, the case analogous to the center singularity in two dimen-

 sions, in which the fixed point is surrounded by closed trajectories, we can build up

 surfaces without contact around the periodic solution, which reduce to cycles without

 contact in the plane of section. If there is a surface without contact in its neighbor-

 hood, the periodic trajectory is unstable, because a trajectory that passes through a

 neighboring initial condition leaves and cannot return. However, a conclusion in favor

 of stability is much more difficult to obtain (Fig. 3).

 Poincaré proposed to investigate the question through the existence of an invariant

 integral.16 This is a real positive function defined in local coordinates inserted in the

 neighborhood of the closed trajectory that preserves volume. It means that, if a set of

 points in the neighborhood of the closed trajectory have a certain volume at time ř, the

 images of those points by the function will be a set having this same volume for all

 subsequent instants of time. If this function exists, there is no surface without contact.

 This is a first step towards stability. But in this case, there still may be instability.
 The reason for that lies in the presence of small divisors, which can make the series

 expressing the solutions diverge. Because of that, it is easier to infer instability. The

 presence of a cycle or a surface without contact implies instability, but the absence of

 this feature does not imply any positive result about stability.17

 At the very end of "Sur les courbes", Poincaré analyzed the neighborhood of a peri-

 odic trajectory and concluded that a stability result is hard to obtain whatever definition

 is used for stability. The only explicit definition was that of Poisson periodicity, but he

 provided the following example, where different conceptions about the mathematical

 definition are put together.

 14 See Gilain (1991) and Gray (1992).

 15 This fact really impressed Poincaré, and it is at the origin of the study of two-dimensional point trans-
 formations, see also Roque (2007).

 16 This name was given later in Poincaré (1890), where he showed that the existence of an invariant integral
 is a fundamental property of Hamiltonian systems. As Barrow-Green points out (1997, p. 40), it was only
 in this article, where the idea of an invariant integral played an essential role in stability arguments, that

 Poincaré developed a coherent theory about invariant integrals.

 1 7 Poincaré ( 1 890) showed that the integral curves are contained in level surfaces over which energy remains

 constant. Hence, the trajectories do not go from one level surface to another, which means that there are no
 surfaces without contact able to be crossed by integral curves. Even though it does not guarantees stability.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 3 1 1

 Poincaré studied the particular case of a three-dimensional system having a peri-
 odic solution, written in coordinates (co, </>, p). The surfaces p = constant are mutu-

 ally enveloped tori (nested one into the other), defined around the periodic solution.
 The behavior of a variable p allows the stability of the solution to be studied, since

 it measures the distance between the points of the analyzed trajectory and the closed
 trajectory. Several cases can happen (Poincaré 1886, p. 221):

 (1) Trajectories recede constantly or they approach the closed trajectory asymptoti-

 cally. What may happen is that certain trajectories recede while others approach.

 Thus, Poincaré concluded that there is always instability, in the sense that a point
 close to the closed trajectory for t = 0 will no longer be a neighbor for large
 positive values of t (or it was not a neighbor for large negative values of t).
 (2) A point close to the closed trajectory for t = 0 remains constantly close for
 all positive and negative values of i, i.e., stability is guaranteed. In this case, p

 oscillates constantly within certain limits passing an infinite number of times
 through all values between these limits.

 (3) A point close to the closed trajectory for t = 0 can recede far for certain values of

 i, and therefore the periodic solution is not stable. But, from another viewpoint
 this solution is stable since this point returns and becomes infinitely close to
 the closed trajectory for certain values of t. This happens whenever p passes an
 infinite number of times through all possible values.

 In the first case, Poincaré used the definition of stability as Poisson periodicity in

 order to conclude that there is instability. Nonetheless, in the second case, there is sta-

 bility in a stronger sense than that of Poisson periodicity, as the other trajectories are

 confined in the neighborhood of the closed trajectory. It is precisely in this last sense

 that one can conclude in favor of instability in the third case. After all, the trajectories
 do not remain confined in a neighborhood of the periodic solution.

 Different notions of stability coexist in the analysis of one single example. In addi-

 tion to the issue of Poisson periodicity, what is at stake is the confinement of trajectories

 within some region in space, in this case, the neighborhood of a periodic solution.

 3.2 Stability as Poisson periodicity and stability as confinement

 In the third part of "Sur les courbes" Poincaré explicitly defined the stability of a

 three-dimensional trajectory of a differential system of first order and second degree:

 It happens then that the trajectory cannot be a closed curve; but, nevertheless,

 it keeps a certain stability: one can even say that it is a periodicity of particular

 nature. In fact, let M be a point in the trajectory that the moving point occupies
 in an instant t. We trace a circle around the point M with an arbitrarily small
 radius r. The moving point starting at M will obviously go beyond the circle,
 but it will cross again this small circle an infinite number of times, no matter how
 small r can be (Poincaré 1885a, p. 92) [Poincaré's italics].18

 18 II arrivera alors que la trajectoire ne sera pas une courbe fermée; mais néanmoins elle jouira d'une
 certaine stabilité: on peut même dire d'une certaine périodicité d'une nature particulière. En effet, soit M

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Here, we note that stability is equivalent to the Poisson periodicity of an indivi-

 dual solution. A periodic trajectory goes an infinite number of times through all its

 states. A trajectory is stable if, M being an arbitrary point, the trajectory returns an

 infinite number of times to an arbitrarily small neighborhood of this point. This type

 of stability was called in (Poincaré 1890) "Poisson stability". But this is not the only

 possible definition for the stability of a trajectories. All over the paper "Sur les cour-

 bes" the above definition goes together with different, however implicit, conceptions

 312 T.Roque

 of stability.

 In an article about the new ideas of Poincaré, Chabert and Dahan-Dalmedico (1992,

 p. 296) observe that stability as explicitly defined in "Sur les courbes" is an intrin-
 sic property of a trajectory; and they stress the fact that, in his works on celestial
 mechanics, Poincaré defined stability on the set of trajectories. Nevertheless, still in

 "Sur les courbes", on the paragraph immediately after the definition mentioned above,
 Poincaré acknowledged that:

 Stability defined in this fashion has solely a theoretical importance. In practical

 terms, it would be necessary to determine a region of space in which the moving

 point remains invariably confined (Poincaré 1885a, p. 94). 19

 Stability is now identified with the confinement of trajectories to a certain region of

 space. This property already implies an investigation of the whole set of trajectories

 in order to find regions in which trajectories must confined. This double conception of

 stability as Poisson periodicity and as confinement appeared again in Poincaré's papers
 on the three body problem and celestial mechanics. One particular fact to observe is

 the different emphasis on the type of stability required in the two versions of the article

 presented to the 1889 competition (Poincaré 1889).

 Poincaré considered a system of ordinary differential equations:

 (Le;
 -p- = Xi(i = l,...,n)
 at

 where X¿ are analytic functions of *,-, ...,*„. As in "Sur les courbes", the *,- are

 geometrically represented as the coordinates of a point P in space that describe a
 trajectory when t varies. In the very beginning of "Sur le problème des trois corps et
 les équations de la dynamique" in its first version (Poincaré 1889), the one which con-
 tained the mistake, he said there is stability when x¡ remains under certain limits as t

 varies. This means that the trajectory of P is confined within a limited region in space.

 The set of trajectories that pass through a given curve in space is called a surface

 trajectory, and it cannot be cut by any other trajectory. Closed surface trajectories

 play an analogous role to the surfaces without contact and they provide the main tool

 Footnote 18 continued

 un point de la trajectoire, occupé en un temps t par le point mobile. Décrivons autour du point M un cercle
 de rayon r aussi petit que nous voudrons. Le point mobile partant du point M sortira évidemment de ce
 cercle, mais il viendra traverser de nouveau ce petit cercle une infinité de fois, et cela, quelque petit que
 soit r.

 19 La stabilité ainsi définie n'a qu'une importance théorique. Pour la pratique, il faudrait déterminer une

 région de l'espace où le point mobile reste constamment renfermé.

 4y Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 313

 for verifying stability, as they divide the space into an interior and an exterior region.

 If the initial position of P is in an interior region then the trajectory of this point is

 eternally confined in the same region, and there is stability.

 In the first version, the main approach used by Poincaré to demonstrate stability was

 to search for closed surface trajectories. The clarity of this criterion contributes to the

 sense of optimism about the ultimate resolution of the stability problem, as noted by

 Barrow-Green, in opposition to the tenor of the second version (Barrow-Green 1997,
 p. 75).

 As Robadey (2006, pp. 124-125) points out in, we can explain the different empha-

 sis on stability in the two versions of the paper by comparing their introductions. In

 the first, the final goal, highlighted from the beginning, is to demonstrate stability by

 means of a combination of traditional and new geometrical methods. The definition
 of stability is almost always taken as the one mentioned above, seeking to confine
 trajectories in some region of space. Poisson periodicity is also cited as a possible
 conception of stability, but it remains isolated in a section containing some results

 about the almost periodic behavior of trajectories.20

 Robadey also notes that, in the letters Poincaré exchanged with Mittag-Leffler
 (Poincaré and Mittag-Leffler 1999), it becomes clear that the competition jury criti-

 cized the stability definition used in the first version. In particular, Weierstrass con-

 tested the physical sense of this definition, as it does not consider the possibility of

 collisions within the region of confinement. In his response, Poincaré reaffirmed the

 first definition by showing that it excludes collisions. The Poisson periodicity concep-

 tion had a secondary place up to this moment.

 After the discovery of the error in the stability demonstration, this question lost
 importance and in the second version (Poincaré 1890), the term "stability" appears

 much later than in the first. On the other hand, since, the Poisson periodicity of trajec-

 tories is announced in the introduction as a quite important result to be presented. In

 the restricted problem of three bodies, the initial conditions for P may be chosen to

 ensure that the trajectory of this point returns an infinite number of times arbitrarily

 near its initial position.21 The term "stability" appears for the first time in the section
 devoted to this result, and not in the introduction.

 As Barrow-Green shows, negative results acquire a more prominent place in the
 second version. The above conclusion thus is one of the few positive results to remain

 and to sustain hope for a positive response to the stability problem. In a letter sent to

 Mittag-Leffler on the 9th of December 1 889, Poincaré affirmed that "stability subsists"
 in the sense above (Poincaré and Mittag-Leffler 1999, Letter 93).22 Poincaré (1890,
 p. 313) started to call "Poisson stability" the property that we have called up to now
 "Poisson periodicity". The theme of Poisson stability acquires even more importance
 in (Poincaré 1892-1899), where Poincaré includes an entire chapter on the subject.

 20 Robadey calls "recurrence" what we have chosen to call "Poisson periodicity". In our view, the term

 "recurrence" is more mathematically charged. We prefer thus to name this property using another designa-
 tion until the moment it gains a mathematical definition as "Poisson stability".

 21 The proof of this result relies in Poincaré's "recurrence theorem", as explained in Barrow-Green (1997,
 p. 86).

 22 Anne Robadey also cites this letter in Robadey (2006, p. 131).

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 314 T.Roque

 3.3 Periodic solutions and their stability

 The definition of the stability of a periodic solution was made explicit by Poincaré
 in his works on the three body problem and celestial mechanics, (Poincaré 1890) and
 (Poincaré 1892-1899), even though it had already appeared in "Sur les courbes".

 These works treat a special version of the three body problem in which there are

 two bodies of negligible mass,23 each moving according to a Keplerian ellipse around
 a third mass. In this case, there is an infinite number of periodic solutions. Poincaré

 asked when and how it is possible to use existing information about the behavior of this

 system to analyze the situation in which one of the masses - first considered zero - is

 considered infinitely small. In the third volume of Poincaré 1892-1899, this problem

 received the name of "restricted three body problem".

 It is a perturbation problem that ultimately depends on a parameter ß - the infinitely

 small mass mentioned in the previous paragraph - taken as zero in the Keplerian situ-

 ation. Poincaré studied the perturbation effects of /x on the periodic solutions through

 the analytic continuation of one of these solutions for small values of /x.24 A large part

 of Poincaré's work on celestial mechanics is concerned with the question of (i) showing

 that periodic solutions exist and (ii) analyzing their behavior after small perturbations

 of parameter /x.

 The perturbation of this parameter produces another differential system. The ques-

 tion of stability of periodic solutions has to do with the behavior of other solutions

 for the same system, so it is a different question. To investigate a periodic solution

 stability is the first step for the study of other solutions (of the same system) in its

 neighborhood.25 If the initial conditions of a trajectory are slightly different from those

 corresponding to a periodic solution, what is its future behavior? Will the mere fact

 of having initial conditions close to the periodic solutions be enough to ensure a kind
 of "similar" behavior?

 Before defining stability for periodic solutions, Poincaré introduced convenient
 coordinates enabling a study of the behavior of trajectories in their neighborhood. He

 wanted to describe solutions of a system of differential equations:

 dxi
 - =Xi(x',X2,...,Xn)
 at

 in the neighborhood of a periodic solution x¿ = Ci it). Considering that the perturba-

 tions of & (t) + §,- (f ) are also solutions, and discarding all non-linear terms, he wrote

 23 For example, if the three bodies are the Sun, the Earth and the Moon, the last two masses can be neglected

 because they are very small when compared with the mass of the Sun.

 24 Barrow-Green (1997, pp. 92-93) notes that the complete solution of the problem depends on precisions
 added after the second version of "Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique", when

 the use of Cauchy's majorants methods becomes more explicit.

 25 Hill was the first to show the importance of periodic solutions in the three body problem in (Hill 1878).

 In his presentation of the moon theory (Gray 1992, p. 505), he used the periodic solutions as intermediate

 orbits for the study of trajectories in their neighborhood. For a detailed analysis of Hill's contribution to the
 solution of the Earth-Moon-Sun problem, see Gutzwiller (1998). Poincaré stated that it can be advanta-
 geous to consider a periodic solution as a first approximation of a solution. He then quoted Gyldén's works,
 and named it "intermediate orbit" (Poincaré 1892-1899, p. 81, vol. I).

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 315

 what he named the "equations of variation":

 d& _ ^ dXi

 Thus, Poincaré managed to reduce the initial problem of how to solve a non-linear

 differential equation in the neighborhood of a periodic solution to the problem of how

 to solve a homogeneous linear system in £, whose coefficients are periodic functions.

 There are n numbers a,- , called the "characteristic exponents" of the periodic solution,

 and a solution of the system can be written as a linear combination of n solutions of

 the type:

 Ci=*ai'Si,*,..., &=*""%,*

 where the S,-t* are periodic solutions with the same period of <p¡ (t) that can be written

 as absolutely and uniformly convergent trigonometric series.26

 These characteristic exponents control the behavior of the linear system. By means

 of these values, Poincaré hoped to investigate the situations in which the perturbation

 of a periodic solution gives rise to another periodic solution, or to a solution not too

 distant from the periodic solution. This question is analogous to the one at the very end

 of the paper "Sur les courbes", studied in the example of the torus, but Poincarénow
 defined, in a formal manner, a periodic solution <p¡(t) as stable if all characteristic
 exponents a,- = a,- + b¡i are pure imaginary numbers. This works as a guarantee

 that all & remain finite since £,- = (cos(fyí) + i sin(Z?|ř))5,^, where S¡tk are periodic
 functions.27

 The demand that the characteristic exponents are pure imaginary numbers assures

 that trajectories that are near to the periodic solution in some instant cannot recede too

 much. But such conclusion, only valid for the linear approximation provided by the
 equations of variation, is associated with the existence of integrals that can be writ-
 ten in terms of a combination of trigonometric series. This assures a kind of formal

 stability, in the later sense of Birkhoff.

 We will be able to see in the next sections that the question is treated by Levi-

 Civita and Birkhoff in a different manner from Poincaré's. Both showed that Poin-

 caré's so-called "stable" case is in fact unstable, according to what they regard as
 a more adequate definition of stability. Levi-Civita observed that, if one considers

 non-linear perturbations, it is possible that a solution close to the periodic one leaves
 its neighborhood and never returns.

 Indeed, Poincaré did not go far in his study of stable periodic solutions. Using geo-
 metric methods, which were to have a strong influence on Levi-Civita and Birkhoff,

 26 The procedure is similar to the one previously used in Poincaré's section method. However, here the con-

 tinuous three-dimensional system is reduced to another continuous two-dimensional linear system, while
 there we have discrete iterations of points on the transverse section.

 27 The condition for the characteristic exponents a¡ be pure imaginary can be expressed with a demand

 that the characteristic values ea* have module 1 (for they would then be over the trigonometric cycle). Both
 formulations were used.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 316 T.Roque

 he studied the neighborhood of an unstable periodic solution. He expected to solve the

 problem of three bodies by showing that trajectories do not recede too much from a

 neighborhood of the periodic solution, i.e., they remain confined in a region of space.

 Instability of a periodic solution could be established whenever one can find, in its

 neighborhood, other solutions receding from it. But stability was still associated with

 the existence of trigonometric series, as in the classical methods of celestial mechanics.

 In the neighborhood of an unstable periodic solution there is a family of asymp-

 totic solutions. These are curves that asymptotically tend to the periodic solution with

 increasing or decreasing time, and are represented geometrically by two asymptotic
 surfaces.28 Poincaré used the section method in order to study these surfaces. The
 intersection of the periodic solution with the section plane is a fixed point, and by

 the same procedure the asymptotic surfaces turn into curves over the plane. If these

 curves meet to form a closed curve, there is a set of asymptotic solutions that remains

 confined to a given region of space, and we can infer stability.

 The mistake Poincaré had made in the first version of the paper presented to the

 competition (Poincaré 1889) was exactly at this point: these asymptotic curves actu-

 ally intersect, but do not form a closed curve as he had thought. These are the so called

 "doubly asymptotic" trajectories.29 Their existence implies that the behavior of tra-

 jectories in the neighborhood of the unstable periodic solution may be very complex:
 a doubly asymptotic trajectory can begin by being very close to the periodic solu-
 tion when t is large and negative; but then it moves away and deviates greatly from
 the periodic solution before getting close again to this solution when t is large and

 positive. Moreover, the existence of a doubly asymptotic trajectory actually means that

 an infinite number of such trajectories exist. Levi-Civita and Birkhoff showed later

 that such complexity also appears in the neighborhood of a stable periodic solution,
 which forces a reassessment in the definition of stability.

 3.4 Main tools that will be used later in research work on stability

 We will resume in the next section to the analysis of Levi-Civita and Birkhoff notions

 of stability, focusing on their study of stability of periodic solutions. However, although

 their approach to this subject took them in a direction different from Poincaré's, the
 conclusions they obtained depend on several conceptual tools provided by him. We
 summarize the most important of them:

 - the section method (used to analyze the neighborhood of a periodic solution)
 - the invariant curves (which generalize the curves K and K1 discovered by Poincaré,

 invariant under the dynamics)

 - the doubly asymptotic trajectories
 - the geometric theorem on the existence of periodic solutions

 28 Barrow-Green (1997, pp. 104-107) shows that the role of this geometric representation changes from

 the first to the second version of the paper on the three body problem.

 29 These solutions were later called "homoclinic" in Poincaré (1892-1899, V.ffl). In Anderson (1994),

 we find a brief description of Poincaré discovery of this type of trajectories.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 3 1 7

 The three first tools have already been mentioned. The fourth one is the approach
 used in the "last geometric theorem" of Poincaré. In 1912, a few weeks before his

 death, Poincaré published the paper, (Poincaré 1912), where he enunciated a new the-
 orem that, once demonstrated, would confirm the existence of an infinite number of

 periodic trajectories in the restricted three body problem for all values of parameter /x.

 He proposed new conceptual tools, taken from algebraic topology, in order to show

 that if a continuous, one-to-one, area-preserving transformation T takes the ring R9
 formed by concentric circles of radii a and b (a > b), into itself in such a way as to

 move the points on the circle of radius a in a positive sense and the points on the other

 circle in a negative sense; then there are at least two points of the ring that remain
 invariant under the iteration of T.

 Barrow-Green (1997, pp. 169-173) analyzes the suggestions given by Poincaré
 and the final proof provided by Birkhoff in 1913. This result played a key role in
 the study of stability of periodic solutions, since the existence of points on the ring

 that remain invariant under the iteration of T implies the existence of periodic solu-

 tions if the ring is thought of as being over the section (when we apply the section
 method).

 In Sect. 6, we discuss some consequences of this result found by Birkhoff. But
 before analyzing how Levi-Civita and Birkhoff followed the works of Poincaré on

 the stability of periodic solutions, it is worthwhile to mention Lyapunov's previous

 stability definitions (even if they are not stated for periodic solutions).

 4 Stability directly defined on the set of trajectories

 Poisson stability is a property of an individual trajectory, while Poincaré's defini-
 tion of stability for a periodic solution concerns the family of other solutions in its

 neighborhood. This last definition, provided in 1890, assures that the trajectories of
 neighboring points in a periodic trajectory do not go too far. However, this limited

 behavior is stated as a formal requirement regarding the existence of characteristic
 exponents.

 Around the same year* Lyapunov also furnished a definition of stability for a trajec-

 tory in terms of the behavior of other trajectories in its neighborhood, but his criterion

 was directly given on the space of trajectories. A trajectory was defined as stable if a
 perturbation of the initial condition does not affect its behavior too much. Thus, before

 returning to the study of the three body problem, we can indulge in a sort of digression
 about some aspects of the works of Lyapunov, influenced by problems related with
 equilibrium stability.

 4.1 The exchanges between Poincaré and Lyapunov about stability of equilibrium

 As we have seen, the attempts made by Thomson and Tait to generalize the Lagrange-

 Dirichlet theorem for a fluid were quite popular at the time of Poincaré and Lyapunov.
 Nevertheless, they enunciated many results without proof and their demonstrations,

 when furnished, did not seem rigorous enough. Poincaré and Lyapunov took this gap

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 as a point of departure for their researches, and shed new light over the problem of the

 stability of equilibria of a rotating fluid.30

 Poincaré was interested in the different forms that figures of equilibrium can assume,

 and investigated bifurcation points of parameters related to these figures. He showed,

 for instance, that it is possible to obtain infinitely many equilibrium figures different

 from ellipsoidal ones, and the question of stability appears in this context. Lyapunov

 was instead more concerned with stability in its own, which means simply to inquire if

 the perturbed figures are close enough to the original one, no matter their form. Hence,

 even if their works have some points in common, they employ different definitions of

 318 T.Roque

 stability.

 One of Poincaré's most important articles on the equilibrium figures of a rotating

 fluid (Poincaré 1885b) was published in the same year of the third part of "Sur les

 courbes". However, the notions of stability used in these works do not agree. It is inter-

 esting to observe that the qualitative methods Poincaré proposed in "Sur les courbes"

 were later elaborated by Lyapunov in his second thesis, of 1892, in order to deal with

 stability of equilibrium, something Poincaré did not do.

 In fact, Lyapunov had already thought about the stability of equilibrium figures

 in 1884, during his first thesis, which was translated into French as "Sur la stabilité
 des figures ellipsoïdales d'équilibre d'un liquide animé d'un mouvement de rota-
 tion"(Lyapunov 1904). He used Thomson and Tait's stability principle in order to
 obtain a version of Lagrange's theorem for fluids, and hence to demonstrate the sta-

 bility of ellipsoidal figures.

 Soon after having concluded this work, Lyapunov heard of the papers of Poincaré

 on equilibrium figures of a fluid. This is the beginning of a correspondence that lasted

 two years (Smirnov and Youchkevitch 1987) and started when Lyapunov sent Poincaré

 a copy of his thesis. In Poincaré's answer, in October 1885, he suggested that Lyapu-
 nov read the paper he had just published in the Acta Mathematica, that is (Poincaré
 1885b).

 Almost a year later, Lyapunov wrote again emphasizing that his own works deal

 mainly with the question of stability whereas Poincaré's are concerned with more
 general issues, such as the diversity of possible equilibrium figures. The main goal
 of Lyapunov was to demonstrate rigourously the result enunciated in the second edi-
 tion of Thomson and Tait's treatise (Thomson and Tait 1879-1883), affirming that the

 equilibrium of a fluid is stable if the total energy has a minimum.

 Having noticed a difference between his own definition of stability and the one

 Lyapunov proposed in his thesis, Poincaré asked for more clarification:

 What should I understand by this new definition of stability which has to move

 away from the equilibrium figure after a sufficiently small perturbation of the

 fluid, and this at least as long as there will not come to the surface any projections
 under a form of nets or blades, no matter how thin one can suppose them; in

 other words as long as there will be no wrinkles. What are those projections,

 30 For an introduction to the works of Poincaré and Lyapunov on the problem of equilibrium figures of

 a rotating fluid, see Gray (1992). For a comparative analysis of their works on differential equations see
 Mawhin ( 1 994); we will only focus on the new definition of stability proposed by the Russian mathematician.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 3 1 9

 those nets, those blades and those wrinkles? (Smirnov and Youchkevitch 1987,

 pp. 7-8).31

 Lyapunov replied that his aim was to extract, from the energy equation, all the
 consequences related to stability, which requires a definition of the exact scope of the

 idea of two equilibrium figures being "infinitely close" to one another. If we consider

 generic deformations of the figure, it may be the case that, after infinitely small per-

 turbations, the fluid figure has a distinct nature from the equilibrium figure, even if

 only because of the presence of very thin prominences. To exclude them it would be

 necessary to create hardly verifiable conditions on the nature of initial perturbations.

 Lyapunov stated accordingly:

 As this is very hard, I have preferred to slightly modify the definition of stability,

 and the modification merely comes to the fact that one now must consider the

 equilibrium figure as being stable even in those cases when, after infinitely small

 perturbations, the figure of the liquid can move away from the equilibrium figure

 more and more if the spacing is made only by means of deformations which come

 together with infinitely close thin projections (Smirnov and Youchkevitch 1987,
 p. 9) [Lyapunov's italics].32

 The important aspect in this definition is that the stability criterion requires only

 that the figures to remain close to one another - they can have different natures. As we

 will see, the mathematical stability definition Lyapunov proposed in his second thesis
 had a clear influence on these considerations.

 4.2 Qualitative, or "perturbative", stability

 The best known work of Lyapunov remains his second thesis, published in Russian
 in 1892 and translated into French 15 years later with the title Problème général de

 la stabilité du mouvement (Lyapunov 1907).33 In the foreword, Lyapunov mentioned
 Poincaré's paper "Sur les courbes" as having provided the methods to be generalized
 in a major set of applications.34

 31 Que dois-je entendre par cette nouvelle définition de la stabilité qu'après une perturbation suffisamment
 petite le liquide doit s'écarter aussi peu qu'on voudra de la figure d'équilibre au moins aussi longtemps
 qu'il ne se produit pas, à la surface, de saillies sous forme de filets ou de lames, quelque minces qu'on les
 suppose, en d'autres termes pour qu'il n'y a pas de rides. Qu'est-ce que c'est que ces saillies, ces filets, ces
 lames et ces rides?.

 32 Cela étant très difficile, j ' avais préféré de modifier un peu la définition de la stabilité, et cette modification

 se réduit à ce qu'on doit regarder la figure d'équilibre comme stable même dans le cas quand, après les
 perturbations infiniment petites, la figure du liquide peut s'écarter de plus en plus de la figure d'équilibre,
 si cet écartement ne se fait que par le moyen des déformations qui s'accompagnent des saillies infiniment
 voisines minces.

 33 An English translation of this book have been published in 1992 in a commemorative edition of its
 centenary (Lyapunov 1992).

 34 At the end of the foreword Lyapunov comments on Poincaré's works on celestial mechanics, in particular
 the article "Sur les problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique", which came out when the
 book was already in print but that contains results analogous to his.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 320 T. Roque

 In spite of the fact that Poincaré restricts his research to very special cases, he

 uses methods that allow much more general applications and they can still lead
 to several new results. We shall see that by what follows, for, mostly in my
 research, I have been guided by ideas developed in the already quoted paper
 (Lyapunov 1907).35

 Like Poincaré, Lyapunov argued that it is necessary to develop a method capa-

 ble of assuring stability in cases for which the integration of differential equations

 is not possible. The problem of the stability of equilibria consists in knowing if one
 can choose initial values small enough, so that, for all values of time after the ini-

 tial instant, the solutions remain smaller than limits given in advance, no matter how

 small these limits are. If one can integrate the differential equations, or find a potential
 function, this problem is easy to solve. But Lyapunov emphasized that it would be

 important to develop methods that would allow one to verify the stability of a solution,

 independently of the possibility of integrating the differential system.

 One of Lyapunov's main goals was to demonstrate the converse of the Lagrange-

 Dirichlet theorem. We know that a sufficient condition for stability is the potential
 function to have a maximum in the equilibrium position. But is this condition also

 necessary? He obtained this result in certain cases and provided procedures for treat-

 ing equations with constant or periodic coefficients. The conceptual tools developed

 by Lyapunov also permit a study of stability in more general cases. The paper (Mawhin
 2005) gives a good account of the most significant result in the book, we highlight

 here those aspects related to his concept of stability.

 From the standpoint of a qualitative analysis, the most remarkable aspect put

 forward by Lyapunov is to have regarded the solutions as movements, and to have

 focused on properties related to the set of movements. This has enabled him to define

 some properties of solutions by means of a direct analysis of the set of movements.

 Lyapunov's second thesis begins by suggesting how a perturbed and a non-perturbed
 movement can be mathematically defined; what & perturbation is in itself; and how a

 perturbed movement can be defined as being near to a non-perturbed one. All these

 concepts had been used earlier, but mostly in an intuitive manner, without rigorous
 definitions. This new treatment can be explained by noting that Lyapunov's interests

 went beyond an analysis of stability by means of properties related to the potential

 function. It was thus necessary to define stability directly on the set of movements.

 Lyapunov's definition of stability of equilibrium appears as follows:36
 Let (jci , . . . , xn) = (0, . . . , 0) be an equilibrium solution of a differential system

 35 Bien que M. Poincaré se borne à des cas très particuliers, les méthodes dont il se sert permettent des
 applications beaucoup plus générales et peuvent encore conduire à beaucoup de nouveaux résultats. C'est
 ce qu'on verra par ce qui va suivre, car, dans une grande partie de mes recherches, je me suis guidé par les
 idées développées dans le Mémoire cité.

 36 This definition is given in a different manner in the thesis introduction (Lyapunov 1907, pp. 209-210).
 There Lyapunov furnished a more general definition depending on the quantities (named ß/) in relation to
 which stability is studied. But we find the exact definition given here in Lyapunov (1907, p. 466).

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 321

 ^p- = Xi(x,t),...,^- = Xn(x,t)
 at at

 This solution is "stable" if, for each positive number /, arbitrarily small, we can find

 another positive number e such that whenever the functions x¿ have at initial instant
 real values satisfying || jci C^o) II < £, •••> ll*n(io)ll < e> the inequalities 11*1(011 <
 /,..., ||jcn(f)|| < / are also satisfied for all positive values of t.

 The stability of a general solution (f' (i), fi(t), . . . , fn(t)) is defined by means of

 an equilibrium point stability. Lyapunov used the transformation:

 (*1, X2, ...,*„)-► (/l(0> flit), . . . , fn(t)) + (*i, X2, . . . , Xn)

 in order to reduce the question about stability of a general solution to the related
 question of the stability of equilibria as defined above.

 The methods inspired by the paper "Sur les courbes" are used in order to detect

 stability in terms of regions in which the solutions, with initial conditions close to
 equilibrium, must be confined. Lyapunov employed his so-called second method to
 study stability in terms of the possibility of obtaining certain functions, defined in

 the neighborhood of equilibrium and not dependent on any explicit solution for the

 system. These functions, called "Lyapunov functions" nowadays, have to be found by

 trial and error methods. If a level surface of a Lyapunov function involves the equilib-

 rium point, then a solution with initial condition close to that point cannot leave its a

 neighborhood of it, and the equilibrium is stable.

 The role of these functions is somewhat analogous to those of cycles and surfaces

 without contact as proposed by Poincaré. The existence of a surface without contact

 characterizes instability. However, in Poincaré's works there were no criteria of the
 type that would ensure stability. Lyapunov's functions allow one not only to infer

 stability but also to discover the extension of the set of trajectories that do not recede

 from equilibrium, as well as the extension of the set of trajectories that tend to equilib-

 rium. In a qualitative treatment of stability, which can be named "perturbative" after

 Birkhoff, given a movement, the question is precisely to analyze its relationship with
 other neighboring movements.

 Jean Mawhin (2005, p. 672) notes that the methods developed by Lyapunov are

 more analytical than those of Poincaré. Despite this fact, his treatment of stability
 can be said to be more qualitative. There are two ways to study stability: find exact
 or approximate solutions of differential equations or obtain information about the set

 of its solutions without writing their analytical expressions. In Lyapunov's 1892 the-

 sis, we find approaches, like the second method, that allow one to infer stability of
 solutions without any knowledge of their analytical expression.

 Even if his definitions are less geometrical than Poincaré's, Lyapunov proposed

 new objects, like unperturbed and perturbed motions, that enable him to state proper-

 ties directly in the space of motions. As a consequence, his definition of stability does
 not need to take into account the analytical expression of solutions. It can thus be said

 to be a qualitative definition, not because of the geometrical way in which it is stated,

 but as a definition given directly as a property of the space of motions.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 322 T. Roque

 4.3 Poincaré's and Lyapunov's conceptions of stability

 For our purpose in subsequent sections it is sufficient to retain the manner in which

 Lyapunov treated stability for an equilibrium point. If we remember Poincaré's sec-

 tion method, the periodic solution reduces to a fixed point on the transverse section

 (the intersection of the periodic solution with the section). Since a fixed point is, with

 respect to a point transformation, analogous to an equilibrium point, the stability of a

 periodic solution can be conceived in the same way as the stability of equilibria.

 Poincaré did not define the stability of a periodic solution in this way. In Poincaré

 1890 and Poincaré 1892-1899, he did not employ the section method to define the
 stability of periodic solutions. He used the so-called "equations of variations" and

 tried to write the trigonometric functions that describe the variation of other solutions

 in a neighborhood of a periodic solution. As we have mentioned, in his works about
 celestial mechanics, Poincaré had used the section method to analyze what happens

 in the neighborhood of an unstable periodic solution.

 We will see in the later sections, in a study more concerned with the stability of

 periodic solutions, that the definition proposed by Lyapunov is better for obtaining

 results on stability by means of a direct investigation of the geometric space of solu-
 tions. Therefore, it can be said to be more "qualitative" than Poincaré's definition of

 stability.37

 Poisson stability can be seen as a definition that applies, or not, to a trajectory in

 the space of trajectories. But it concerns only an individual trajectory, and not the

 other ones in its neighborhood. As Barrow-Green (1997, p. 181) remarks, this stability

 definition given by Poincaré is less restrictive than Lyapunov's. For a trajectory to
 be stable in Lyapunov's sense, all perturbed trajectories must remain close to it, and

 also each point in the perturbed motions has to be close to its contemporaneous point

 in the unperturbed motion. However, Lyapunov's definition of the stability of equi-

 libria served as the prototype for the stability of a general motion. In the subsequent

 qualitative works concerning stability in the three body problem, in which the section

 method is employed to analyze the stability of periodic solutions, this definition was

 turned into the properly qualitative one.

 In 1897, 10 years before the translation of his second thesis into French, Lyapu-
 nov presented a synopsis of some of the results achieved in his thesis in the article
 "Sur l'instabilité de l'équilibre dans certains cas où la fonction de forces n'est pas
 un maximum" (Lyapunov 1897), published in the Journal des Mathématiques. The

 main question was to demonstrate the converse of the known result about the stability

 of equilibrium: if the force function does not attain a maximum can we be sure that
 instability occurs?

 This issue was responsible for the rare quotations of the author by his contemporar-
 ies, and we will summarize in the next part the relevant results cited by Levi-Civita.

 37 Even in the general case, to analyze stability of an arbitrary trajectory, Lyapunov's definition has become
 more useful in qualitative approaches, as we can see in Cesari (1959) or La Salle and Lefschetz (1961).

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 323

 5 Qualitative stability in the three body problem

 Levi-Civita was one of the first mathematicians to use the qualitative point of view
 introduced by Poincaré. We confine our inquiry to the long article titled "Sopra
 alcuni criteri di instabilità" (Levi-Civita 190 1).38 In this text, cited several times by

 Birkhoff, the author mentioned Lyapunov's first article in French (Lyapunov 1897),

 and regretted the fact that his work about the general stability of movement had only

 been published in Russian at that time. His acquaintance with Lyapunov's works does

 not go beyond the 1897 article and some synopses published four years before in the
 Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik.

 Levi-Civita used the section method in order to reduce the problem of stability of a

 periodic solution to the related one concerning the stability of a fixed point over two-

 dimensional section. He was the first to catch a glimpse of the possibility of defining

 stability for a periodic solution in the same manner as the stability of equilibria. In

 this sense, he produced a synthesis, using methods developed to study the stability of

 equilibria in the three body problem.

 5.1 Levi-Ci vita's synthesis

 The initial problem of (Levi-Civita 1901) is the same as that presented by Poincaré
 in Les Méthodes nouvelles (Poincaré 1892-1899, V.III, Chap. XXVI). It begins with

 a "canonical" system of differential equations ^f- = X¡ (such that ^ ^f = 0),
 possessing an integral invariant.

 For a two-dimensional system^- = X, ^ = Y, Levi-Civita noticed that Poincaré's

 research suggested that instability has a qualitative character - as it can be verified by

 means of inequalities - and stability is quantitative - as it requires conditions on the

 nature of functions X and Y . We recall that Poincaré had already remarked that the

 use of cycles without contact to verify the fact of instability was precisely the mark

 that distinguished his own methods from traditional ones. In this sense, instability can

 be considered more qualitative than stability.

 The verification of stability remained dependent upon formal conditions on the func-

 tions that intervene during the series development of X and Y - which, in certain cases,

 can be used to solve the problem by integration. An example of a quantitative condi-

 tion on the nature of functions X and Y that permits one to guarantee stability in the

 two-dimensional case is the existence of a function H such that X = y^, Y = - |j.
 If this condition is fulfilled, Levi-Civita added, neither the criterion of stability nor
 that of instability are qualitative. The same holds for the equilibrium of a material
 system under conservative forces. But what happens - he asked himself- when we

 move from a study of the stability of equilibria to a study of stability of movements?
 The use of the section method is essential in this transition and Levi-Civita started

 to study the neighborhoods of periodic solutions employing a qualitative approach to
 investigate their stability.

 38 This work contains results of three publications from the previous year, as explained in Dell'Aglio and
 Israel (1989).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 324 T. Roque

 Before describing how he did that, we emphasize that it is one of the first times

 we find a clear criterion for making a distinction between a qualitative and a quanti-

 tative approach. While the latter concerns an explicit search for analytic expressions,

 the former is satisfied with the implicit verification of certain conditions by means of

 inequalities, or features that can be inferred directly from the set of solutions seen as

 movements (without any necessity for providing an analytic expression). Lyapunov

 had already worked with a criterion of this kind, but did not put forward a discussion

 about its qualitative character.

 In order to investigate the stability of a periodic solution, Levi-Civita used Poin-

 caré's section method, and concluded that "tutto si trova in tal modo ricondotto allo

 studio delle transformazioni puntuali" (Levi-Civita 1901, p. 223). The novelty of his

 approach was to define stability by means of the behavior of a point transformation T,

 defined over the section, in the neighborhood of the fixed point O corresponding to

 the periodic solution (Fig. 1). Such transformation is unstable whenever positive and
 negative iterations of a point P by T escape any given neighborhood of 0, no matter
 how small; and T is stable in the opposite case. The periodic solution associated to a

 fixed point x¿ = 0:

 Will be said stable (...) if and only if, for each arbitrarily small neighborhood E

 of the origin [x¿ = 0], there exists an H such that, taking in H the initial position

 of the moving point, it remains in E for all positive and negative values of t.
 There will be instability in the opposite case, that is to say if does not exist an

 H endowed with the cited property; or, in other words, if arbitrarily close to the

 origin, there always exist an initial position Pq from which the moving point can
 be, for at least an instant, out of E (Levi-Civita 1901, p. 262).39

 Two pages later he concluded:

 The question of stability of periodic solutions reduces to that of point transfor-
 mations(Levi-Civita 1901, p.264).40

 He then investigated the properties of the point transformation 7' in particular the

 case in which it is unstable, using a result extracted from (Lyapunov 1897). In this

 point, Levi-Civita had already defined stability, without attributing his definition to

 Lyapunov. But the way he used Lyapunov results shows they must have had the same

 conceptions of stability.41

 39 Sarà a dirsi stabile (...) allora e solo allora che, per ogni intorno comunque piccolo E dell'origine

 [jc; = 0], ne esiste um H tale che, prendendo in H la posizione iniziale del mòbile, questo rimane in £, per

 qualunque valore positivo o negativo di t.
 Vi è instabilità nel caso opposto, ossia se non esiste um H dotato della anzidetto proprietà; o in altri termini
 se, vicino quanto si vuole all'origine, esiste sempre qualche posizione iniziale Po» a partire dalla quale il
 mobile si trova, in un istante almeno, fuori di E.

 40 La questione della stabilità delle soluzioni periodiche si riduce a quella delle transformazioni puntuali.

 41 In fact, Levi-Civita's definition is different from Lyapunov's at a single point: it considers not only future

 stability, but a the past stability of a solution as well. In mathematical terms, it is an irrelevant difference
 since it is equivalent to a mere change of t for -t in the solution. Barrow-Green (1997, p. 182) notes
 that this addition may reflect Levi-Civita's concern with classical mechanics, as his definition reflects the

 reversibility of physical processes.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 325

 For a system of equations:

 - - = Xi(x',X2,...,xn)
 ût

 where i = 1, . . . , n, Lyapunov considered each X,- a linear function of*,-, added to a

 residue of second order (or higher):

 Xi = Pi'Xi + . . . + PinXn + ^/.

 The equilibrium solution jc,- = 0 was defined to be stable or unstable exactly in the same

 manner as in his second thesis. He showed that it is unstable if there are eigenvalues

 of the [pij] matrix with positive real part.

 A similar method was used in Lyapunov (1907) in order to analyze the case of
 eigenvalues with negative real parts, which allows one to infer stability (and also to

 justify the linear approximation for small perturbations). In fact, when the equation

 has constant coefficients, the linear approximation is sufficient for a study of stability

 in almost all cases, except when eigenvalues have a zero real part, i.e., when they are

 purely imaginary. Levi-Civita analyzed precisely this situation.

 If not all the characteristic values associated with T have absolute value 1 - which

 means that the characteristic exponents are pure imaginary - one can solve the problem

 of stability. As Poincaré had demonstrated in (Poincaré 1 892-1 899), the case where all

 characteristic values have absolute value 1 corresponds to stability, but this conclusion

 is only valid in the first approximation. It is necessary to see if Poincaré's method is

 still efficient for higher order approximations. Levi-Civita showed that the demand

 that characteristic exponents be purely imaginary (stability in the first approximation)

 is far from assuring stability of a periodic solution in any approximation.

 The article "Sopra alcuni criteri di instabilità" follows with the consideration of

 canonical equations:

 dpi _ dF dqi _ dF
 dt ~~ dqi ' dt ~ dpi

 where i = 1 , 2 and F does not depend on t . For a periodic solution, examined by means
 of a point transformation over the section, Levi-Civita concluded that it is essential

 to know whether the perturbed trajectory returns infinitely close to the fixed point or
 recedes from it after an arbitrarily small variation of the initial condition. It is desirable

 to show, according to him, the general unstable character of the transformation T, even

 when the characteristic exponents are purely imaginary (condition used by Poincaré
 to define a stable periodic solution).

 Levi-Civita thus conjectured that the general case is unstable and demonstrated this

 fact for the specific situation obtained when the average movements of the sun and the
 moon around the earth are commensurable. This means that the case considered as

 "stable" by Poincaré can be unstable if the precision of the approximation is increased.

 Hence, it becomes clear that Levi-Civita's definition of periodic solutions stability fits
 better into the qualitative approach than that proposed by Poincaré.

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Using the section method, Levi-Civita showed that there are zones of instability

 that condense around the orbit of the planet.42 What remains to be discovered is how

 those regions distribute themselves inside the domain. But the author admitted that his

 methods did not allow him to go very far into this question, not even to know whether

 the instability zones cover the whole plane or not (Levi-Civita 1901, p. 295). Birkhoff

 started from this point in his own studies about the problem.

 326 T. Roque

 5.2 Tradition and innovation in Levi-Civita's works

 In their analysis of Levi-Civita's style, Dell'Aglio and Israel (1989) have already
 noticed that his works are in some ways very singular, in particular because they

 reconcile the qualitative viewpoint with the traditional approach of Lagrange's analyt-

 ical mechanics. According to them, what puts Levi-Civita and Lyapunov's definitions

 together is the fact that both mathematicians made direct use at the start of their work

 of Lagrange's and Dirichlet's definitions of stability, with a view to adjusting them to
 more general problems.

 For these historians, one of the main features of Levi-Civita's style is this effort to

 reconcile tradition and innovation, without marking out points of rupture and without

 even emphasizing his own original contributions. In fact, throughout his article on the

 stability criteria, he never emphasized the difference between his definition for the

 stability of periodic solutions and the one proposed by Poincaré.

 Although Levi-Civita's methods seem innovative, Dell'Aglio and Israel remark

 that his attitude is typical of someone who believes in a line of continuity within the
 traditional methods. This can be understood in terms of his conservative belief that a

 scientific domain must pay tribute to already accumulated results.

 These traits in Levi-Civita's scientific personality contrast sharply with Birkhoff 's.

 The contribution of the latter to the constitution of the domain of dynamical systems

 consists precisely in establishing criteria that identify what is new in qualitative meth-

 ods, explicitly showing where and how they converge or diverge by comparison with

 the traditional approach.

 This difference between Levi-Civita and Birkhoff 's styles can be felt in the letters

 they exchanged from 1913 onwards.43 In one of the first letters, dated March 3rd 1913,
 Birkhoff confessed how Levi-Civita's study of stability had impressed him as almost

 the only definite advance in the restricted three body problem made to that time. The

 general keynote of the letters was that of mutual respect and admiration in face of the
 research progress each one had accomplished. After 1918, the discussion on issues in
 celestial mechanics became briefer.

 42 This example eliminates, according to Levi-Civita, the expectation that stability is less exceptional in
 concrete cases than it is in the abstract mathematical case. In his view, it is rather surprising that stability

 appears as an exception when, from an astronomic point of view, everything points to the opposite idea
 (Levi-Civita 1901, p. 224).

 43 Birkhoff's letters to Levi-Civita have been published as (Nastasi and Tazzioli 2000, pp. 199-220). Levi-
 Civita's letters to BirkhofT have not been published yet. I thank Rossana Tazzioli for her kind help in this
 matter.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 327

 One of the last letters on the three body problem is from October 26th 1918. It is

 Birkhoff 's response to Levi-Civita's response to his paper entitled "Sur la régulariza-

 tion du problème des trois corps"(Levi-Civita 1920). For the American mathematician,

 this work represents the definitive treatment of the regularization problem, but he found

 it strange that Levi-Civita did not seem interested in showing that the main results of
 Sundman could be deduced from it.44

 On December 1st Levi-Civita replied to the letter saying that Sundman's famous

 results are immediate corollaries of the point already established in his own article:

 I have the impression that this is a true pedagogical detail, noticeable afterwards,

 and summing up, without changing anything in the concept, the final consider-

 ations of Mr. Sundman. That is the reason why I neglected it.45

 We will return to this correspondence later. So far, reference is made to this response

 only to highlight the differences between Levi-Civita's and Birkhoff 's styles and gen-

 eral positions.46 Birkhoff considered it strange that Levi-Civita did not emphasize the

 fact that a known result can be inferred in a new, simpler and clearer, manner. As we

 will see next, for Birkhoff it was fundamental to clarify the essential difference in

 methods, even if they end up with the same results.

 6 A clear criterion for distinguishing qualitative and quantitative

 approaches to stability

 The name of Birkhoff first appeared in the international mathematical community in
 the 1910s and one of his first texts on dynamical systems is the article "Quelques
 théorèmes sur le mouvement des systèmes dynamiques" (Birkhoff 1912). At the very

 beginning, Birkhoff defined the so-called "recurrent" movements, which are those that

 arbitrarily approximate any of its positions, past and future. Such recurrent movements

 are important inasmuch as they have a special property of representing, in a satisfactory

 manner, the entire extension of the movement, to any degree of approximation, during

 the whole period of time. Equilibrium points and periodic movements are particular
 cases of recurrent movements.

 Birkhoff 's recurrent movements are Poisson stable. It is precisely the denomination

 of "stability" for the recurrence property that he had criticized in 1935: "this [Poin-

 caré's] use of the word 'stability' is, however, unfortunate" (Birkhoff 1935, p. 310). He

 then noticed that it is more convenient to keep the term "stability" for other properties:

 The fundamental fact to observe here is that this concept [stability] is not in itself

 a definite one, but it is interpreted according to the question into consideration
 (Birkhoff 1935).

 44 The works of Sundman had appeared some years before (Sundman 1912).

 45 J'ai l'impression qu'il s'agit d'un véritable détail didactique, réalisable après coup, en résumant, sans y
 changer rien en concept, les dernières considérations de M. Sundman. C'est pour cela queje me suis passé.

 46 A comparison between Levi-Civita's and Sundman's works on the three body problem can be found in
 Dell'Aglio (1993).

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 328 T. Roque

 Between the 1912 article and the comment quoted above stability was very often

 discussed by Birkhoff. We will see just some examples, more directly concerned with

 the stability of periodic solutions and the definition of a qualitative treatment.

 6.1 Periodic solutions and point transformations

 One of Birkhoff's first important results was the demonstration of Poincaré's last

 geometric theorem (Poincaré 1912). It was a proposition according to which the exis-

 tence of an infinite number of periodic trajectories in dynamical problems, such as

 the restricted three body problem, could be inferred from the analysis of a transfor-
 mation of a ring to itself (defined between two closed curves over the surface of a
 two-dimensional section).

 In 1912, Poincaré had put forward the hypothesis that, if an area preserving trans-

 formation T takes the ring to itself, in which the circles forming the boundary move

 in opposite angular directions, it is possible to conclude that there are, at least, two

 invariant points inside this ring. By using the section methods, a three-dimensional

 periodic trajectory can be reduced to an invariant point over the section, and if we trace

 out a ring around that point, the result allows one to conclude that there are at least two

 other periodic trajectories in the neighborhood of the first one. As Poincaré noted in

 particular cases the demonstration of this theorem is topological in nature, but it fell to

 Birkhoff to find, in 1913, a simple procedure capable of ensuring the result (Birkhoff

 1913). It suffices to apply successively the transformation T (or T~x) noting that the

 mere fact of preserving areas can be used to conclude that a stripe of the ring should be

 taken to another stripe (with the same area), which necessarily intercepts the first one.
 After successive iterations of the transformation, the intersections of multiple rings

 should have a common point.

 After publishing his paper in 1913, motivated by the usefulness of a two-dimen-

 sional point transformation, Birkhoff devoted his studies to dynamical systems with
 two degrees of freedom. This culminated in the publication of a paper on the sub-
 ject (Birkhoff 1917), in which he stated that these systems are the "simplest type of

 non-integrable dynamical problems and possess a very high degree of mathematical
 interest"(Birkhoff 1917, p. 1).

 In this article, Birkhoff stressed Poincaré's section method. He quoted Levi-Civi-

 ta's article of 1901 to show the importance of point transformations and to present a

 definition of stability and instability in terms of its properties. By studying the effects
 of a two-dimensional transformation on a surface of a definite genus, he managed to

 establish a relationship between this number and the number of invariant points that are
 stable and unstable. In addition to that, Birkhoff showed that, given some conditions

 on the surface, there are infinitely many periodic orbits.

 In the following years, he continued to work on this problem and, in his correspon-

 dence with Levi-Civita, he seemed surprised by the possibility of obtaining a positive

 answer for a typical problem of stability. But this requires that the definition of stability
 in use be stated clearly. On 1 May 1918 he wrote:

 At present I am at work with the paper which forms the natural conclusion to the
 earlier one [from 1917] (...) and I have apparently obtained some results which

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 329

 I have been altogether astonished at. In particular I believe that I will be able to

 demonstrate that the periodic orbits of the simplest type in the restricted problem
 of three bodies are stable in the true sense that, if a certain number is irratio-

 nal, nearby orbits remain nearby, whereas, if it is rational, nearby orbits remain

 within a fixed neighborhood of the periodic orbit, although this neighborhood is

 not 'infinitesimal'. I have not yet verified all of the analytic details involved in

 this particular application of the general methods of my paper, which I expect to

 finish in a couple of months. The result as I have stated it is in harmony with your

 own fundamental results on instability, but nevertheless it has gone contrary to

 my preconceived ideas (Nastasi and Tazzioli 2000, p. 206). [our italics]

 Here the definition of stability "in the true sense" emerges, which means that solu-

 tions near the periodic orbit remain nearby. The article in preparation that Birkhoff

 referred to was published in 1920 and became one of his most famous: "Surface trans-
 formations and their dynamical applications" (Birkhoff 1920b). Here, he presented
 a rigorous definition of the section method and analyzed several properties of point

 transformations defined in the neighborhood of an invariant point.

 The use of the section method, and the resulting reduction of dynamical problems

 to problems about point transformations, is one of the main steps in the institutionali-

 zation of dynamical systems as a new domain. The quotation above is one of the first

 occasions showing Birkhoff' s desire to distinguish a new field, which is the question
 we will treat in our conclusion. Before arriving at this point, we must explain his

 results on the stability of periodic solutions.

 6.2 The instability of Poincaré's stable periodic solutions

 In order to undertake a general study of point transformations, Birkhoff started with a

 classification of invariant points. If mi and v' are coordinates of a transformed point,

 the transformation T is written as power series of u and v, with real coefficients:

 = au +bv + ...

 v' = eu + dv + . . .

 The classification of the invariant points is based on the linear terms in those series

 and depends upon the nature of the roots of the characteristic equation:

 p2 - (a + d)p + ad-bc = 0,

 where ad - be = I and the roots are p and -.

 In the first case, if p is real with a numerical value not equal to unity, a point P in
 the surface will move on a hyperbola after successive applications of T or T-' . In the

 third case considered, this point would move along a pair of parallel lines.

 But the most important for us is the second case, in which p is complex and of
 modulus 1. The transformation is a rotation around the invariant point through an
 angle 0 and every point P remains at a fixed distance from the invariant point after
 successive applications of T or T-'. This case can be divided in two subcases: the

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 irrational (when ^ is irrational); and the rational (when 0 = 0 or ^ = £, and this
 fraction is not an integer).

 Birkhoff added that the essence of this distinction is brought out clearly by means

 of a stability definition, explicitly referred to as being as analogous to the one given
 byLevi-Civitainl901:

 If a neighborhood of an invariant point can be so taken that points arbitrarily

 near the invariant point leave this neighborhood after successive applications of

 T or T-' , the invariant point is unstable', in the contrary case the invariant point

 is stable (Birkhoff 1920b, p. 5).

 The determination of curves on the surface that remains invariant under successive

 applications of Í or Li is essential for Birkhoff 's method. If there are curves of
 this sort, given by real series (analogous to the curves K and Kf already described

 by Poincaré), the transformation is called hyperbolic. In the contrary case it is called
 elliptic.

 330 T. Roque

 Fig. 4 Ring of
 instability - hyperbolic points
 between two invariant curves C'

 and Ci around a fixed point P

 The first case, of real /?, is the prototype of a hyperbolic situation; whereas the

 irrational situation is elliptic, since we have a pair of conjugate imaginary invariant
 curves. The other ones may be either hyperbolic or elliptic. Birkhoff explained the
 connection between the hyperbolic-elliptic distinction and the question of stability.
 The stable case must be defined by the existence of an infinite number of invariant

 closed curves surrounding the invariant point (Birkhoff 1920b, p. 80).

 From now on, we will just treat the case when the roots are imaginary of modulus

 1, defined as stable by Poincaré. This situation is regarded now as the one furnishing

 a possibility of stability, but not necessarily stable.

 Birkhoff showed that in the ring formed by two invariant curves C' and C2 there

 may or not be other invariant curves. If there are, this ring can be subdivided further
 into similar rings. In the integrable case, these rings reduce to single invariant curves,

 but in the general case they can be viewed as "rings of instability" (Birkhoff 1920b, p.
 91). Inside those regions there can be hyperbolic points with very complex behavior
 (Fig. 4).

 The last six pages of his more than one-hundred-page paper give some dynami-

 cal applications of these methods. Birkhoff quoted several connections with celestial

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 33 1

 mechanics all over the text, but his work is more concerned with a general study of

 point transformations defined in the neighborhood of an invariant point. He closed the

 paper by saying that the remarkable diversity and complexity of structures emerging
 when we analyze the solutions of dynamical systems with two degrees of freedom

 is not yet well understood, and the theory of point transformations must help one to

 grasp what is going on.

 Levi-Civita had already demonstrated the instability of a periodic solution for a
 system where the mean motions of the planetoid and the two other bodies are com-
 mensurable. This occurs because there are solutions that approach and recede from the

 periodic solution. In Birkhoff's language, this means that there are hyperbolic points

 in the neighborhood of an invariant point.

 If the invariant point is hyperbolic, there are invariant curves that go through it:
 one curve on which the iterated points recede from the invariant point (expanding

 dynamics) - responsible for instability - and another one on which the iterated points

 approach the invariant point (contracting dynamics). Birkhoff (1920b, p. 100) showed
 that if these two sets intersect, there is an infinite number of intersections, which

 makes the trajectories' dynamics extremely complex. In fact, the hyperbolic points
 are doubly asymptotic in the sense that Poincaré had already announced in 1890. As
 he had already noted, the presence of this kind of points, also called "homoclinic",

 makes the dynamics extremely complex.47 In the figure above, the hyperbolic points

 in the ring of instability between curves C' and Ci can be points of this type, and we

 find an explanation there of the difficulties mathematicians had found in studying this
 problem since Poincaré.

 Despite that one can expect that stability subsists, as those points are entirely con-

 tained in the rings of instability, i.e., they are confined between closed invariant curves.

 This conclusion will lead to the main definition put forward by Birkhoff for the stability

 of periodic solutions. The possibility that instability remains confined was celebrated

 by Levi-Civita in his response to the letter quoted before, in which Birkhoff informed

 him on his progress during the 1920 article preparation. On June 3rd 1918, Levi-Civita
 wrote:

 My first essay - in which instability in the strict sense emerged as a general rule

 - was rather disappointing. Even more striking are the news about the successful

 outcome of your brilliant and insightful researches that enabled you to grasp the

 laws of distribution of periodic solutions, and also to deduce from them that, in

 any case, they are stable in a suitable and very clear sense of this word.48

 In October 26th, Birkhoff replied with the following:

 Although I have not yet had the leisure to give my recent work on stability the
 extraordinarily careful verification it demands I am reasonably confident of the

 47 On the history of the discovery of doubly asymptotic solutions by Poincaré see (Anderson 1994) and
 (Barrow-Green 1997).

 48 Mon premier essai, d'où ressortait comme règle générale l'instabilité au sens strict, était plutôt déoura-
 geant. D'autant plus frappante est la nouvelle de l'heureuse issue de vos géniales et pénétrante recherches,
 qui vous ont permis de saisir les lois de distribution des solutions périodiques, et d'en déduire qu'en tout
 cas elles sont stables dans une convenable et bien nette acception de ce mot.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 following critical theorem: Let C' , C2 be two distinct continuous closed curves

 about a fixed point O which are met by any half-line ending at O in one and only

 one point. Let T be a direct, continuous, one-to-one area-preserving transforma-

 tion of the area between C' and Ci into itself, which has the further property

 of taking half-lines ending at O into curves met by any half-line ending at O at
 most once. There will then exist an invariant continuous closed curve C about O

 332 T. Roque

 met by any half-line ending at O in one and only one point. From this theorem
 follows at once the existence of an infinitude of such invariant curves, which

 need not however fill up the region between C' and C2 (Nastasi and Tazzioli
 2000, p. 209).

 In the integrable case, there are only invariant closed curves in the neighborhood

 of the invariant point. This is equivalent to complete stability (i.e., all the solutions

 in the neighborhood of a periodic solution are situated on invariant tori over which

 the integral is constant). Birkhoff was saying, in other words, that stability in the
 non-integrable case corresponds to the existence of invariant closed curves enclosing

 the invariant point, even though there may be hyperbolic points between two of these

 curves, as in Fig. 3. In fact, for a non-integrable system very close to an integrable

 one, Birkhoff demonstrated that there may be doubly asymptotic hyperbolic points in

 the rings of instability, but it does not disturb stability, at least in the sense he defined
 it.49

 This way to enunciate the problem became more precise after 1925, when Birk-
 hoff proposed an extension of Poincaré's last theorem (Birkhoff 1925). By means of

 a topological procedure,50 he showed that in the neighborhood of an elliptic periodic

 movement there are an infinite number of periodic movements.51

 As was said previously, an invariant point is considered stable if there is an invariant

 closed curve enclosing this point, as that implies the confinement of other trajectories

 in its neighborhood. Birkhoff then studied the nature of all possible invariant curves
 near an invariant point over the section, and demonstrates that an elliptic periodic
 movement is a "cluster motion" of an infinite number of other periodic movements.
 The method allows another conclusion: there are an infinite number of stable and

 unstable periodic movements in the neighborhood of an elliptic periodic movement.52
 In the integrable case, an elliptic fixed point must be stable. This coincidence led
 Poincaré to define the stability of a periodic solution in terms of the conditions now
 used to characterize ellipticity: pure imaginary characteristic exponents. BirkhofFs

 results imply that, for a system obtained by a very small perturbation of an integrable

 one, an elliptic fixed point may be unstable.

 49 These results are in the beginning of the now called KAM Theory, in a reference to mathematicians

 Kolmogorov, Arnold, and Moser.

 50 Birkhoff noticed that the importance of Analysis Situs to study the types of periodic movements is
 clarified with Morse's (1925) works.

 51 It is even possible to eliminate the condition that transformation T preserves the areas (Birkhoff 1925,
 p. 299).

 52 Apart from the existence of non-periodic movements that are uniform limits of periodic movements,
 and therefore "quasi-periodic".

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 333

 The necessary and sufficient condition to ensure stability is the existence of an infi-

 nite number of invariant closed curves arbitrarily near the invariant point. This is the

 same as saying that the periodic movement is stable if there exists an infinite number

 of invariant tori closing down upon the curve of the given periodic motion. This is the

 true sense of stability Birkhoff had referred to in his 1 st May 1918 letter to Levi-Ci vita.

 Hence, for a non-integrable situation, even if close enough to an integrable one,

 the discovery of complex movements in the neighborhood of an elliptic periodic point

 demands a redefinition of stability. That is the reason why a periodic movement is said

 to be "stable" only if movements sufficiently close to the periodic movement remain
 in a small neighborhood at any instant, as it appears in the 1927 book Dynamical

 Systems. Birkhoff stated accordingly that:

 Stability in this fundamental qualitative sense is not to be confused with the

 'complete formal stability' introduced earlier, and a periodic motion 'of stable

 type' may or may not be stable (Birkhoff 1927a, p. 220).

 The condition used by Poincaré to define stability of a periodic solution only indi-

 cates whether or not the invariant point, to which the solution corresponds over the

 section, is of "stable" type. The two situations - stable and of stable type - are equiva-

 lent for an integrable system, since in the neighborhood of an elliptic invariant point on

 the section there is a family of invariant closed curves arbitrarily close to the invariant

 point. However, in the non-integrable case, this equivalence is no longer valid.

 6.3 Several types of stability

 Levi-Civita had already distinguished qualitative and quantitative stability. Birkhoff

 made the definitions more precise. In his view, we can speak of two different kinds of

 stability: one that can be named "formal" and another one that is properly speaking

 "qualitative". The formal definition reflects the classical treatment about the problem
 of stability of the solar system since Lagrange and Laplace. Stability is verified by
 means of analytic conditions expressing properties of solutions related to periodic-

 ity. The qualitative definition has a perturbative character and considers stability as a

 property of the whole set of solutions seen as movements.

 Both types can be found in Poincaré's works. His definitions of stability for periodic

 solutions reflect properties of series developments. The inspiration for the definition

 of Poisson stability comes from traditional approaches, but the methods Poincaré used

 to investigate it were quite geometrical - as the intervention of the recurrence theorem
 in Poincaré (1892-1899). On the other hand, stability as confinement can be said to
 be qualitative.

 In the analysis of the stability of periodic solutions, we can also identify mixed
 approaches: the stable case is defined in a formal manner, but the unstable one, defined

 as opposed to the stable, is analyzed by means of qualitative methods, as surfaces with-

 out contact and asymptotic surfaces. Poincaré showed that, in the three body problem,
 when the average movement of the small body is commensurable with the average
 movement of the two other, formal series can be obtained and there is stability in the
 traditional astronomic sense (formal). In the same commensurable case, by using a

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 better than linear approximation, Levi-Civita showed that a periodic solution is not
 stable in the sense he designated as "qualitative". As a consequence, formal stability
 does not imply qualitative stability.

 This conclusion and the research described in the previous part led Birkhoff to dis-

 tinguish two types of stability in the book Dynamical Systems (Birkhoff 1927a). On

 the one hand one has the "formal" definition, named "astronomic" or "trigonometric".

 On the other, there is a properly qualitative definition, also named "mathematical" or

 "perturbative". The formal condition is used to designate an invariant point of "gen-

 erally stable type". This point is properly "stable" when all movements going through

 initial conditions sufficiently close remain indefinitely in a small neighborhood of this

 334 T. Roque

 point.

 The definition proposed by Levi-Civita in this case is, according to Birkhoff, quali-

 tative par excellence. Birkhoff briefly quoted Lyapunov's research in (Birkhoff 1927 'a,

 p. 122), without emphasizing he had already proposed a stability definition of the same

 kind. We can say that the use of Levi-Civita's works shows an indirect influence of

 Lyapunov. However, it is important to notice that Birkhoff did not take from Poincaré
 the same tools as Lyapunov had done. For him, the section method, which did not

 interest Lyapunov, is the most fruitful invention presented by Poincaré in his works

 on differential equations. This indicates a different perception of the importance of

 perturbative stability, even if Birkhoff 's definition is analogous to Lyapunov's.

 Birkhoff added that an "outstanding question in dynamics is whether or not the com-

 plete formal stability assures stability in the fundamental qualitative sense" (Birkhoff

 1927a, p. 227). From this moment onwards, one needs to answer the following gen-

 eral questions: Does formal stability ensure such qualitative stability (which Birkhoff

 calls "actual stability")? If not, does formal stability imply actual stability in important

 special cases such as the restricted three body problem?

 Birkhoff stated then that a movement has "stability of the /nth order" when both

 properties are satisfied:

 (A) movements in the neighborhood of the given movement remain within a con-

 trolled distance according to ^ (perturbative stability);

 (B) the coordinates of any movement can be represented in terms of trigonometric

 series with an error limited by €m during a fixed interval (trigonometric stability).

 A movement is "completely stable" if it is stable to all orders. Perturbative stability

 does not need trigonometric stability (B), although this is sufficient for a demonstration

 of perturbative stability in some cases (B implies A, but A does not imply B). The con-

 dition (B) is, therefore, stronger and often used to infer (A), even if it is harder to obtain

 than (A). Hence, perturbative stability may be present even if one is unable to write the

 series expansion of the movements. In this case, it is worth investigating directly, by

 means of geometrical and topological methods, whether there is perturbative stability
 or not.

 Before Birkhoff, the two notions of stability expressed by conditions (A) and (B)

 had been mixed up. One of the reasons for that lies in the fact that these conditions
 are equivalent for the equations of dynamics in the integrable case. Research done
 until Birkhoff 's time was concerned essentially with the nearly integrable situation.

 However, in the non-integrable case, conditions (A) and (B) are different and it is

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 necessary to propose new methods to investigate qualitative stability directly in the

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 335

 space of motions.

 In the second half of the 1920s Birkhoff wrote articles in which he declared his

 intention of unveiling the "mysterious significance of the Hamiltonian equations".53 In

 these works, Birkhoff distinguished quantitative and qualitative stability in the "gen-

 eral equations of dynamics" - equations in Hamiltonian form that arise from a special
 type of variational principle and describe a nearly integrable system. He suggested
 that, in order to understand the relevance these equations acquired in the nineteenth

 century, one must have in mind there is a special relationship between formal complete

 stability and qualitative stability in the systems they describe. We will not take time to

 examine these works because this would lead us away from our goal. Birkhoff wished

 to show that the importance of these equations is less a consequence of the natural

 laws than a consequence of the fact that, for them, the two types of stability (formal

 and perturbative) are indeed associated. However, in order to investigate the stability

 of solutions defined by non-integrable Hamiltonian systems one has to describe the

 behavior of their trajectories in the space of motions. This same procedure should be
 developed for a general, not necessarily Hamiltonian, system.

 7 Conclusion: stability and dynamical systems theory

 The qualitative methods introduced by Poincaré are now unanimously celebrated as

 a great invention. Notwithstanding, it was not always like this. Regarding the paper

 that earned the prize offered by the King of Sweden, Barrow-Green observes that:

 Its sheer novelty would probably have been sufficient to make the memoir almost

 inaccessible to those of a more practical persuasion. This was certainly the view

 adopted by Mittag-Leffler, who, while studying the original memoir, expressed

 the concern that Poincaré's resolution of the restricted three body problem was

 given in a form that would be difficult to understand by anyone except those
 familiar with this work (Barrow-Green 1997, pp. 107-108).

 From the end of the nineteenth century up to the first two decades of the twentieth

 century, it seems that qualitative methods were not very easily accepted. In an article

 published in the journal Science, Birkhoff (1920a) ranked the most important results

 about dynamical systems since the very end of nineteenth century, making a vehement

 defence of qualitative methods. In the final part of the article, he argued that qualitative

 information about the movements defined by a dynamical system is fully satisfactory:

 The recent advances supplement in an important way the more physical, formal,

 and computational aspects of the science by providing a rigorous and qualitative
 background.

 To deny a position of great importance to these results, because of lack of empha-
 sis upon the older aspects of the sciences would be as illogical as to deny the
 importance of the concept of the continuous number system merely because of

 53 We refer to the texts Birkhoff (1926b), Birkhoff (1926a), Birkhoff (1927a) and Birkhoff (1927b, p. 1).

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 336 T. Roque

 the fact that in computation attention is confined to rational numbers (Birkhoff
 1920a, p. 5).

 It seems there had been researchers who questioned the relevance of qualitative

 analysis. Even if it is an interesting question, it is not our purpose in this article to

 investigate to whom the above statement was directed. But seemingly in 1920 there

 was a need to speak in favor of qualitative methods.

 Some years earlier, Karl Sundman had solved, in a certain sense, the three body

 problem. By showing that there exists a convergent series expansion for the coordi-

 nates of the bodies valid for all time values, he had provided an analytic solution to the

 problem, which seemed impossible to many mathematicians before him. Two papers

 on this problem were published respectively in 1907 and 1909 in the Acta Societatis
 Scientiarum Fennicae [(Sundman 1907) and (Sundman 1909)], but Sundman's works

 only became known after the publication of his main results in the Acta Mathematica,
 (Sundman 1912).

 The historical context of these works and their reception have been analyzed in
 detail by Barrow-Green (2010). She observes that in the years following the 1912

 publication, "while Sundman's mathematical dexterity was widely lauded, it had not
 gone unnoticed that his result gave no practical help to astronomers, whose agenda
 was rather different from that of the mathematicians" (Barrow-Green 2010, p. 191).

 Some mathematicians doubted that Sundman's series could be suitable for providing

 qualitative information about astronomical phenomena than the trigonometric series,

 as these series give no properties of the motion. In 1917 Whittaker referred to the result
 in the new edition of his Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid
 Bodies (Whittaker 1917) but, as Barrow-Green notices, described it as a considerable

 advance rather than a solution, indicating that he was hesitant about how to classify
 the result. This ambivalent reaction is characteristic of what she describes as the third

 stage in the reception of Sundman's results, which began after the First World War and
 continued up until the early 1990s. In this period, Poincaré's work had changed the

 nature of the subject, at least in the highly theoretical sense, and it was not obvious in
 which direction the research on celestial mechanics would go. Barrow-Green points
 out that:

 Poincaré's mathematics was difficult and held little immediate promise for the

 practical mathematical astronomer. Sundman's solution was in a similar vein.
 While not of the same level of difficulty as the work of Poincaré, it neverthe-

 less encompassed an analytical result: a result in pure mathematics and without

 practical application. For applied mathematicians the problem remained ostensi-

 bly unsolved and their appreciation of Sundman's achievement was correspond-
 ingly muted (Barrow-Green 2010, p. 195).

 The discussions about the status of Sundman's results raised the question of what

 counts as a "solution" in the context of an applied mathematics problem, as Barrow-

 Green remarks, but the same question can be brought to the context of pure mathemat-

 ics. In the article cited above, published in Science, Birkhoff qualified Sundman works
 as "remarkable", but he added immediately after that his results "solves" the problem

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 337

 of three bodies in a highly artificial sense (Birkhoff 1920a, p. 53).54 In the same 1920

 article, Birkhoff states that the question of stability is beyond the demonstration of

 stability in celestial mechanics. Rather, it is a question of pure mathematics, that of

 determining the general character of the limitations upon the possible variations of the
 coordinates in dynamical problems (Birkhoff 1920a).

 This brings us to the heart of the qualitative approach. As Birkhoff explained, the

 question of stability must be seen as a subproblem of another, more general problem:

 to describe the global aspect of the set of trajectories in the space of motions. In other

 words, it is necessary to describe the qualitative aspect of trajectories as a whole in
 order to obtain some information about stability.

 Poincaré had already performed an analysis of the same kind. An example can be

 found in the first parts of "Sur les courbes", when he described the topographic aspect
 of the whole set of trajectories in a two-dimensional situation to infer results about

 stability. In higher dimensions, we can often find similar approaches in his works about

 celestial mechanics. However, the qualitative definition of stability that intervenes in

 these results - the one that associates it with the confinement of trajectories in some
 region of space - remains almost implicit. Unstable situations can be identified by
 means of properly qualitative methods, but the stability definition in Poincaré's works

 is still dependent upon the possibility of writing functions, what characterizes formal

 stability.

 We hope to have shown the role qualitative analysis has played in the constitution

 of dynamical systems as a new domain of research, and also the central place of sta-

 bility in this history. From the moment treatises and popular papers begin to appear,

 such as those published by Birkhoff, we can say a new field of research has emerged.
 Definitions thus become clearer and, from this new viewpoint, the older definitions

 having similar characteristics to the ones then proposed are considered "implicit". In
 this sense we can describe Poincaré qualitative stability conception as being merely
 implicit.

 Only with Levi-Civita's and - above all - Birkhoff's works, both making strong
 use of Poincaré's methods, does one come to an explicit qualitative definition of sta-

 bility. The issue of periodic solutions provides an excellent example of how things
 happened. In the integrable case, the elliptic situation is stable. But beyond that case,

 even if the system is very close to an integrable, it is still necessary to distinguish
 stability from ellipticity. As a consequence, it is also necessary to propose a definition
 of stability "in the true sense", as quoted in the letter Birkhoff sent to Levi Civita in
 1918 (mentioned in Sect. 6.1).

 In the non-integrable case, qualitative stability cannot be studied by means of ana-

 lytical expressions and a direct analysis of the possible types of solution in the neigh-
 borhood of periodic movements is needed. Hence, it is important to investigate the
 invariant curves that goes through the fixed point on the transverse section. The new

 criterion of selection, fundamental to research to today, respects the separation between

 54 Barrow-Green notices that this was not Birkhoff's last pronouncement on the subject, since he devoted
 a large part of the final chapter of his book Dynamical Systems to Sundman's contribution. The discussion

 we propose here being not that of Sundman's works reception, we do not think it is worth to analyze the
 commentaries.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 338 T. Roque

 elliptic and hyperbolic situations.55 This classification gives room for the description

 of the whole set of trajectories in the space of motions. But the remarkable diversity

 and complexity of structures of trajectories defined by dynamical systems is very dif-

 ficult to grasp, and one of Birkhoff 's main contributions of is to have suggested that a

 theory of transformations can be helpful for this task.

 The context of non-integrable Hamiltonian systems, and even the more general

 systems investigated by Birkhoff is another factor that has led research in the direction

 of a general description of trajectories. The richness, and above all the inexorability

 in the use of qualitative methods could not appear while the search for integrability,

 in the classical meaning of the term, remained the main goal of research. When it is

 possible to calculate and write analytic expressions, the qualitative methods are merely

 auxiliaries. Yet, when those analytical methods prove to be insufficient, it becomes

 necessary to search for new directions and the qualitative approach assumes a central
 place.

 From his first articles, Birkhoff insisted on the importance of Poincaré's works for an

 inquiry into non-integrable systems. Beyond the studies of integrable systems under-

 taken by Lagrange, a thorough investigation of non-integrable dynamical problems is

 essential for the further progress of research (Birkhoff 1915). And he continued:

 Until now only periodic movements and certain closely allied movements have
 been treated with any degree of success in such problems, but the final goal of

 dynamics embraces the characterization of all types of movement, and of their
 interrelation (Birkhoff 1915).

 Here, it is possible to notice his concern with the general study of trajectories in

 relation to the consideration of non-integrable systems. In 1934, Birkhoff reaffirmed

 this connection in an analysis of Poincaré's works on differential equations:

 They [the works of Poincaré] are likely to stand always as the most important
 works in this field [celestial mechanics]. Lagrange, Jacobi, and other mathema-

 ticians had fastened attention upon integrable cases (...) In the field of celestial
 mechanics, Laplace and the succeeding theoretical astronomers had been con-
 tent to use formal series as a means of systematic computation. But Poincaré was

 the first to attack the general question of non-integrable systems of differential

 equations from a purely mathematical point of view (Birkhoff 1934).

 The qualitative approach is thus recognized as being "purely mathematical". In the
 domain of differential equations, mathematics has to progress beyond the solution of

 specific problems to develop a more general study, which can permit a classification
 of the different possible types of trajectory. This is the new meaning of "solution"

 assigned to the qualitative treatment of differential equations.56 The field of dynam-
 ical systems emerges from this conception of what to "solve" a dynamical problem

 55 Yoccoz (2007) shows that in all cases in which it is possible to understand something about the behavior of

 a set of trajectories, the description ultimately depends on hyperbolicky or quasi-periodicity of trajectories.

 56 Chenciner (2007) suggests that the possibility of a global qualitative description of trajectories can be
 seen as a kind of integrability. This means that any system defining a (qualitatively) well-understood space

 of trajectories can be considered as fully integrable.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 339

 means, leading to a separation from the traditional domains of differential equations
 and celestial mechanics.

 Acknowledgments I am grateful to Frédéric Brechenmacher, José Ferreiros, and Marco Panza for having
 read the first version of this article and made valuable suggestions. Any remaining problems are of my full

 responsibility. The author was partially supported with grants received from FAPERJ (Fundação de Amparo

 à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro) by means of the program Jovem Cientista do Nosso Estado.

 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncom-
 mercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
 provided the original authors) and source are credited.

 References

 48(2): 133-147.

 Anderson, K.G. 1994. Poincaré's discovery of homoclinic points. Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 Barrow-Green, J. 1994. Oscar IPs prize competition and the error in Poincaré's memoir on the three body

 problem. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 48: 107-131 .

 Barrow-Green, J. 1997. Poincaré and the Three Body Problem. Providence: American Mathematical Soci-

 ety, London Mathematical Society.

 Barrow-Green, J. 2010. The dramatic episode of Sundman. Historia Mathematica 37:164-203.
 Birkhoff, G.D. 1912. Quelques théorèmes sur le mouvement des systèmes dynamiques. Bulletin de la

 Société mathématique de France 40:305-323. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 1, 654-672.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1913. Proof of Poincaré's geometric theorem. Transactions of the American Mathematical

 Society 14:14-22. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 1, 673-681.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1915. The restricted problem of three bodies. Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo

 39:1-70.

 t. 2, 106-110.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1917. Dynamical systems with two degrees of freedom. Transactions of the American

 Mathematical Society 18:199-300. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 1-102.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1920a. Recent advances in dynamics. Science (N.S.) 51(1307):51-55. In Birkhoff (1950),

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1920b. Surface transformations and their dynamical applications. Acta Mathematica 43:1-

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1925. An extension of Poincaré's last geometric theorem. Acta Mathematica 47:297-311.

 1 19. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 1 1 1-129.

 In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 252-266.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1926a. Sur la signification des équations canoniques de la dynamique. Comptes rendus de

 l'Académie des Sciences 183:516-519. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 279-282.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1926b. Über gewisse Zentralbewegungen dynamischer système. Ges. d. Wiss. Nachrichten.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1927a. Dynamical Systems. Providence: American Mathematical Society. Reprinted in 1966

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1927b. Stability and the equations of dynamics. American Journal of Mathematics 49: 1-38.

 In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 283-294.

 with additional references by Jürgen Moser.

 In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 295-332.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1934. The work of Poincaré on differential equations. American Mathematical Society

 Bulletin 40:363-366. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 3, 544-547.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1935. Nouvelles recherches sur les systèmes dynamiques. Memoriae Pont. Acad. Sci. Novi

 Lyncaei 1(3):65-216. In Birkhoff (1950), t. 2, 530-661.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1950. Collected Mathematical Papers. Providence: American Mathematical Society.

 Reprinted in 1968, New York: Dover.

 Brechenmacher, F. 2007. L'identité algébrique d'une pratique portée par la discussion sur l'équation à l'aide
 de laquelle on détermine les inégalités séculaires des planètes (1766-1874). Sciences et Techniques en
 Perspective 1:5-85.

 Cesari, L. 1959. Asymptotic Behavior and Stability Problems in Ordinary Differential Equations. Berlin-

 Göttingen: Springer.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 340 T. Roque

 et al. (1992), 274-305.

 et al. (1996), 13-33.

 mathématiques 8: 5-65.

 Chabert, J.-L., and A. Dahan-Dalmedico. 1992. Les idées nouvelles de Poincaré. In Dahan-Dalmedico

 Chenciner, A. 2007. De la mécanique céleste à la théorie des systèmes dynamiques, aller et retour: Poincaré

 et la géométrisation de l'espace des phases. In Franceschelli et al. (2007), 13-36.

 Dahan-Dalmedico, A. 1996. Le difficile héritage de Henri Poincaré en systèmes dynamiques. In Greffe

 Dahan-Dalmedico, A., J.-L. Chabert, and K. Chemla, eds. 1992. Chaos et déterminisme. Paris: Seuil.

 Darrigol, O. 2002. Stability and instability in nineteenth-century fluid mechanics. Revue d'histoire des

 Dell'Aglio, L. 1993. Tradizioni di ricerca nella meccanica celeste classica: il problema dei tre corpi in

 Levi-Civita e Sundman. Physis. Rivista Internazionale di Storia della Scienza 30(1): 105-144.

 Dell'Aglio, L., and G. Israel. 1987. 1 temi della stabilità e dell'analisi qualitativa nell'opera di Levi-civita

 et di Volterra. In La Matematica tra le Due guerre mondiali, ed. A. Guerraggio, 125-142. Bologna:
 Pitagora.

 Dell'Aglio, L., and G. Israel. 1989. La théorie de la stabilité et l'analyse qualitative des équations différenti-
 elle ordinaires dans les mathématiques italliennes: le point de vue de Tullio Levi-Civita. Cahiers du
 séminaire d'histoire des mathématiques 10:283-321.

 Franceschelli, S., M. Paty, and T. Roque, eds. 2007. Chaos et Systèmes Dynamiques, éléments pour une

 Gilain, C. 1977. La théorie géométrique des équations différentielles de Poincaré et l'histoire de l'analyse.

 epistemologie. Paris: Hermann.

 Thèse de doctorat, Université de Paris7.

 Gilain, C. 1991. La théorie qualitative de Poincaré et le problème de l'intégration des équations différenti-
 elles. In La France mathématique. La Société Mathématique de France (1872-1914), éd. H. Gispert,
 215-242. Paris: Société Française d'Histoire des Sciences et des Techniques et Société Mathématique
 de France.

 Grattan-Guinness, I. 1997. The Norton History of the Mathematical Sciences. New York: W.W. Norton &

 Grattan-Guinness, I., and R. Cooke, eds. 2005. Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics (1640-1940).

 Company.

 Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 (1992), 502-524.

 Blanchard, Akademie Verlag.

 70(2):589-639.

 Gray, J. 1992. Poincaré, topological dynamics, and the stability of the solar system. In Harman and Shapiro

 Greffe, J.-L., G. Heinzmann, and K. Lorenz, eds. 1996. Henri Poincaré: Science et Philosophie. Paris:

 Gutzwiller, M.C. 1998. Moon-Earth-Sun: The oldest three-body problem. Reviews of Modern Physics

 Hadamard, J. 1901. Sur l'itération et les solutions asymptotiques des équations différentielles. Bulletin de

 la Société mathématique de France 29:224-228.

 Harman, P.M., and A.E. Shapiro. 1992. The investigation of difficult things: Essays on Newton and the
 history of exact sciences in honour ofD. T. Whiteside. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

 Hill, G.W. 1878. Researches in the lunar theory. American Journal of Mathematics 1(5): 129-145.

 La Salle, J., and S. Lefschetz. 1961. Stability ofLyapunov's Direct Method. New York: Academic Press.
 Lagrange, J.L. 1774. Recherches sur les équations séculaires des mouvements des noeuds et des inclin-
 aisons des orbites des planètes. Mémoires de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris. In Lagrange
 (1867-1892), t. 6, 635-709.

 Lagrange, J.L. 1781-1782. Théorie des variations séculaires des éléments des planètes. Nouveaux mémoires
 de l'Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles-Lettres de Berlin. In Lagrange (1867-1892), t. 5, 127-207,
 208-344.

 Lagrange, J.L. 1867-1892. Œuvres de Lagrange. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.
 Lagrange, J.L. 1788. Mécanique analytique. Pans: La Veuve Desaint. Kepnnted m iy»y. ťans: Jacques

 Laplace, P.-S. 1796. Exposition du système du monde. Paris: Impr. du Cercle-Social. In Laplace (1878-

 Laplace, P.-S. 1878-1912. Œuvres complètes de Laplace. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.
 Laplace, P.-S. 1891-1904. Traité de Mécanique Céleste. Paris: Gauthier- Villars. In Laplace (1878-1912),

 Laskar, J. 1992. La stabilité du système solaire. In Dahan-Dalmedico et al. (1992), 170-21 1.

 Gabay.

 1912), t. 6.

 t. 1-5.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Stability of trajectories from Poincaré to Birkhoff 341

 Lattes, S. 1906. Sur les équations fonctionnelles qui définissent une courbe ou une surface invariante par

 une transformation. Annali di Matematica Pura i Applicata 13: 1-138.

 Le Verrier, U.-J. 1856. Annales de l'Observatoire de Paris, vol. 2. Paris: Mallet Bachelet.

 Leine, R. 2010. The historical development of classical stability concepts: Lagrange, Poisson and Lyapunov

 Lejeune-Dirichlet, J.P.G. 1846. Über die Stabilität des gleichgewichts. Journal für die reine und angewandte

 stability. Nonlinear Dynamics 59: 173-182.

 Mathematik 32:85-88.

 Levi-Civita, T. 1901. Sopra alcuni criteri di instabilità. Annali di Matematica Pura i Applicata 5:221-308.
 Levi-Civita, T. 1920. Sur la régularisation du problème des trois corps. Acta Mathematica 42:99-144.

 Lützen, J. 1984. Joseph Liouville's work on the figures of equilibrium of a rotating mass of fluid. Archive

 for History of Exact Sciences 30(2): 1 13-166.

 Lyapunov, A.M. 1897. Sur l'instabilité de l'équilibre dans certains cas où la fonction de forces n'est pas un

 maximum. Journal des Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées (5e série) 111:81-94.

 Lyapunov, A.M. 1904. Sur la stabilité des figures ellipsoïdales d'équilibre d'un liquide animé d'un mouv-

 ement de rotation. Annales de la Faculté des Sciences de l'Université de Toulouse (2) 6:5-1 16.

 Lyapunov, A.M. 1907. Problème général de la stabilité du mouvement (translated by E. Davaux). Annales
 de la Faculté des Sciences de l'Université de Toulouse (2) 9: 203-474. Reprinted in 1988, Paris: Jacques
 Gabay.

 Lyapunov, A.M. 1992. The General Problem of the Stability of Motion. Washington: Taylor & Francis.
 Mawhin, J. 1994. The centennial legacy of Poincaré and Lyapunov in ordinary differential equations.

 Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo (II) 34:9-46.

 Mawhin, J. 1996. The early reception in france of the work of Poincaré and Lyapunov in the qualitative

 theory of differential equations. Philosophia Scientiœ 1(4): 1 19-133.

 Mawhin, J. 2005. Aleksandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov thesis on the stability of motion (1892). In Grattan-

 Guinness and Cooke (2005), (eds.) 664-676.

 Morse, M. 1925. Relations between the critical points of a function of n independent variables. Transactions

 oftheAMS 27:345-396.

 Nabonnand, P. 2000. Les recherches sur l'œuvre de Poincaré. SMF-Gazette 85:33-54.

 Nastasi, P., and R. Tazzioli. eds. 2000. Aspetti scientifici e umani nella corrispondenza di Tullio Levi-Civita

 (1873-1941), n. 12. Palermo: Quaderno PRISTEM.

 Poincaré, H., and G. Mittag-Leffler. 1999. La correspondance entre Henri Poincaré and Gösta Mittag-
 Leffler, avec en annexe les lettres échangées par Poincaré avec Fredholm, Gyldèn et Phragmén. Basel:
 Birkhaüser. Published by P. Nabonnand.

 Poincaré, H. 1881. Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle (Ve partie). Journal de

 Mathématiques (3e série) 7:375^22. In Poincaré (1951-1956), 1. 1, 3^4.

 Poincaré, H. 1882. Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle (2e partie). Journal de

 Mathématiques (3e série) 8:251-296. In Poincaré (1951-1956), 1. 1, 44-84.

 Poincaré, H. 1885a. Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle (3e partie). Journal

 de Mathématiques (4e série) 1:167-244. In Poincaré (1951-1956), 1. 1, 90-158.

 Poincaré, H. 1885b. Sur l'équilibre d'une masse fluide animée d'un mouvement de rotation. Acta Mathem-

 atica 7:159-380. In Poincaré (1951-1956), t. 7, 40-140.

 Poincaré, H. 1886. Mémoire sur les courbes définies par une équation différentielle (4e partie). Journal de

 Mathématiques (4e série) 2:151-217. In Poincaré (1951-1956), 1. 1, 167-222.

 Poincaré, H. 1889. Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique avec des notes par

 l'auteur- Mémoire couronné du prix de S.M. le Roi Oscar II. Not published.

 Poincaré, H. 1890. Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique. Acta Mathematica

 13:1-270. In Poincaré (1951-1956), t. 7, 262-479.

 Poincaré, H. 1892-1899. Méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.
 Poincaré, H. 1912. Sur un théorème de géométrie. Rendiconti dei circolo matematico di Palermo 33:375-

 407. In Poincaré (1951-1956), t. 6, 499-538.

 Poincaré, H. 1951-1956. Œuvres d'Henri Poincaré. Ed. Paul Appel et al. Paris: Gauthier- Villars.

 Poisson, S.D. 1808. Mémoire sur les inégalités séculaires des moyens mouvements des planètes. Journal

 de l'école Polytechnique 15(1): 1-56.

 Robadey, A. 2006. Différentes modalités de travail sur le général dans les recherches de Poincaré sur les

 systèmes dynamiques. Thèse de doctorat, Université Paris7.

 Roque, T. 2007. Les enjeux du qualitatif dans la définition d'un système dynamique. In Franceschelli et al.

 (2007), 37-66.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Smirnov, V.l., and A.P. Youchkevitch. 1987. Correspondence de A. M. Liapunov avec H. Poincaré. Cahiers

 du Séminaire d'Histoire des Mathématiques 8:1-18. www.numdam.org.

 Sundman, K.F. 1907. Recherches sur le problème des trois corps. Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae

 342 T. Roque

 Sundman, K.F. 1909. Nouvelles recherches sur le problème des trois corps. Acta Societatis Scientiarum

 34:1-43.

 Fennicae 35:1-27 '.

 University Press.

 Paris: Jacques Gabay.

 Sundman, K.F. 1912. Mémoire sur le problème des trois corps. Acta Mathematica 36:105-179.

 Taton, R., C. Wilson, and M. Hoskin. 2009. The general history of astronomy, vol. 2: Planetary astronomy

 from the renaissance to the rise of astrophysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Thomson, W., and P.G. Tait. 1879-1883. Treatise on Natural Philosophy (2nd ed). Cambridge: Cambridge

 Tisserand, F. 1889-1896. Traité de Mécanique Céleste. Paris: Gauthier- Villars et fils. Reprinted in 1990,

 Whittaker, E.T. 1917. A treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies, 2nd edn. Cam-

 bridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Wise, N. 2005. William Thomson and Peter Guthrie Tait, Treatise on natural philosophy, 1st edn (1867).

 In Grattan-Guinness and Cooke (2005), 521-533.

 Yoccoz, J.C. 2007. Hyperbolické et quasipériodicité. In Franceschelli et al. (2007), 145-156.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:24:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

