 

 

 

 

Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications of Jakob Steiner and Julius Plücker

(1827–1829)
Author(s): Jemma Lorenat
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 4 (July 2016), pp. 413-462
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913438
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:58 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:413^62 /β\ _ M ,
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-015-0174-8 VC/

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications
 of Jakob Steiner and Julius Plücker (1827-1829)

 Jemma Lorenat1

 Received: 7 July 2015 / Published online: 9 February 2016

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016

 Abstract In their publications during the 1820s, Jakob Steiner and Julius Plücker fre

 quently derived the same results while claiming different methods. This paper focuses

 on two such results in order to compare their approaches to constructing figures, calcu

 lating with symbols, and representing geometric magnitudes. Underlying the repetitive

 display of similar problems and theorems, Steiner and Plücker redefined synthetic and

 analytic methods in distinctly personal practices.

 1 Introduction

 One reads frequently that analytic and synthetic methods divided early nineteenth
 century geometry. So Felix Klein claimed in his 1872 paper, "Vergleichende
 Betrachtungen über neuere geometrische Forschungen," in which he called for an

 end to methodological divisions in geometry. As it appeared in the English translation
 of 1893:

 The distinction [Unterschied] between modern synthesis and modern analytic

 geometry must no longer be regarded as essential, inasmuch as both subject

 matter and methods of reasoning have gradually taken a similar form [gestaltet]

 Research for this article was made possible through the generous assistance of the Ecole Polytechnique
 archives in Palaiseau, the Hochschularchiv of the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule in Zürich, and
 the National Research Council of Canada archives in Ottawa.

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 Ε JemmaLorenat

 jlorenat @ pitzer.edu

 1050 North Mills Avenue, Claremont 91711, Los Angeles, CA 90026, USA

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 414

 J. Lorenat

 in both. We choose therefore in the text as common designation of them both
 the term projective geometry. (Klein 1893, 216)

 Here, we shall contest whether such a dichotomy really operated in geometry during the

 first half of the nineteenth century. Klein's categorization of two opposing geometries,

 however, aligned with the recently published biographies of the analytic geometer

 Julius Plücker (Clebsch 1872; Dronke 1871). In his biography, Adolf Dronke explained

 that Plücker had stopped research in geometry in 1847 due to opposition from the

 influential synthetic geometer, Jakob Steiner.

 Steiner declared that he would no longer write in Crelle's Journal, if Plücker's

 work still continued to appear there. Berlin was thereby ruined for him and it is

 easy to grasp why he submitted his scientific works mostly to foreign journals,

 where he knew that his contributions were at least not despised. (Dronke 1871,
 11-12)1

 In fact, Plücker did stop publishing articles in geometry in 1847, when he began a

 position as a professor of physics at the University of Bonn.2 Accordingly, Plücker's

 research turned to experimental physics.

 The perception of a long-standing dichotomy between methods and geometers per

 sisted. During the early twentieth century, several articles written as part of Klein's

 Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften included historical analyses of

 early nineteenth-century geometry. In "Gegensatz von synthetischer und analytis

 cher Geometrie in seiner historischen Entwicklung im 19. Jahrhundert," Gino Fano

 assessed the opposition as a matter of difference in "style" with Plücker and Steiner

 positioned on opposing sides (Fano 1907). This division is apparent from the chapter
 titles alone: the second chapter concerned "Einsetzen der synthetischen Geometrie

 durch Poncelet, Möbius, Steiner, Chasles," and the following chapter "Entsprechende

 Entwicklung der analytischen Geometrie," featured Möbius and Plücker. Similarly,

 in their respective histories of elementary and projective geometries, Max Simon and

 Arthur Schoenflies frequently cited Plücker and Steiner. Though subscribing to dif

 ferent methods, the two geometers were said to have reached the same results in quick
 succession during the 1820s and 1830s (Simon 1906; Schoenflies 1909). Brief bib

 liographic references at once emphasized the importance of method and the scarcity

 of new results. When citing individual theorems or solutions, Steiner's contributions

 were labeled "geometric" or "synthetic," while Plücker's were "analytic." The pattern

 continues in recent general texts on the history of mathematics. The few paragraphs

 devoted to early nineteenth-century geometry cast Steiner as a "champion of' analytic

 geometry, which Steiner "loathed" (Eves 1990; Cooke 2005; Kline 1972; Bourbaki

 1960; Struik 1948). When authors cite publications as evidence, they are from the

 1 "Steiner erklärte, nicht mehr in Crelle's Journal schreiben zu wollen, falls noch Arbeiten Plücker's fern

 erhin Aufnahme fänden. Dadurch war ihm Berlin vollständig verleidet und ist es wohl begreiflich, wie er

 seine wissenschaftlichen Arbeiten meist in ausländischen Journalen niederlegte, wo er wusste, dass seine

 Leistungen wenigstens nicht verachtet wurden."

 2 While at Bonn, Plücker would serve as Klein's advisor for his dissertation on geometry completed in
 1868.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.,

 415

 first decade of Plücker's and Steiner's publishing careers and particularly their first
 monographs.

 Though analytic and synthetic have many possible connotations, in these historical

 references to the early nineteenth century, analytic geometry was understood to mean

 the use of coordinate equations. By contrast, synthetic geometry has been defined as

 figure-based (Fano 1907; Kötter 1901; Klein 1926) or as projective geometry without
 the use coordinate equations (Schoenflies 1909; Darboux 1904; Loria 1887).

 The apparent consensus in these historical accounts implies that the descriptions

 were uniformly applied by Plücker, Steiner, and their contemporaries. However, early

 nineteenth-century geometers had argued that the descriptions of analytic and syn
 thetic were too inconsistent to be meaningful. The Swiss mathematician and educator,

 Emmanuel Develey, explicitly rejected employing the terms analysis and synthesis

 to describe his methods because there was currently "no accord as to their distinct

 characters" [n'est point encore d'accord sur le caractdre distinctif ] (Develey 1812,

 v). Gergonne (1817d) similarly despaired of the recent confusion of the terms syn

 thesis and analysis, which he attributed to Condillac and the metaphysicians of his
 school.3

 As the editor of the Annales, Gergonne frequently classified articles as "analytic
 geometry," but never used "synthetic geometry" in this context. Instead, articles

 fell under elementary geometry, pure geometry, geometry of the ruler, geometry
 of situation, geometry of curves and surfaces, geometry, and several other alterna
 tive subject headings. These terms were not exclusive, and often the same article

 would have multiple such labels. The distinction between geometrical methods was

 in flux. When Gergonne (1814) contrasted the advantages of analytic geometry to
 those of pure geometry, he was corrected by Poncelet who instead divided geom

 etry into three parts: ancient pure, modern pure, and analytic geometry (Poncelet

 1817). Gergonne acquiesced (Gergonne 1817c). Geometry did not divide neatly in
 two.

 Likewise, geometers were not simply analytic or synthetic. During their early
 careers, descriptions of Plücker and Steiner varied to the point of contradiction.

 Plücker's analytic geometry at once appeared as "restrained in calculations" (Anony
 mous 1827a, 173) similar to "synthesis" and lacking in new discoveries (Cournot 1828,

 178), "innovative" and "fruitful" (Gergonne 1828), uniting the method of discoveiy—
 the method of analysis—with clarity and insight (Crelle cited in (Eccarius 1980),

 208-211), and new "pure analytic geometry" (Plücker 1828a). During this period,

 Steiner's publications were considered as a reemergence of the "long-neglected" pure

 geometry (Cournot 1827, 299), fruitful but overly complicated (Anonymous 1828,

 245), systematic and organic (Steiner), inventive and original [written by Friedrich

 Wilhelm Bessel in 1826 and published in Lange (1899), 18-26], particular to the

 author and too elementary but elegant (Steiner and Gergonne 1827,286), complicated
 (Poncelet 1866,410), merely following in the footsteps of Poncelet (Plücker 1828a),

 and independently derived [Crelle in Eccarius (1980)]. Not only the same geometer,

 but even the same publication could elicit dichotomous responses. By drawing upon

 3 Gergonne's philosophical article was an excerpt from a longer paper that has been described and analyzed
 by Amy Dahan Dalmedico (1986).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 416

 J. Lorenat

 research articles, reviews, private correspondences, and public letters of support, this

 paper will show how Plücker, Steiner and their contemporaries utilized an array of

 attributes to assess positive and negative features of geometrical publications.

 Conflicting descriptions suggest that labels of analytic and synthetic geometry, as

 emphasized by Klein, have obscured the respective methods of Plücker and Steiner.

 Rather than restricting their practices or areas of study, these geometers understood

 the descriptions of analytic and synthetic geometry in the context of their particular

 problem solving and theorem proving. We will examine two instances of intersection

 in their research on planar geometry: the Apollonius problem and Lame's theorem. To

 focus on comparison between methods, the following episodes draw upon instances

 of nearly identical results. Further, re-examining publications that had been simply
 classified as analytic or synthetic enables a comparison between the original texts

 and their surrounding commentaries. Our focus on the early career of Plücker and

 Steiner reflects that of late nineteenth and early twentieth century historical accounts.

 We observe that during the first decade of their careers, neither geometer reined in

 his research with traditional methodological boundaries. By the end, they had each

 become emblematic of their respective methods. This then raises the question of when

 this association emerged, and how their contributions redefined both methods. In

 documenting how their methodological positions and practices changed over time,

 these findings call for a revision to the standard account of continual opposition.

 We begin in Sect. 1 with Steiner's first publication, written on the subject of tangent

 circles in a plane. Steiner's early research included work on the so-called Apollonius

 problem: to find a circle tangent to three given coplanar circles. Steiner described

 his findings as independent, and his choice of research subject drew the attention of

 Joseph-Diez Gergonne, the editor of the French journal Annales des mathimatiques

 pures et appliquees. Gergonne had framed his own solutions to the Apollonius prob
 lem as evidence of the elegance and simplicity of analytic geometry (Gergonne 1810,

 1814, 1817a). While Gergonne (1817d) formally agreed that the choice of problem
 should determine the choice of method in geometry, this convention did not seem to

 apply to the Apollonius problem, which continued to be solved through numerous
 methodological approaches (Poncelet 1821; Durrande 1820). Steiner's text on cir

 cles was quickly followed by a translation and reinterpretation by Gergonne (Steiner
 1826a; Steiner and Gergonne 1827). After surveying the reviews and recommenda

 tions that followed Steiner's first publications, we consider how Plücker introduced

 his own research on circles, including proofs of both Gergonne and Poncelet's original

 solutions to the Apollonius problem. Steiner and Plücker situated their publications

 with attention to contemporary interests, which led to reviews and repurposing of their

 publications. These texts contain early manifestations of the form and techniques that

 would characterize both geometers' publications through the 1830s. Steiner developed

 a new, comprehensive vocabulary to describe constructive relationships between cir

 cles, lines, and points that utilized simple algebraic calculations. Addressing the same

 problem, Plücker limited his calculations through carefully choosing coordinate axes
 to re-derive already known results. With reference to Poncelet's recent publication,

 Plücker adopted the newly defined ideal chords, which had not yet previously been

 written in coordinate equations.

 "ß Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 417

 The prevalence of "modern" objects and techniques will become even more apparent

 in Sect. 2 and the proofs by Steiner and Plücker of a theorem on conic sections first

 published by the French geometer Gabriel Lame in 1817. Using Lame's original proof

 as a point of reference, we will see how Steiner and Plücker recast the theorem's form
 and context (Steiner 1828b; Plücker 1828b). For Steiner, Lame's theorem illustrated

 his ability to extend results from a circle to a general conic section via perspective,

 projection, and reciprocity. For Plücker, Lame's theorem served as an application of

 his general theory of intersections between curves of any order. Both articles appeared

 in the Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees and were critically appraised

 in the Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et chimiques.

 Later, the results would be incorporated in the longer manuscripts of Plücker (1828a,

 1831) and Steiner (1832). The conservatism of this geometric framework, and in

 particular the recycling of well-known theorems and problems, invited comparisons.

 While developing original techniques, their work retained enough features of older

 publications to remain familiar to readers of the Annales as subsequent citations show.

 Their reception included debates linked to several oppositions: that of pure or synthetic

 and analytic, but also German and French geometers or ancient and modern geometries.

 This paper will complement other reappraisals of individual contributions of Steiner

 and Plücker. Plücker's innovative modern geometry received new appreciation in the

 mid-twentieth century, when Carl Boyer featured Plücker as the protagonist of the

 "Golden Age of Analytic Geometry" and focused specifically on Plücker's simpli
 fication of coordinate equations in geometry (Boyer 1956). Further, Jeremy Gray

 has underscored Plücker's substantial contributions to the theory of duality, where

 "Plücker's contribution has been rather marginalised" (Gray 2010, vi). In Philippe
 Nabonnand's history of points and lines at infinity, Nabonnand examined Steiner's

 specific contributions in the development of geometry from Poncelet to von Staudt.

 For Steiner, "the central object of geometry is no longer the figure but becomes the

 notion of fundamental forms" (Nabonnand 2011a, 167).4 This then points to a new

 concept of pure geometry that we will investigate with respect to Steiner's early pub

 lications. Yet as much as Steiner can be interpreted as breaking away from Euclidean

 geometry, his work remained committed to constructions and questions from ancient

 Greek geometry. With attention to this, Viktor Blasjö has attempted to rescue Steiner's

 Systematische Entwicklung from "a lasting and undeserved depreciation" by interpret

 ing it as "a monumental unification of classical geometry" (Blasjö 2009, 21). From

 a more literary perspective, Anne Boy£ has integrated Steiner within the Romantic

 movement of his time, drawing particularly on his Socratic style of pedagogy (Boye

 1999). In another vein, Wolfgang Eccarius has provided a direct comparison between

 the social situations of Plücker and Steiner in the late 1820s and early 1830s (Ecca

 rius 1980). Drawing on previously unpublished letters from August Leopold Crelle,

 the editor of the Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik who also lobbied

 for salaried positions for several of his contributors, Eccarius proposed that the per

 ceived methodological divide was greatly motivated by these economic concerns. This

 assessment coincides with speculations from the 1840s of personal animosity between

 4 "[...] l'objet central de la göomitrie n'est plus la figure mais devient la notion de formes fundamentales."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 418

 J. Lorenat

 Steiner and Plücker resulting in Steiner's distaste for analysis, rather than the other

 way around (Aronhold 1902, 64).

 When Plücker and Steiner are directly compared, the nuances and overarching
 forms of their distinctive methods come to the fore. In fact, this evidence will show

 that the two geometers were very similar with respect to their approach to constructing

 figures, calculating with symbols, and representing geometric magnitudes. Moreover,

 both geometers claimed the same virtues of simplicity, elegance, and visualizability.

 Nevertheless, this was not a period of stagnant conformity. Rather the malleability of

 the terms analytic and synthetic allowed them to be shaped by their users, who could

 profess adherence to a tradition without confining their expression. Underlying the

 repetitive display of similar problems and theorems, Plücker and Steiner redefined

 analytic and synthetic methods and explored diverse paths toward greater generality

 and novelty.

 2 Tangent circles in the plane (1826-1827)

 Perhaps most emblematic of the repetition exhibited within early nineteenth-century

 geometry publications is the deceptively simple problem of finding a circle tangent to

 three given coplanar circles, known as the Apollonius problem.

 2.1 Gergonne's solution to the Apollonius problem

 Prior to 1826, Gergonne had published three separate articles on the Apollonius prob

 lem, with essentially the same solution but different degrees of explanation (Gergonne
 1810, 1814, 1817a). His most extended version appeared in the Annales in 1817.

 Gergonne introduced his repetition by explaining he had received complaints about

 lacking a complete justification in his earlier version.

 I wrote for consummate scholars, and if I thought it right to be brief it appears that

 I made it a bit too much; several geometers, who knew of my memoir, reproached

 me without doubt because the thread which had guided me was not very apparent

 and that my calculations seemed rather to legitimize a construction found by

 happy accident, than to lead to discovering this construction. It appeared even

 that, due to my excessive brevity, many geometers had not been able to follow

 my methods and capture their spirit; because they return again to these two

 problems, about which I believed that nothing was left to say. (Gergonne 1817a,
 289-290)5

 5 "J'ecrivais pour des savans consommes, et je crus devoir etre court; il parait que je le fus un peu trop;

 plusieurs giomfctres, qui eurent connaissance de mon mimoire, me firent le reproche, fondi sans doute,
 que le fil qui m'avait guide n'y itait pas assez apparent, et que mes calculs semblaient plutot propres ä

 legitimer une construction trouvee par un heureux hasard, qu'ä faire dicouvrir cette construction. II parait

 me me que, par suite de mon excessif laconisme, beaucoup de giomötres n'ont pu suivre mes methodes et

 en saisir l'esprit; car on est revenu encore posterieurement sur ces deux problömes, sur lesquels pourtant

 j'avais cru ne plus rien laisser ä dire."

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The equation of the unknown circle and the line could be combined to solve for

 one of the tangent points at (x, y). Rather than solving this equation (which Ger

 gonne admitted would be complicated by radicals), he worked backward following

 the steps of reduction outlined above, showing that analytically simpler lines and points

 could instead be constructed and still lead to a uniquely determined point. Gergonne

 reminded the reader that there would be eight possible tangent circles satisfying the

 problem's conditions. These cases depended on whether the desired circle enveloped

 or was exterior to each of the three given circles. With respect to the analytic proof,

 the type of tangency corresponded to the positive or negative sign of the value of the
 radii.

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 419

 Against these reproaches of merely having "legitimized a graphic construction, dis

 covered in advance," Gergonne would show that an analytic treatment led "naturally"

 and "absolutely inevitably" to his conclusions. The solution was "elegant," "simple,"

 and "direct"-not "fashioned after the fact." Finally, the exposition would be entirely
 elementary, even though involving coordinate representation.

 Gergonne began by laying out his strategy in detail. He would successively reduce

 the problem to determining simpler and simpler geometric objects. The desired circle

 could be determined by its three tangent points. Finding three tangent points reduced

 to finding a single tangent point. Finding that point reduced to finding a second line

 containing that tangent point. Finding that second line reduced to finding any two

 points on that line, and so on.

 Gergonne then chose a set of coordinate axes with the origin at the center of one of

 the given circles c" (with radius r") and axes through the centers of the remaining two
 circles c (centered at (a, b) with radius r) and c' (centered at (a', b') with radius r').

 If the unknown circle C was tangent to the circle c" at the point (jc , y), then, from the

 equation of a circle, x2 + y2 = r"2. Similarly, the centers of each of the given circles

 could be expressed with respect to their distance from the center of the unknown circle

 and their distance from the origin.

 From the equations of the given circles, Gergonne calculated an expression of a

 line containing the tangent point: ·

 This analytic proof concluded with a planar construction. In this construction, Ger

 gonne differentiated two kinds of tangent lines shared by a pair of circles. The two

 interior tangents intersected between the two given circles, while the two exterior

 tangents intersected on one side of both given circles.

 Given three coplanar circles c, c', c", begin by drawing the common exterior tan

 gents to the three circles considered pairwise and the chords of contact defined by the

 tangent points for each circle. The two chords of contact of circle c will meet at a point

 M, and their parallel chords on c' and c" will meet at N. Similarly, the two chords

 of contact on c' will meet at W with their parallel chords meeting at N', and the two

 chords of c" meeting at M" with parallels at N" (Fig. 1).

 One could then draw lines MN, M'N', M"N". Line ΜΝ would meet circle c at

 two points, which Gergonne called t and Θ. Similarly, M'N' would meet c' at t' and

 Θ', M"N" will meet c" at t", Θ". Finally the two circles respectively drawn through
 t, t', t" and θ, θ', Θ" would be the circles sought (Fig. 2).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 420

 J. Lorenat

 Fig. 1 Construction of tangent
 Fig. 1 Construction of tangent
 lines and chords of contact from
 lines and chords of contact from

 Gergonne's description
 Gergonne's description
 (Gergonne 1817a)
 (Gergonne 1817a)

 Fig. 2 Construction of
 Fig. 2 Construction of
 intersection points and tangent
 intersection points and tangent
 circles
 circles

 The remaining six tangent circles could be found by substituting combinations
 of exterior and interior tangents. Gergonne described his solution as the simplest
 yet, presenting "an entirely new face" for the application of analytic geometry in
 solving planar problems. Further, the construction could be applied "exactly in the
 same manner" to the case where the circles lay on the surface of a sphere.

 Gergonne's claims for the merits of his solution stood up to those of many histor

 ically esteemed mathematicians, including Viete, Newton, Euler, and Carnot (Carnot

 1803, 391). Through the nineteenth century, the Apollonius problem served as a fre

 quent trope for geometers exhibiting their abilities and methods in geometry. By 1906
 Max Simon cited around 100 different solutions that had been published in the past
 century (Simon 1906).

 2.2 Poncelet and the Apollonius problem

 Poncelet's first solution from 1811 further attests to the problem's ubiquity. Jean
 Nicholas-Pierre Hachette included a statement of the problem in the Correspondance

 Spring er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications...

 421

 sur I'Ecole Polytechnique the previous year as the sixth of eight problems on circles
 and spheres for students to solve. Hachette provided a solution to the problem by

 considering the given circles as great circles of three spheres and posing the three

 dimensional question of finding the sphere tangent to three given spheres whose center

 is coplanar with the three given centers. He also cited analytic solutions from Newton in

 the Arithmdtique Universelle and from Euler and Fuss in the Memoires de l'Academie

 de Petersbourg.

 to the plane.

 Poncelet's solution marked his first publication in geometry (Poncelet 1811). He

 relied upon results proved in the Hachette article, but his constructions were limited

 By contrast, Poncelet 1821 article promoted an application of his new principle

 of continuity.6 The year before, Poncelet had submitted a memoir on the projective

 properties of conic sections to the Academie Royale des Sciences. This memoir had

 been reviewed by Francis Arago, Sim6on-Denis Poisson, and Augustin Louis Cauchy,

 the last of whom wrote up a report subsequently published in Gergonne's Annales.

 While criticizing some of Poncelet's methods, Cauchy complimented Poncelet's "very

 elegant" solution of the problem to draw a circle tangent to three others (Poncelet and

 Augustin 1820, 82). Intrigued, Gergonne requested Poncelet's construction, which
 was subsequently published.

 The constructions presented could be understood independently, but their proofs

 rested upon propositions and principles only fully explained in Poncelet's extensive

 monograph, Traiti des proprietes projectives, which would appear the following year

 (Poncelet 1822). However, Poncelet used the problem to show off possible applications

 of his new geometric techniques such as ideal chords, an extension of the ordinary

 chords of conic sections to include both real and imaginary points of intersection.

 Steiner and Plücker would adapt these objects to their own researches in the following

 decade. In particular, Poncelet argued that two concentric circles would share a com

 mon ideal chord at infinity, their points of intersection being imaginary. This concept
 enabled Poncelet to consider simultaneously the cases of concentric circles and those

 having parallel shared tangent lines.

 Poncelet advertised his solutions as advantageous because constructible with only

 a simple ruler. Poncelet further showed how to reach a "very elegant solution" with

 the same basis as that of Gergonne's from 1814. Poncelet assessed Gergonne's pre
 sentation favorably,

 [...] the purely algebraic path that this geometer has followed is entirely new, and

 appears susceptible to apply to a great number of questions reported difficult in

 the current state of Analysis. (Poncelet 1822,138)7

 Poncelet's positive comments suggest that for him, providing another proof for Ger

 gonne's solution was not intended as a critique of the original analytic approach.

 6 For detailed analyses of Poncelet's controversial principle of continuity, see Nabonnand (2011b),
 Friedelmeyer (2011), Gray (2005).

 7 "[...] la marche purement algibrique qu'a suivie ce giomfctre est entiörement neuve, et parait susceptible

 de s'appliquer ä un grand nombre de questions riput6es difficiles dans l'6tat actuel de 1'Analyse."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 422

 J. Lorenat

 The Apollonius problem invited multiple solutions, and the elegance of one did not
 preclude the advantageous qualities of another.

 2.3 Steiner's tangent circles

 Among Steiner's six articles that appeared in the 1826 inaugural volume of Crelle's
 Journal, his paper "Einige geometrische Betrachtungen" (Steiner 1826a) and its

 sequel, "Fortsetzung der geometrische Betrachtungen" (Steiner 1826c), generated

 attention within the French mathematical community. This was due not so much to

 Steiner's results, as to his development of geometric concepts that seemed valuable in

 further research and pedagogy.

 Steiner explained that his research on tangent circles over the past three years had

 been motivated by three sets of problems: finding a circle tangent to three given planar

 circles (the Apollonius problem), the problem of inscribing three tangent circles to a

 triangle (the Malfatti problem), and the fifteenth theorem of the fourth book of Pap

 pus's Collectiones Mathematicae (determining proportions between tangent circles

 inscribed in a semi-circle). Although acknowledging that each of these problems pos

 sessed well-documented recent solutions, Steiner avowed that his work was entirely

 independent, relying only upon theory developed by Viete and Pappus. Steiner claimed

 that he had but recently become aware of contemporary French publications in geome

 try, in particular Poncelet's Traite, where many of his own results had already appeared.

 However, Steiner also promised new findings that would further demonstrate the inde

 pendence of his research. Specifically, his work contained new generalizations to a

 greater number of given circles, to circles intersecting at given angles rather than in tan

 gent points, and to analogous results for second-degree curves and three-dimensional
 surfaces.

 Though Steiner claimed that his theorems could be applied to many more problems

 concerning coplanar circles, the details of his solution to the Apollonius problem

 would appear only posthumously almost 100 years later in Steiner's anticipated book

 on circles, spheres, and spherical circles that he had promised as forthcoming in
 1826.8

 Instead Steiner devoted most of the text toward organizing definitions in four parts,

 each devoted to a particular geometric relationship, and a total of nineteen numbered

 sections, each beginning with a particular configuration of objects and leading to a

 property or theorem to be referenced by citation to that section, for example "nach

 (1.):" As Gergonne would observe, Steiner's exposition often delved into the very

 elementary. In this feature, the entire text served to reinforce Steiner's introductory

 remarks about the independence of his findings. Until Steiner arrived at the final part,

 8 This book was published in 1931 as Allgemeine Theorie über das Berühren und Schneiden der Kreise
 und der Kugeln worunter eine grosse Anzahl neuer Untersuchungen und Sätze vorkommen in einem system

 atischen Entwicklungsgange dargestellt, edited by Rudolf Fueter and Ferdinand Gonseth (Steiner 1931).

 As the editors explained in their introduction, during the late nineteenth century, the mathematician Fritz

 Bützberger had found the unpublished manuscript dating between 1823 and 1826 in a box at the Library of

 the Naturalist Society of Bern. The manuscript was then rediscovered by the editors, Fueter and Gonseth,

 among Biitzberger's papers.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 423

 in which he posed and solved a series of problems, very few results were assumed
 as known and there was only one external citation. Steiner began from the Euclidean
 result (Euclid 111.37) that the area of the square on a tangent segment is equal to
 the rectangle determined by the intersected secant and its external segment drawn
 from a point to a coplanar circle. He then examined proportions to determine fixed
 relationships between constructed points, lines, and circles, which he described in
 his unique vocabulary. While many of his terms had already been developed under
 different names in France, Steiner introduced a few new concepts, including the idea of

 a "circle of common power" that was specifically admired by later reviewers. Despite
 its absence in the article, the Apollonius problem served as an invisible motivating

 force for the definitions and results throughout the body of the text. This would become

 visible in Gergonne's later translation.

 The text developed as an exploration of the relationships between coplanar geo
 metrical objects, from two points to a point and a circle, to two circles, to three circles,
 to more complex planar relationships (Fig. 3). Steiner modeled his presentation as a
 discovery beginning from the ground up and resulting in conclusions that were sur
 prising even when they were already known. Figures served as clarification and were

 never invoked as a tool of proof. Steiner presented his research without a clear map of

 his intended progression, and a brief summary here will motivate our understanding
 of his development. While Steiner never reached the Apollonius problem, we will see
 how his new definitions progressed toward finding tangent circles.

 The first part concerned defining the power relationship between coplanar circles
 and contained five sections each examining a different set of geometric objects: on

 equations relating to perpendicular lines (1), on the power of a point with respect to a

 Fig. 3 Steiner's Figures (Steiner 1826a)

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 424

 J. Lorenat

 circle (2), on the line of equal powers between two circles (3), on the point of equal

 powers between three circles (4), and on power relationships between multiple and

 orthogonal circles (5). The concept of the power of coplanar circles and points derived

 from a well-known Euclidean relationship: when two chords of a circle intersect, then

 the rectangles formed by their respective segments are equal (Proposition 111.35) and

 when a tangent and a secant line are drawn from a point to a circle, then the square on

 the tangent is equal to the rectangle formed by the intersected segments of the secant

 (Proposition 111.36). Steiner denoted this product as the power of a point with respect

 to a circle, which could be found regardless of a coplanar points position. Extending

 this definition, he determined that the line containing all points of equal power to

 two given coplanar circles would be perpendicular to the line containing their centers.

 For three given coplanar circles, the lines of equal power considered pairwise all

 three intersected in a single point, the point of equal powers. Steiner further explored,

 without explicit definition or citation, the relationship of poles and polars with respect

 to a given circle and line or point. In particular, Steiner described how one could

 determine two points with respect to the line of equal powers and two given circles by

 choosing any point on the line of equal powers, drawing the four tangent lines to the

 given circles, and passing two line through each of the respective circles' two points of

 tangency. These newly constructed lines intersected the line containing the two given

 circles' centers in two fixed points (the poles of the line of equal power with respect

 to the respective given circles) regardless of which point on the line of equal powers

 was chosen. We will see that Gergonne used this construction in his exposition on the

 Apollonius problem.

 In his second part, containing sections 6-8, Steiner continued his examination of

 circles, now with respect to similitude points and similitude lines. Any two coplanar

 circles shared two similitude points, determined by a fixed ratio between the circles'

 centers, which Steiner distinguished as inner and outer. In the simplest case of two

 coplanar exterior circles, the similitude points were the points of intersection of the

 common tangent lines to two circles. Steiner progressed from examining the similitude

 ratio between three coplanar points (6), to defining the similitude points and lines
 between two circles (7), and then the similitude lines between three circles (8). Three

 given circles shared six similitude lines, three outer and three inner, each containing two

 similitude points. Thus in the first half of his paper, Steiner described two independent

 relationships among three coplanar circles.

 Steiner combined the concepts of equal power and similitude to define the common

 power of coplanar circles in the third part of his paper. He began by examining the

 relationship between lines of equal power and similitude points (9), which he applied

 to define the concept of common power between two circles (10), power circles (11),

 and the power position of a point or circle with respect to a similitude point (12). Later,

 reviews would credit Steiner with introducing power circles, which he defined as circles

 centered at similitude points with radii determined by the power relationship between

 two given circles. Finally, Steiner applied these definitions to a series of theorems

 concerning tangency and power circles (13). The fourth part of his paper concerned

 solutions and generalizations of the Malfatti problem. Steiner continued publishing

 his results on circles in a slightly later paper (Steiner 1826c), in which he explicitly

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 425

 addressed Pappus' Theorem, and developed numerous results pertaining to tangent

 circles, but did not include any further reference to the Apollonius problem.

 Gergonne's long-term interest in the Apollonius problem, illustrated by his own

 publications and interest in publishing Poncelet's solutions, may explain why Steiner's

 article was quickly translated and appeared in the Annales under the title "Geometrie

 Pure. Theorie generale des contacts et des intersections des cercles" in 1827 (Steiner

 and Gergonne 1827). Gergonne prefaced his exposition of the "Theorie generale des

 contacts et des intersections des cercles" by explaining what he perceived as the advan

 tages and flaws of Steiner's approach. Steiner had presented the elementary theories of

 "similitude centers, axes and planes, radical axes, planes and centers, and finally poles,

 polars, polar planes and conjugate polars" in order to solve "difficult" and "general"

 problems with "very elegant" solutions. Among Steiner's contributions, Gergonne

 suggested that school teachers would find "abundant resources" for "profitable" stu

 dent exercises. Moreover, Gergonne's version of Steiner's "doctrine" promised to be

 even better than the original German text.

 We thus suppose it will be a very useful thing for the progress of pure geometry,

 and consequently very agreeable to our readers, to offer here, in a concise frame

 work, the principal points of M. Steiner's doctrine; however, without slavishly

 following him and permitting ourselves to deviate a bit from his path, whenever

 we think that it may result in some advantage with respect to clarity or brevity.

 We will present, in a word, these theories as we think they could and should

 be in elementary treatments, remembering, however, that we do not write for

 beginners; that is to say, in withholding, in order to abbreviate, developments

 which are easy for any intelligent reader to supply. (Steiner and Gergonne 1827,
 287)9

 Here was Steiner clarified, abbreviated, and overall adapted to a mathematically literate
 French audience.

 Gergonne's choice of content appears in large part motivated toward reproving his

 construction for the Apollonius problem, now by purely geometric methods. As we

 saw above, Gergonne's original solution had been framed as evidence in favor of ana

 lytic geometry. The same construction, except for a change in the names of points,

 remained as simple and elegant in a purely geometric setting, thus in some ways under

 mining Gergonne's initial intent. Gergonne unabashedly explained his divergence from

 Steiner's text as an opportunity to showcase his preferred solution.

 All self love on the author's part aside, this construction, that we gave for the

 first time more than a dozen years ago (Memoires de Turin in 1814), appears to

 9 "Nous pensons done faire une chose tres-utile pour le progrfes de la g6om6trie pure, et consiquemment

 tres-agriable ä nos lecteurs, en offrant ici, dans un cadre resserre, les principaux points de la doctrine de

 Μ. Steiner; mais sans toutefois le suivre servilement, et en nous permettant de nous ecarter un peu de sa

 marche, toutes les fois que nous penserons qu'il en peut rösulter quelque avantage, sous le rapport de la

 clarti ou de la bri£vete, nous exposerons, en un mot, ces thiories comme nous pensons qu'elles pounaient

 et devraient I'etre dans les traitis eldmentaires, en nous rappelant toutefois que nous n'6crivons pas pour
 des commengans; c'est-ä-dire, en negligeant, pour abriger, des developpemens faciles ä suppleer pour tout
 lecteur intelligent."

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 426

 J. Lorenat

 us preferable to all those that have been given of the same problem before or
 afterward, (ibid, 310)10

 Gergonne proved his solution using radical centers and axes (Steiner's points and

 lines of equal powers), similitude points and lines, and poles and polars (which Steiner

 had constructed and described, but left unnamed). Take the first and simplest case, to

 construct a fourth circle tangent to three given circles in the same manner (either

 all exterior or all interior points of tangency). If one drew lines through the radical

 center of the three given circles to the poles of their exterior similitude axis, then

 the intersections of these lines would determine the tangency points with the desired

 fourth circle. An analogous proof followed for the case where the circles were tangent
 in different manners.

 Gergonne further connected Steiner's work in the final section, when he returned

 to three given coplanar circles, essentially the hypothesis of the Apollonius problem.

 Using Steiner's concept of common power, Gergonne derived a theorem, which he

 attributed to the engineer and teacher Louis Gaultier de Tours: the centers of the eight

 circles tangent to three given circles will be distributed pairwise on the perpendicular
 lines drawn from their four similitude axes to the radical center of the three circles.

 Gergonne thus brought Steiner's research another step toward solving the Apollonius

 problem, but without elucidating the details of a full proof here.

 Gergonne's presentation of Steiner's article brought the idiosyncratic German arti

 cle up to date with contemporary French mathematics. To begin with, the article was

 now in a language readable by French audiences, or at least those who read the Annates.

 Further, Gergonne had added several citations and modified Steiner's vocabulary to

 reflect current French usage. Most notably, rather than Steiner's points and lines of

 equal powers, Gergonne used the term radical centers and axes, also from the work of
 Gaultier. While much was added, not all of Steiner's original content survived transla

 tion. Most notably, Steiner's nineteen figures were not repeated, and with the change

 of notation his figures as published in Crelle's Journal would not have been very use

 ful to a reader without knowledge of German. Further, the French article assumed a

 stronger knowledge base and skipped over Steiner's foundational exposition. Rather

 than progress from points to circles, Gergonne developed his research in terms of

 circles and polygons. Further, he employed the concept of a circle of variable size and

 position to extend his results to further cases. By orienting Steiner's content toward

 the Apollonius problem, Gergonne obscured its initial appearance as a set of tools

 applicable to a variety of problems. Significantly, while Steiner had emphasized that

 the same properties determined for a circle would likewise hold for any planar conic

 section, Gergonne only mentioned this generalization in the introduction and hinted
 at it in the conclusion.

 Gergonne's conclusion, designated as a post-script, commented upon another article

 of Steiner (1826b) in which he had pointed out several exceptions to a theorem due to

 Monge. Gergonne defended Monge and dismissed the exceptions as too particular to

 10 "Tout amour propre d'auteur ä part, cette construction, que nous avons dornte pour la premiöre fois il

 y a plus de douze ans (Memoires de Turin pour 1814), nous parait de beaucoup pr6fi£rable ä toutes celles

 qu'anterieurement et postirieurement on a donn6es du me me probleme."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications...

 427

 affect the theorem in its entirety. He further remarked that Steiner had perhaps failed
 to recognize the crucial role of generalization in his own constructions. In the work

 of Steiner, there was no stated mechanism for extending the result from a sphere to

 a plane or from a circle to a general conic section. The process was simply assumed

 as possible. Gergonne continued by comparing ancient and modern geometry, to the
 advantages of the latter.

 [...] but is it not precisely in this broader way of envisaging geometric magnitudes

 that the moderns are in part owed their superiority in pure geometry? Superiority

 that the same geometers could also contest; but is no less a patent fact for those

 who will not deny the obvious.11

 Gergonne took full advantage of the dynamic capabilities of these modern concepts.

 Thus, Steiner's article, as interpreted by Gergonne, functioned as evidence in favor of

 the superiority of modern pure geometry, just as Gergonne's earlier Apollonian proofs

 had served him to represent the superiority of analytic geometry.

 2.4 Steiner's initial reception

 Soon after Gergonne's interpretation of Steiner's paper appeared it was anonymously

 reviewed and summarized in the Bulletin de Ferussac. In describing Steiner's expo

 sition, his use of new vocabulary was emphasized as a fruitful innovation in problem
 solving.

 Steiner's means of solution rest uniquely on the known theory of similitude axes

 and centers, of that of radical axes and centers, of that of poles and polars, and

 finally of that which the author calls circles of common power of two given
 circles, which shows all the fruitfulness and all the importance of these various

 theories and justifies the particular attention that several French geometers have

 given them already for several years. (Anonymous 1827b, 277)12

 The Bulletin further pointed out how Gergonne had modified Steiner's work to include

 his own solution of the Apollonius problem, which Gergonne "continues to believe

 very preferable to all those which have been given before and after of the same prob

 lem."13 The review continued by explaining Steiner's circle of common power, an
 original concept that provided "an idea of the proceedings of M. Steiner." More so

 than in the text of Gergonne, a background knowledge in geometric constructions

 11 "[...] mais n'est-ce pas pricisiment ä cette manure plus large d'envisager l'itendue giomitrique que les

 modernes sont en partie redevables de leur sup6riorit6 dans la g6om6trie pure? Sup6riorit6 que les memes

 ggomfctres pourront bien aussi leur contester; mais qui n'en demeurera pas moins un fait patent pour qui ne
 voudra pas se refuser ä Γ Evidence."

 12 "Les moyens de solution de Μ. Steiner se tirent uniquement de la thgorie connue des centres et axes de

 similitude, de celle des axes et centres radicaux, de celle des poles et polaires, et enfin de celle de ce que
 l'auteur appelle cercles de commune puissance de deux cercles donn6s, ce qui montre toute la Kconditi

 et toute rimportance de ces diverses theories, et justifle l'attention parti culiüre qui leur a έίέ donnöe par
 plusieurs g£om£tres fran9ais depuis d6jä plusieurs anndes."

 13 "[...] persiste ä croire bien prifirable ä toutes celles qui ont έίέ donnies antirieurement et postirieurement
 du meme probteme."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 428

 J. Lorenat

 (such as similitude points, ratio relations, and tangent circles) would be required to
 follow the review. No intermediate constructions were presented and no figures were

 employed.

 The reviewer concluded by considering some philosophical issues concerning the

 relationship between analysis and geometry. In particular, he noted the simplification

 of both methods effected by the development of new concepts.

 Analysts, perceiving that certain quite complicated functions are reproduced fre

 quently in their calculations, have called them exponentials, logarithms, sines,

 tangents, factorial derivatives, etc.; they have created abbreviated signs to des

 ignate them, and their formulas have acquired greater clarity and conciseness.

 And thus for certain points, certain lines and certain circles whose consideration

 is frequently represented in geometric speculations, it is natural to do the same

 with respect to them, and to call them, following their properties, similitude

 centers, radical centers, polars, similitude axes, radical axes, circles of common

 power, etc. This attention must inevitably introduce analogous simplifications in
 the statement of theorems and in the solution of problems which belong to the

 science of magnitude, (ibid, 279)14

 Such a comment appeared to reinforce the importance given to Steiner's development

 of new vocabulary, such as circles of common power. Although the review had begun

 by praising Steiner's problem solving, the emphasis ultimately returned to his new

 tools and their potential for future use. In this respect, the review presented a much

 more accurate summary of Steiner's original mode of presentation than had Gergonne's
 "translation."

 At this time, Steiner was working as a private teacher in Berlin and solicited his

 well-placed acquaintances, Karl Friedrich von Klöden, an educator and the direc
 tor of the Berlin Gewerbeschule where Steiner then worked, and the mathematician

 and astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel to write in support of his (ultimately

 unsuccessful) application for funds from the ministry.15 Here Steiner emphasized
 his methodological choices and declared his dedication to "geometric synthesis"

 [geometrischen Synthesis] or the "synthetic method" [synthetische Methode]. But
 while labeled as synthetic, Steiner's contemporaries recognized his method as per

 sonal and unique. Klöden began his review by pointing out the novelty as a positive
 attribute.

 14 "Les analystes s'ilant aper?u que certaines fonctions assez compliqu&s se reproduisaient frequemraent
 dans leurs calculs, les ont appel6es exponentiels, logarithmes, sinus, tangentes, d6riv6es factorielles, etc.;

 ils ont αέέ des signes abreviatifs pour les disigner, et leurs formules en ont acquis beaucoup de clarti et de

 concision. Puis done qu'il est certains points, certaines droites et certains cercles dont la considiration se

 represente friquemment dans les speculations de g6om6trie, il est naturel d'en user de me me ä leur 6gard,
 et de les appeler, suivant leurs propriit£s, centres de similitude, centres radicaux, polaires, axes de simili
 tude, axes radicaux, cercles de commune puissance, etc. Cette attention doit introduire in£vitablement des

 simplifications analogues dans l'inonci des thiorfemes et dans la solution des problfemes qui appartiennent
 ä la science de l'itendue."

 15 Their letters along with Steiner's applications and the ministry's response were published in Julius

 Lange's 1899 biography (Lange 1899, 18—26).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications...

 429

 The method is quite particular and has not previously been tried for these prob

 lems. (Lange 1899, 18)16

 Similarly, Bessel described Steiner as a "an inventive and original thinker," even

 in comparison with the work of Poncelet (ibid, 21).17 In particular, both Klöden
 and Bessel characterized recent geometry as almost exclusively confined to ana
 lytic approaches. On the one hand, they praised the speed of analytic methods that

 could address problems "completely inaccessible" [völlig unzugänglich] to synthetic

 methods. On the other hand, synthetic geometry had pedagogical benefits. Steiner's

 publications revealed the "formative power of geometry" [bildende Kraft der Geome

 trie] and formed more "coherent" and "complete" educational material than the

 "disjointed problems" of analytical geometry. Like Gergonne and Bulletin reviewers,

 Klöden and Bessel noted a reemergence of pure or synthetic geometry, now capable

 of favorable comparison against analysis.

 Steiner framed his dedication to synthetic geometry as illustrative as his broader

 philosophical search for systematicity [Systematizität], organic unity [organischen

 Einheit], and intuition [Anschauung] based on his early education under Johann Hein

 rich Pestalozzi. Steiner supported a unified geometric approach, and so dismissed

 many contemporary results in mathematics, regardless of method, as invented hap

 hazardly. In describing his educational development, he provided a narrative in which

 he studied and rejected combinatorial analysis and differential calculus. Even his first

 encounters with geometry textbooks had revealed, he said, an arbitrary or even empir

 ical approach, as if the individual theorems were the aim of science and the general

 organic unity, remained obscured. Steiner likewise distinguished his form of synthetic

 geometry from that of the ancients, as more general and complete, but still employ
 ing a "rigorously genetic path" [streng genetischen Gang], developing increasingly

 complex concepts from common constructions. In these qualities of generality and

 completeness, Steiner observed the connection and possible contributions between

 his method and analytic geometry.

 The work finally will enable a rich profit for the analytic geometer, as well as an
 expansion of his method, (ibid, 21)18

 While his reviewers and recommenders saw Steiner's work as synthetic geometry as an

 alternative to analytic geometry, Steiner viewed synthetic geometry as a much greater

 and autonomous achievement, whose systematicity, unity, and intuition exceeded those

 of any other area of mathematics research. In this respect, Steiner separated his work

 as more universal and grounded in higher principles, compared to even contemporary

 synthetic geometry as practiced at the Ecole Polytechnique. We will return to the tone

 of these reviews and efforts at self-promotion in light of our second case study, where

 Steiner's results were criticized in lacking a straight-forward method.

 16 "Dabei ist die Methode durchaus eigentümlich und bisher für diese Aufgaben nicht versucht."

 17 "[...] ein erfindungsreicher und origineller Kopf [...]"

 18 "Dem analytischen Geometer endlich dürfte die Arbeit eine reiche Ausbeute, wohl gar eine Erweiterung
 seiner Methode gewähren."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 430

 J. Lorenat

 2.5 Pliicker and the Apollonius problem

 Pliicker was well aware of the French version of Steiner's article and the associated

 publicity when he composed his introduction to "Geometrie analytique. Memoire sur
 les contacts et sur les intersections des cercles" (Pliicker 1827). Although Pliicker

 followed the same narrative as Steiner, from similarity to common power, Plücker's

 use of coordinate equations, classified by Gergonne as analytic geometry, rendered his

 objects very different. Further, Pliicker had begun publishing and corresponding with

 contemporary French mathematicians in 1826, and even just one year later, he was

 far more in tune with contemporary research.19 In particular, he appeared comfortable

 using what Poncelet had defined as ideal chords and secants in 1820, a new designation

 that was just beginning to be acknowledged by other geometers. Ideal objects were

 constructible as well-defined lines in the plane, but unlike real chords and secants, they

 contained imaginary points of intersection.20 In fact, Poncelet's influence in this text is

 evidenced by much of Plücker's choice of vocabulary including ideals, conjugates, and
 inverse or direct relations as well as one of his constructions. However, in introducing

 his work Pliicker explicitly compared it to Steiner's and strongly suggested that his

 own presentation was simpler and faster.

 [...] but the publicity that this geometer has given to his work does not appear to

 us as a sufficient motive for renouncing publishing a summary of ours, so that

 one will be able to better compare them, and then one will perhaps even find our

 path more rapid and more simple in several respects. (Pliicker 1827, 29)21

 Pliicker was also familiar with Gergonne's several solutions to the Apollonius problem

 in 1827, which he summarized in his Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen the

 following year as an analytic determination of the tangency points to the desired circle

 lying on each of the given circles (Pliicker 1828b, 102-105). In his book, Pliicker
 credited Gergonne with simplifying the problem by finding tangency points rather
 than centers of the desired circles. The solution and proof Plücker provided in his

 Entwicklungen followed Gergonne much more directly than his solution published
 in the Annates. The former version was a very short exposition relying upon well

 chosen coordinate axes, without any "modern" geometric terminology. In the article

 we consider here, Pliicker would briefly cite Gergonne's solution, but his method

 differed substantially through the adoption of Poncelet's new geometric objects.

 Pliicker began directly with three circles, which he designated as c = 0, c' =

 0, c" = 0. Considered pairwise the real or ideal common chord, "that is, radical axis,"

 19 The impact of Gergonne on Pliicker's first publication is discussed in Lorenat (2015).

 20 Beginning with Augustin Louis Cauchy's favorable mention of ideal objects, in his otherwise very critical
 review of Poncelet's research (Poncelet and Augustin 1820), Poncelet's ideal secants, chords, and points of

 intersection began to be discussed in the Annates. Often the term appeared juxtaposed to its real counterpart,
 such as "real or ideal" common chords, points of intersection, or tangent lines (Sturm 1826a,b; Bobillier
 1827; Chasles 1828a). For historical analyses of Poncelet's ideal chords, see Gray (2005), Nabonnand

 (201 lb), Bioesmat-Martagnon (2011).

 21 "[...] mais la publicity que ce geometre a donnie ä son travail ne nous a pas paru un motif süffisant pour

 renoncer ä publier un sommaire du nötre, qu'on sera peut etre bien aise de lui comparer, et dont on trouvera

 peut-etre meme la marche plus rapide et plus simple ä quelques igards."

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 431

 for these circles would have the equations c' - c" = 0, c" — c = 0, c — c' = 0. Since

 these radical axes each intersected two by two at the same χ and y coordinates, they

 all three would concur in a single point, the radical center.

 In a footnote, Plücker attributed to Gergonne this "turn of reasoning" [tour de

 raisonnement], where common points between two coordinate equations were repre

 sented through subtracting linear equations. This use of coordinates would come to be

 known as "abridged notation."22 In an extended proof using conventional coordinate

 equations (occupying three pages with one footnote), Plücker proved that the radical

 axis to a point on the circle's circumference would be a tangent line through this point.

 Plücker's use of equations in this 1827 article was minimal and appeared only in

 the beginning. Further, his use of analysis in geometry remained like that of Gergonne

 in 1817, as we will see by comparison with his research the following year. While

 he began by describing the circles with abridged notation, after the first section the

 circle equations were given in their standard extended form. Further, Plücker only

 applied analytic geometry to find the radical axes, perpendicular lines, and concurrent

 points. The new geometric objects, as mentioned in the Bulletin review, were primarily

 described with respect to their positional relationship in purely geometric terms. While

 one could have derived analytic representations from Plücker's exposition, he did not

 show the equation of an orthogonal circle, a pole, or a similitude center, to take three

 such examples. He briefly mentioned imaginary circles as an intermediate step in

 obtaining a real solution, but not as a solution itself, which would have to be represented

 This minimalist computation was viewed as admirable in the subsequent Bulletin

 constructively.

 review.

 But ordinarily it is much better, in a great number of researches, to pass alterna

 tively from resources provided by calculation to those offered by pure geometry,

 and from the latter to the former, one thus avoids at once both the delays to which

 complicated calculations lead and the obscurity that the accumulation of great

 number of lemmas creates. In the first article of the issue, M. Plucker gives a very

 remarkable example of the application of this latter method [...] (Anonymous
 1827a, 173)23

 The anonymous reviewer suggested that too much calculation made the reader lose

 sight of the problem, and that Plücker's balance enabled a comprehensible presenta

 tion. We note this review implied that geometric understanding could presumably be

 achieved without the use of figures.

 22 Carl Boyer traced the invention of this "abridged notation" back to Lamp's 1818 text (Boyer 1956; Lame

 1818). Pliicker was among the early adopters, along with Etienne Bobillier (1798-1840), who had employed

 abridged notation in the article immediately preceding Plücker's. Pliicker would frequently employ abridged

 notation in his Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen (Pliicker 1828a).

 23 "Mais d'ordinaire on se trouve beaucoup mieux, dans un grand nombre de recherches, de passer alter

 nativement des ressources que fournit le calcul, ä Celles qui sont offertes par la geometrie pure, et de ces

 derniöres aux premieres, on övite ainsi ä la fois et les lenteurs qu'entrainent des calculs compliquis et
 l'obscuriti que fait naitre l'accumulation d'un trop grand nombre de lemmes. Dans le ler. article de la
 livraison, M. Plucker donne un exemple fort remarquable de l'application de cette demiere methode

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 432

 J. Lorenat

 Plücker's constructions contained numerous geometric objects, but the majority of
 these objects were at most enumerated and not named. With the use of coordinate

 representation and the new ideal objects, Pliicker was able to avoid delving into most

 particular instances, instead covering all cases with a single construction or proof.

 Within Plücker's constructions the only named objects were five circles (C), (C),

 (C"), (c), (c') and the two tangent points p, p', which defined the line pp'. Part of

 this brevity may be attributed to the fact that Plücker's publication came after those of

 Steiner, Poncelet, and Gergonne. Plücker could rely, even without direct citation, on

 the more elaborate constructions of his predecessors.

 2.6 Plücker's initial reception

 Situated as it was in the Annates and treating the very same content that Steiner had

 treated less than a year earlier, Plücker's article could not escape comparison with

 Steiner's, a fact that he acknowledged in his introduction. Yet, without Gergonne's

 footnotes, any acknowledgment to Steiner in the body of the text was strikingly absent.

 Plücker instead attributed his constructions to the earlier work of Gergonne and Pon

 celet. Nevertheless, this liaison between Steiner and Plücker appeared in a Bulletin

 review, which cited Steiner's treatment of the theory of circle tangency by so-called

 pure geometry in Crelle's Journal. The Bulletin review provided a positive assessment

 of Plücker's combined use of analytic and synthetic methods, which the reviewer con

 sidered much better than either method taken in isolation. Plücker, in particular, artfully

 avoided both complicated calculations and too many obscure lemmas.

 M. Plucker is very restrained in calculations, and all of his can, somehow, be

 followed by the eye; but he chooses them with great art and taste [...] (Anonymous
 1827a, 173)24

 In a review of Plücker's monograph, Cournot (who may have been the anonymous

 reviewer) echoed this praise of Plücker's simplicity in contrast to what he claimed to

 be "the often merited reproach to scholars of Plücker's country, to love complication"
 (Cournot 1828,179).25 However, Cournot also noted the drawbacks to Plücker's style

 of analytic geometry. While Plücker's minimalist analysis was very useful for demon

 strating already known theorems, it was not the means for mathematical discovery.
 Because Plücker avoided all calculations that did not concern the final result, and

 so revealed this result, Cournot suggested that Plücker's analysis strongly resembled

 "la synthese" (ibid, 178). Cournot employed the term synthesis to emphasize how

 Plücker's presentation worked toward a known result, and thus functioned well for

 proving known theorems.

 Plücker's article and Bulletin reviews resurfaced in a letter of recommendation

 written for Plücker by Crelle to the Prussian culture minister, Karl vom Stein zum

 24 "Μ. Plucker est fort sobre de calculs, et tous les siens peuvent, en quelque sorts, etre suivis de l'oeil;

 mais il les choisit avec beaucoup d'art et de goüt

 25 "[...] le reproche souvent mi rite, que Ton fait aux savants de sons pays, d'affectionner la complication."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 433

 Altenstein in July, 1828.26 The letter aimed to promote Pliicker's recently published
 Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen, which had appeared earlier that year, and

 lends further evidence of Pliicker's perceived intermediary position between analytic

 and synthetic methods. Moreover, in this letter Crelle provided a thorough description

 of the "two different methods of research in studying figures in the plane and in space."

 His description of the qualities of each method far exceeded the level of detail observed

 in either Plücker or Steiner's published work up to that point. However, as Crelle was

 writing a letter of recommendation, some of this detail may be attributed to simply list

 ing Pliicker's many merits. First, Crelle contrasted the opposing "synthetic, or graphic,

 or intuitive methods, more or less following the manner of the ancients" to the analytic
 method that uses calculations and is more mechanical.27 He then outlined the advan

 tages and disadvantages of each approach. The first method benefitted from a clear

 intuition about the object under investigation and mindful awareness of the operative

 steps of research. Thus, the synthetic method was most useful, clear, and convincing in

 simple cases, where the analytic method seemed too difficult. Yet, the analytic method

 required no additional effort to be applied generally to more complicated cases. Crelle

 admitted that the merits of each method had been debated, with Synthesists accusing

 the analytic method of "merely mechanical operations" [bloss mechanische Operatio

 nen] and Analysts defending "the great power and fruitfulness of analytic operations"

 [die grosse Kraft und Fruchtbarkeit der analytischen Operationen] as well as its ease.

 However, he insisted that both methods had their own "individual value" [eigentüm

 lichen Werth], While the analytic method was the method of discovery, the synthetic

 method achieved the greatest clarity and certainty of insights For Crelle, the study
 of mathematics required both qualities, and both qualities had been achieved in the
 recent work of Plücker.

 In advertising Pliicker's publication record, Crelle cited Pliicker's recent Bulletin

 reviews, which stated that Plücker had united both methods (Anonymous 1826,

 1827a).28 Crelle then explained that despite Plücker's claim in his preface that his
 monograph was purely analytic, it actually also combined both methods with success.

 Diplomatically, Crelle continued by correcting Plücker's accusation from the same

 preface that Steiner had merely been following in the footsteps of Poncelet. He coun

 tered that Steiner's work had been independently derived and was useful in its own

 right. Overall, Crelle suggested that the prefatory remarks expressed a tendency against

 synthetic methods and practitioners that was not apparent in the body of Plücker's

 text. Crelle concluded by listing the diverse subjects of new geometry that Plücker

 had included: transversals, ideal chords, polars and poles, similarity points and axes,

 curves of second order, osculation points, imaginary expressions, curves of higher

 order and other figures in space, etc. Although Plücker framed his work as analytic

 geometry, or even "pure analytic geometry," Crelle interpreted mixed methodological

 26 This letter is published in (Eccarius 1980) as "Document 1: Gutachten Crelles für den Kultusminister
 von Altenstein über J. Pliickers."

 27 "[...] synthetische, oder graphische, oder anschauliche Methode, mehr oder weniger nach Art der Alten."

 28 It is worth pointing out that this first review (Anonymous 1826 contained a synopsis of the article by
 "Pluker," which indeed was not analytic geometry, but which had been dramatically altered from Pliicker's
 original submission by Gergonne (Pliicker and Schoenfiies 1904; Lorenat 2015).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 434

 J. Lorenat

 tendencies in his attention to the form of the equation that would become increasingly

 apparent in his later works.

 In both Steiner's and Plücker's approach to tangent circles, the content remained
 mostly elementary. Tangents and intersections among coplanar circles could be
 achieved through Euclidean constructions, and despite their new nomenclature, the

 relationships conveyed by similitude, powers, and radicals were grounded in sim

 ple proportions, collinearity, and concurrence. However, Steiner and Pliicker both

 remarked that these same results would continue to hold should circles be replaced by

 any conic sections, and Pliicker described the necessary projective procedure to apply

 circle-specific constructions to any second-order curve. This generalization extended

 the domain of research beyond the elementary geometry found in Euclid. Poncelet

 and Gergonne had likewise applied results from circles to general conic sections, but

 the concept was novel enough that in 1828 Chasles announced it as a new theorem.

 It follows from there, in particular, that any circles that one likes, traced on

 the same plane, can always be considered as the stereographic projections of

 the same number of planar sections made in a second-order surface, and their

 centers as stereographic projections of the vertices of cones circumscribed to

 this surface, according to these same planar sections (*). (Chasles 1828b, 309)29

 Gergonne modified Chasles' claim with a footnote, signaling both the special position

 of Steiner and Pliicker as German geometers and their publications on tangent circles

 at the forefront of contemporary French geometry.

 This principle does not appear to be unknown to German geometers. M. Plucker

 invokes it formally on page 47 of the present volume, and M. Steiner relies on it

 equally in the memoir of which we gave an extract on page 285 of our XVIIth

 volume, to transport planar constructions onto any surfaces of second order.30

 Though Gergonne would later apologize for seeming to have trivialized Chasles'

 research, his remarks proved prescient in forecasting Steiner and Plücker's early adop

 tion of new principles and practices.

 3 Conic sections with four common points (1828)

 In the two years following his first publication, Steiner contributed six additional
 articles to Crelle's Journal and three to the Annates, along with numerous posed

 problems in both journals. Meanwhile, Pliicker had recently published the first volume

 of his two-part monograph, Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen and as well as

 29 "II suit de lä, en particulier, que tant de cercles qu 'on voudra, traces sur un me me plan, peuvent toujours

 etre consideres comme les projections stereographiques d'un pareil nombre de sections planes faites dans

 une surface du second ordre, et leurs centres comme les projections stereographiques des sommets des
 cones circonscrits ä cette surface, suivant ces memes sections planes (*)."

 30 "Ce principe parait ne pas etre inconnu aux giomfetres allemands. M. Plucker l'invoque formellement, ä

 la pag. 47 du präsent volume, et Μ. Steiner s'en appuye 6galement dans le memoire dont nous avons donne

 un extrait ä la pag. 285 de notre XVII.e volume, pour transporter ses constructions planes sur des surfaces

 quelconques du second ordre."

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 435

 a total of three articles in the Annates and one in the Journal. Both Steiner's and

 Plücker's articles from this period had been consistently summarized and reviewed in

 Ferussac's Bulletin, and cited in contemporary journals and monographs (Anonymous
 1826, 1827a; Didiez 1828).

 Solutions to geometry problems, such as the Apollonius problem, were in the form

 of constructions. By contrast, theorems in geometry were often independent of con

 structions, more theoretical, and hence better suited toward exhibiting methodological
 variety. First, in order to understand the original context of Land's theorem, we will

 examine his original statement and proof as it appeared in the Annates in 1817. Lame's

 theorem states that when three or more conic sections intersect in four common points,

 then if one draws parallel diameters to these conics the corresponding conjugate diam

 eters will meet in a point. Its central concept is that of conjugate diameters, which have

 ancient roots in Apollonius's Conics. In the texts considered here geometers assumed

 conjugate diameters as known and without need of definition. Definitions of conjugate
 diameters could be found in pedagogically oriented books, such as Traite elementaire

 de trigonometrie rectiligne et spherique, et d'application de l'algebre ä la geometrie

 (Lacroix 1807), in which Sylvestre Francois Lacroix defined the diameter conjugate

 to a given diameter of an ellipse as the diameter //' parallel to the tangent drawn
 through the endpoint L of another given diameter (Lacroix 1807,172). To extend this

 construction from ellipses to every conic section, geometers often used projection or
 coordinate equations.

 In the intervening decade between Lame's first statement of his theorem and

 Steiner's proof, the whole subject of Lame's article-the correspondence between

 conic sections and their conjugate diameters-remained popular in geometric articles

 within the Annates. In particular, the research of Gergonne, Brianchon, and Poncelet

 explored the conditions necessary to determine second-order curves and the relation

 ships between conjugate diameters (Brianchon 1817; Brianchon and Poncelet 1820;
 Gergonne 1821; Poncelet 1822). For instance, in his 1822 Traite, Poncelet included a

 proof of Lame's theorem, which he described as a direct corollary to his more general

 theorem on polar reciprocity found by passing a planar point to infinity.

 Thus, in 1828 Steiner's choice of studying the relationship between conic sections

 in the plane engaged with a set of geometric questions still under lively investigation.
 Approximately two-thirds of the content in the nineteenth volume of the Annates

 were devoted to articles on the study of geometric curves and surfaces by at least
 nine different geometers (several articles were signed only as un abonne). However,

 if Steiner's subject matter was well established and well represented, his approach, as
 we will see, was original to him.

 The following issue of the same volume of the Annates opened with an article of

 analytic geometry, "Recherches sur les courbes algebriques de tous les degres" by
 "M. le docteur Plucker, professeur ä l'Universite de Bonn" (Plücker 1828b). Plücker's

 ten-page article was the first in a two-part series, the second of which explored the

 same questions for algebraic surfaces. In a concise introduction, Plücker explained

 his intention; "to give several examples of a method, by aid of which one can deduce,

 immediately and without any sort of calculation, a great number of general properties
 of curves of any degree, simply from considering the algebraic constitution of their

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 436

 J. Lorenat

 representative equations" (Plücker 1828b, 97).31 Pliicker's development of coordinate

 representation without calculation characterized a new method of analytic geometry.

 While both articles were about relationships between planar curves, the diverse

 treatments masked their parallel content except for their common reference to Lame's

 theorem. If the Apollonius problem reinforced the similarities between different geo

 metric methods in their common invocation of illustrated or virtual figures, frequently

 repeated constructions, and use of the same set of new geometric objects, the case of

 Lame's theorem will emphasize their differences.

 3.1 Lame's theorem (1817)

 Lame had just graduated from l'Ecole Polytechnique in 1817 when his article
 "Geometrie analitique. Sur les intersections des lignes et des surfaces. Extrait d'un

 memoire presente ä Γ Academie royale des sciences, en decembre 1816" was published

 in the Annates (Lame 1817). As the lengthy title indicates, the article was excerpted

 from a longer memoir, later revised, and published in 1818 as Examen des differentes

 methodes employees pour resoudre les problemes de geometrie (Lame 1818,30-41).

 The article's subject matter, the use of coordinate equations to solve geometry prob

 lems, was dear to Gergonne's heart and he may have requested this contribution from

 Lame as he would with respect to Poncelet's memoir in 1821. This brief article set out

 to use rectangular coordinate equations in order to find conditions such that:

 1. three first- or second-order curves [lignes] on the same plane concur in a point;

 2. three first- or second-order surfaces in space meet on a curve;

 3. four first- or second-order surfaces in space concur in a point.

 The result on conjugate diameters was considered by Lame as an "interesting theoret

 ical and practical consequence."

 second order.

 For his first problem, Lame used coordinate equations to represent three curves of

 ax2 + 2 bxy + cy2 + 2 dx + 2ey + / = 0

 α χ2 + 2b'xy -f- c'y2 -I- 2d'χ -4- 2e y + f =0

 a" x2 + 2b"xy + c"y2 + 2d" χ + 2e"y + f" = 0

 By multiplying the first two equations by the indeterminate constants m and m', respec

 tively, and then finding their sum, he derived a single equation.

 (am + a'm')x2 4- 2(bm + b'm')xy + (cm + c'm')y2

 + 2 (dm + dm')x + 2 (em + e'm')y + (fm + f'm')

 31 "[...] donner quelques exeraples d'une methode ä l'aide de laquelle on peut d&luire, immediatement et
 sans aucune sorte de calcul, un grand norabre de propriitis genirales des courbes de tous les degr6s, de la

 simple consideration de la constitution algibrique des iquations qui les repr£sentent"

 32 Evelyne Barbin has shown how Lami demonstrated the potential for progress and discovery in associ

 ating analysis and geometry (Barbin 2009). In particular, Barbin considers the content of Lamp's Examen
 des Afferentes methodes and his development of abridged notation.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 437

 Because of the indeterminacy of m, m' this new equation, "in its generality," rep

 resented all the curves of second order passing through the intersections of the two

 first curves. Examining the equation, Lame remarked that, under various relationships
 between the coefficients, it could belong to two different parabolas, a circle, or an

 infinity of ellipses and hyperbolas. The condition for the third line to have the same

 intersections would be met by setting each coefficient in the new equation equal to its

 corresponding coefficient in the third curve equation. That is,

 am + a'm' = a", bm + b'm! = b", cm + c'm' = c",

 dm + d'm' = d", em + e'm' = e", fm + f'm! = f".

 Through elimination of the constants m, m' Lame arrived at four other equations

 that expressed the concurrence of the three second-order curves. Moreover, the three

 equations containing a, a', a", b, b', b", and d, d', d" could be simultaneously satis

 fied, signifying that the three straight lines ax + by + d = 0, a'χ + b'y + d' = 0,
 a"x + b"y + d" = 0, concurred in a point.

 Each of these equations also belonged to the diameter that bisected all chords

 parallel to the x-axis of its corresponding second-order curve. For this result, Lame
 cited an article by Berard from the Annates. Then, since the direction of the jc-axis

 could be chosen with respect to the second-order curves, Lame concluded,

 THEOREM. If three or more conic sections have four common points; then

 in no matter what direction one draws parallel diameters to these conics, the

 corresponding conjugate diameters will concur in the same point. (Lame 1817,
 233)33

 At this stage in the text, no figures had been employed, and all geometric objects

 were represented by their coordinate equations. Having derived his theorem, Lame

 then applied it to determine graphically the center of a conic given five points on its

 perimeter and the slope of the diameters of a parabola given four points on its perimeter.

 These two constructive problems referenced straight edge figures, (Fig. 4). Though

 the problems themselves featured conic sections, the figures, which were printed at
 the end of the issue, contained only the given points, as was common practice for

 published geometrical figures at this time.

 The Annates classified Lame's article under the subject heading "analytic geome

 try," and within this article, Lame chose coordinate equations and algebraic analysis to

 prove his theorems but then used these theorems to solve associated problems through

 constructing figures without coordinate representation. Lame was thus able to employ

 the generality of algebraic expressions, without sacrificing the practice and applica

 tion of graphic constructions. In fact, Lame explicitly suggested that the application of

 algebra to geometry served as the method of discovery in his Examen des differentes

 methodes employees pour resoudre les problemes de geometrie. Following a long list

 of potential applications of algebraic representation of geometric loci beginning with

 33 "JHEOREME. Si plusieurs sections coniques ont quatre points communs; dans quelque direction qu'on

 leur mfene des diamötres parallöles, les conjuguis de ces diametres concourront en un meme point."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 438

 J. Lorenat

 Fig. 4 Lame's Figures (Lame
 1817)

 the study of straight lines and extending to second-degree curves directed toward his
 beginning student reader, Lame concluded,

 [...] finally in all these applications [we] must not neglect to draw attention to

 the constant agreement of Algebra with Geometry, an agreement that permits us

 to entrust calculation with the task of discovering new theorems. (Lame 1818,
 5-6)34

 In the case of Lame's theorem, his assessment appears to be correct, as his successors

 repeatedly cited his article as the source of the theorem.

 3.2 Steiner proves Lame's theorem: "Developpement d'une serie des theoremes

 relatifs aux sections coniques" (1828)

 Gergonne and Bulletin reviewers described Steiner's first publications as employing

 a method completely unique to the author. As Steiner continued writing for a French

 audience, his knowledge of the background literature and terminology transformed
 accordingly. Now writing in French, Steiner cited Carnot and Lame (and himself).

 34 "[...] enfin ne rien nigliger dans toutes ces applications pour faire remarquer l'accord constant de
 l'Algebre avec la Geometrie, accord qui permet de confier au calcul le soin de decouvrir de nouveaux
 theoremes."

 ■Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 439

 Like Steiner's first publication in the Annales, this paper received substantial
 input from Gergonne. Among Steiner's Nachlass at the Eidgenössische Technische

 Hochschule in Zürich a manuscript draft of Steiner's original submission is accompa

 nied by attempts at a letter from the author to the editor (Steiner 1828e). In the most

 complete copy, Steiner requested that Gergonne include the following theorems in his

 journal. He requested that Gergonne exercise full editorial authority.

 It is only your indulgence and the hope that you will not refuse to correct in

 this whatever you think appropriate, which encourages me to offer my humble

 geometrical research in such a rough and incorrect style. (Steiner 1828a)35

 Steiner described his difficulty with writing in French, which prevented him from

 communicating his method of discovering his theorems. Consequently, his style was

 "very aphoristic," and he hoped that Gergonne could "supply all that my work lacks in

 reasoning and clarity." Steiner concluded by offering to send part of his forthcoming

 book if Gergonne did not find his work "displeasing." Steiner's modest appeal con

 trasts with his confident assertions in German letters and publications. Further, Steiner

 recognized that his contribution lacked a "method of discovery" and thus appeared ad

 hoc-a feature he had criticized in analytic geometry.

 The subsequent publications show that Gergonne certainly followed Steiner's direc

 tions. Steiner wrote his manuscript, entitled "Developpement d'une serie de theoremes

 relatifs aux courbes et aux surfaces du second ordre," in three parts, each of which
 became a separate article appearing in the nineteenth volume (Steiner 1828b, c,d).

 Notably, Gergonne classified the first article as elementary geometry, the second as

 pure geometry, and the third as geometry of situation. Gergonne extensively changed

 the first and third articles through adding dual columns of writing, new theorems,

 and numerous citations. He limited his changes to grammar, vocabulary, and notation

 (Steiner's A\ became A', for example) in the second article, "Developpement d'une

 serie des theoremes relatifs aux sections coniques," which contained Lamp's Theorem.

 Gergonne also added a single additional reference: the Annales volume IV, page 251,
 an article by Gergonne himself (Steiner 1828b, 45).

 "Developpement d'une serie des theoremes relatifs aux sections coniques" ran

 to thirty pages in twenty-eight sections and included dozens of theorems and prob

 lems, which were only designated as such by the use of quotation marks around their

 statements (Steiner 1828d). The list-like form of Steiner's article was emphasized by
 its vague title, lack of preface or introduction, and extensive enumeration of small

 sections-some as short as a sentence, others extending several paragraphs. The same

 format featured in at least two of Steiner's publications of the same period, "Demon
 stration de quelques theoremes" and "Einige geometrische Sätze" (Steiner 1828b,
 1826b), and seemed to contradict his earlier systematic intentions or desire to show an

 organic unity. However, Steiner's proliferation of new articles could also be interpreted

 as publicizing results that would be systematically developed in his forthcoming book

 or as an effort to secure a permanent position (Steiner 1832).

 35 "C'est votre indulgence seule et l'esperance, que vous ne refuserez pas d'y coniger tout ce que vous
 jugerez ä propos, qui m'encourage de vous offrir dans un style si rude et incorrect mes faibles recherches
 geometriques [sic]."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 440

 J. Lorenat

 Fig. 5 Steiner's Figure 1
 (Steiner 1828d)

 B

 The Bulletin review later summarized Steiner's article as based on a single proposi

 tion: given a triangle and three points on the lines containing the sides of this triangle

 such that perpendiculars raised through these points concurred in the same point, then

 if one drew a circumference through these points, it would intersect the given lines in

 three new points from which perpendiculars would also concur. Certainly, this proposi

 tion was Steiner's first result in this text, but he only explicitly referenced it in deriving

 his second result (whereas, for example, his fifth theorem was referenced three times

 throughout the text), so its role as the foundation of his research seems to be mostly
 positional.

 As well as articles devoted to the proof of new results, Steiner's other primary
 output at this time were posed problems (without solutions) and theorems (without

 proof) offered to the readers of the Annates and the Journal (Steiner 1827a, c, d). These
 collections served to both secure Steiner's priority and encourage readers to practice
 applying his methods. Structurally, "Developpement d'une serie des theoremes" was
 reminiscent of these catalogs in neither building from general considerations (like in
 Steiner's Systematische Entwicklungen) nor building toward some promised results
 (like in Steiner's "Leichter Beweis eines stereometrischen Satzes von Euler"). To
 introduce Steiner's style with an elementary result and for future comparison with

 Pliicker's proof of the same proposition, we will begin with Steiner's first proposition

 before turning to his proof of Lame's theorem.

 Steiner began with constructing a figure (our Fig. 5), for which we will provide a

 series of step-by-step illustrations following Steiner's construction instructions. How
 ever, certain features of his finished Figure 1, only described later and not relevant to

 proving Lame's theorem, will not be introduced.

 From a point Ρ in the plane of a triangle ABC drop perpendiculars PA', PB',

 PC' respectively to sides BC, CA, AB. Though not specified in the text, we follow
 Steiner's figure by placing Ρ inside the triangle ABC (Fig. 6).

 Then join the vertices A, B,C to Ρ (Fig. 7).
 These new segments determine fixed relationships between the parts of the right

 triangles.

 ί) Springer

 5Ä72 - CA'2 = ~BP2 - CP2,

 cW2 - JW2 = CP2 - ÄP2,

 AC2 - ~BC2 = ~ÄP2 - ~BP2.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications...

 441

 Fig. 6 Triangle ABC and point Ρ

 Fig. 7 Segments AP, Β Ρ, CP

 By "adding, reducing and transposing" [ajoutant, reduisant et transposant]36 the

 above equations Steiner derived,

 AB'2 + BC'2 + CA'2 = ΒΑ'2 + CB'2 + AC'2.

 He claimed that this relationship between line segments was a necessary and sufficient

 condition that perpendiculars raised from the points A', B', C' on the three respective
 sides BC, C A, AB of a triangle ABC all concurred in the same point Ρ. He concluded

 immediately that from this resulted (1) that the perpendicular bisectors of the sides of

 ^ Gergonne frequently used the expression "adding, reducing and transposing," in the manuscript Steiner
 simply wrote "thus the sum is" [done la somme est].

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 442

 J. Lorenat

 Fig. 8 Steiner's Figure 2
 (Steiner 1828d)

 a triangle concurred in a point and (2) that the perpendiculars from each side to its
 opposite vertex concurred in a point. In section 2, Steiner introduced a circumscribed
 circle and gradually derived further theorems on the triangles inscribed to conics.
 Steiner's progression in section 1 revealed how tenuous the line between what
 was classified as pure and analytic geometry might be. Here Steiner began with a
 figure illustrating the relationship he intended to derive: the concurrence of three
 lines. From an algebraically computed equation, Steiner determined a criterion for the

 desired relationship, followed by two exemplary cases. Though Steiner's criterion was

 constructible, the form of presentation, as well as the use of calculations, suggests an

 algebraic affinity not present in the figure. Further, the sufficiency of the condition only
 followed because each of the steps was reversible. Figure 1 served as a representation
 of the hypothesis and the conclusion, but concealed the intermediary non-constructive

 steps.

 We now jump forward to Lame's theorem, stated toward the end of the text in section

 22. In this section, Steiner initiated a new line of research. He referred explicitly only
 to section 6 of his article and a figure (his Figure 7) he had introduced in section 18.

 He thus required from his reader knowledge and memory of points only defined in
 section 18. In order to explain Steiner's derivation of Lame's Theorem, we need first to

 determine the necessary results from section 6 required in section 22, the construction
 of Figure 7 in section 18, and its special case in section 19; we then shall turn to
 Steiner's proof per se.

 Section 6 began by describing the relationships between points pictured in his

 Figure 2 (our Fig. 8), a circle with center Ρ circumscribed to a triangle ABC.

 Steiner had shown in section 2 that perpendiculars raised from AB, AC, BC to
 Ρ bisected their respective sides at C', B', A'. In section 6, he employed this result,
 though without any direct citation.

 Drawing B'C', C'A', A'B', Steiner concluded that these lines were respectively
 parallel to the sides BC, CA, AB of the original triangle. Then, for example, if the
 line A P' was perpendicular to B'C' it would be perpendicular to BC. So, from a result

 proved but not referenced from Section 1, P' would be the point where perpendiculars

 dropped from vertices to opposite sides concurred. Steiner designated the feet of these
 perpendiculars as A", B", C". Then points Α', Β', C', A", B", C" would all lie on
 the circumference of a circle centered at Ο, the midpoint of PP'. These constructive

 steps are shown in our Fig. 9.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 443

 Fig. 9 Constructing Steiner's Figure 2

 Steiner referenced Lazare Carnot (without a date or a title) in finding a fourth point
 G on ΡP' such that GO : GP :: P'O : Ρ'Ρ,37 From this ratio P' and G were the
 similitude centers of the two circles centered at Ο and Ρ .38 Thus the circle centered at

 Ο also passed through the midpoints of the segments P'A, Ρ' B, and P'C. This was
 the result that Steiner would employ in section 22.

 As we have seen with his Figures 1 and 2, each of Steiner's figures carried its own,

 usually new, definition of points. Often these new points would have overlapping

 names with the points from prior figures. Since he cited Figure 7 in section 22, we
 must now set aside the use of point labeling from Figure 2, except in translating the

 31 This proportion reappears in many early nineteenth-century pure geometry texts. Poncelet attributed the
 result to Pappus and also noted Brianchon's treatment (Poncelet 1822, 12). Brianchon in turn references
 "Pillustre auteur de la Geometrie de position," that is, Carnot (Brianchon 1817,6). Poncelet, Brianchon, and
 Steiner refer to the division as harmonic or harmonic proportion. Carnot indeed proved the existence of the
 fourth proportional point for any three given points in space in De la correlation des figures de giomitrie
 in 1801 (Carnot 1801,103-125).

 38 The similitude centers between two circles were defined by precisely this ratio between circles with radii
 GO and Ρ'Ρ in (Steiner 1826a).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 444

 J. Lorenat

 Fig. 10 Steiner's Figure 7
 (Steiner 1828d)

 application of results from Figure 2 as noted. This will hopefully help avoid too much

 confusion over the changing roles of points.

 Figure 7 (our Fig. 10) pictured a circle, but was described in section 18 as any
 conic circumscribed to a triangle ABC. As in the previous figures, we will construct

 Figure 7 step by step with intermediary illustrations along the way. However, we note

 that Steiner's Figure 7 pictured the construction in its entirety and incorporated other

 elements not featured in section 18 or 22, which we will omit from our progressive
 illustrations.

 Consider any conic circumscribed to a given triangle ABC, as in Steiner's Figure

 7 we begin with a circle (Fig. 11).

 Through the vertices of this triangle and through any planar point P' (again, fol
 lowing Steiner's figure, placed within ABC), lines AP'A"a, BP'B"ß, CP'C"y
 respectively cut the extended triangle sides opposite the three angles in A", B", C"
 and the conic at α, β, γ. If through any point D on the circumference, one drew lines

 Doe, Dß, Dy cutting respective sides BC, AC, AB in α', β1, γ', then these three points
 would always be on a line α'β'γ' containing Ρ'. This collinearity result followed when
 one considered DßBCAaD, or any six such points, as an inscribed hexagon to the
 conic. Then Pascal's theorem guaranteed that the intersections of opposite sides Dß
 and CA, β Β and Aa, BC and a D, respectively, at β1, Ρ, a!, were collinear. Choosing
 a different hexagon and applying the same procedure would ensure the collinearity of
 all four points. Finally, as D moved along the circumference, the line α'β'γ' rotated
 on the point P', and (as Steiner put it) vice versa.

 In section 19, Steiner considered the special case where the conic was a circle, then
 P'A" = A"a, P'B" = B"ß, and P'C" = C"y. While Steiner did not state whether
 or not the conic was a circle in Section 22, he did begin with this particular equality

 result, which also allied with his application of the results from section 6, proved only

 for a given circle not a general conic.

 So, in section 22 points A", B", C" were now the respective midpoints of seg
 ments P'ot, Ρ'β, Ρ'γ, particular cases of the points constructed in section 18. If from
 Α", Β", C" one drew three lines respectively parallel to Da, Dß, Dy, where D was
 some point on the circumference, they would then pass through each of the mid
 points of P'ot', Ρ'β', Ρ'γ' and concur at a point D'. Then, from section 6, a conic
 would pass through A', B', C' midpoints of βγ, aß, αγ (the former BC, CA, AC of

 ■Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 445

 Fig. 11 Constructive steps toward Steiner's Figure 7

 section 6) and Λ", Β", C" the midpoints of Ρ'α, Ρ'β, Ρ'γ (the former P' A, P'B, P'C
 of section 6). From the construction, the point of concurrence D' would also lie on
 this circumference and by Pascal's Theorem D, D', P' would be collinear. Steiner
 declared that from this resulted a theorem he said was due to Lame (with no date or

 text cited).

 Four coplanar points A, B, C, P' determine three systems of line pairs AP'
 and BP' [sic, BC in manuscript], BP' and AC, CP' and AB, which intersect
 respectively in A", B", C". If one intersects these systems by any line α!β'γ'P'
 passing through Ρ', and if, by the points Α", Β", C" and by the midpoints of the
 segments [α'Ρ', β'Ρ', γ'Ρ] of this line, one draws the lines A" D', B"D', C"D',
 then these lines will concur in the same point D'. And the locus of this point will

 be a conic passing through the points A", B", C" and through the midpoints of
 the lines BC, CA, AB AP', BP', CP', etc. (ibid, 61)39

 39 "Quatre points A, Β, C, P' donnes sur un meme plan determinent trois systemes de deux droites AP'
 et BP', BP' et AC, CP' et AB, qui se coupent respectivement en A", B", C". Sil'on coupe ces systemes
 par une droite quelconque α'β'γ'Ρ' conduite par P', et si, par les points A", B", C", et par les milieux
 des segmens de cette droite, on mene des droites A"D', B"D', C"D', ces droites concourront en un meme

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 446

 J. Lorenat

 The overall effect of the theorem juxtaposed to the construction is disorienting. Perhaps

 most jarringly, Steiner had reassigned the point names in his theorem's statement:

 α, β, γ were suddenly A, B,C (thus better corresponding to section 6, but in disregard

 of the midpoint construction from Figure 7). Many constructive steps were inverted.

 The line containing points α', β', γ', and Ρ', found in section 18, was described as any

 straight line in the theorem's statement. The midpoints of P'a', Ρ'β', Ρ'γ' here defined

 the three lines respectively through A", B", C", on which they had been proved to lie

 in the proof. The point D remained unmentioned as did the parallel relation and the

 given circle (or conic).

 By omitting the conic and conjugate diameters, Steiner's text removed the main

 features of Lame's Theorem as it originally had appeared in 1817. It was only in the

 constructive proof and Figure 7 that one could recognize that the four common points

 were α, β, γ, D (or A, B, C, D in the theorem's statement-although D is missing), the
 diameters were Da, Dß, Dy with parallel conjugates A"D', B"D', C"D' concurring
 at D'.

 Although in this proof Steiner only seemed to examine the case of the circle,

 Steiner's final statement of Lame's theorem referenced a general conic section, without

 providing an argument of how one might apply projection to extend the proof from the

 case of a circle. However, in numerous earlier examples throughout the text, Steiner

 had used parallel projection and central projection in order to extend circle properties to

 any conic section. Presumably, he intended that similar techniques could be employed

 here, but in section 23, Steiner began a new line of inquiry, and did not further reference
 Lame's Theorem, nor use its conclusion, in the remainder of his article.

 Steiner's article did not build toward any cumulative final results. Nevertheless, the

 list of theorems maintained a coherent structure in terms of subject matter and repeated

 techniques. Throughout the article, Steiner employed a common theme of progressing

 from a simple case to ever more general elaborations. Each new line of inquiry began

 with simple particular figures-most commonly a circle and straight lines-that Steiner

 generalized progressively into curves. He often repeated a three-step argument pattern,

 first a specific result for a circle or an ellipse, then via projection to a broader result for a

 set of conic sections, and finally via perspective to an even more general result applied

 to all conic sections.40 Finding the reciprocal result was another common practice

 for Steiner. Sometimes he simply stated "reciprocally" or "vice versa," sometimes he

 wrote out the reciprocal in full in the same section, and sometimes he devoted an

 entirely new section to the exposition of the reciprocal. These choices do not appear

 motivated by the significance of the result or the length of the process. The symmetry

 Footnote 39 continued

 point D', et le lieu de ce point sera une conique passant par les points A", Β", C" et par les milieux des
 droites BC, CA, AB AP', BP', CP', etc."

 This theorem is nearly identical between the published and unpublished versions (Steiner 1828e). Steiner,
 in fact, ended many theorems with "etc." or "etc. etc. etc." in his manuscript, several of which Gergonne
 edited out.

 40 For instance, in section 10 Steiner proved a result for an equilateral triangle circumscribed to a circle.

 Through parallel projection he extended the result to any triangle and the smallest possible circumscribed

 ellipse in section 11. Then in section 12 he applied central projection or perspective to generalize the result

 to any triangle and any circumscribed conic section.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 447

 of Steiner's argument patterns unified his article more than the particular contents,
 which ranged across objects in the geometric plane, leading to numerous results and

 then backtracking to different hypotheses. Although the results appeared disorganized,

 the repetition of generalization could serve as a guide to the reader in systematically
 following and applying Steiner's method. Though it did not make for easy reading,
 this repeated form of argument perhaps more closely resembled an imitable method of

 discovery than an argument directed toward a specific result. Here, no one result was

 placed as more important or significant than another. Some results were employed more

 frequently, but because Steiner proceeded from particular findings to generalizations,

 the more specific results appeared more often despite their limited applicability.

 As in the case of section 2 and section 18, each new line of inquiry included a spec
 ified figure, where Steiner took the opportunity to wipe the slate clean and redefine
 previously designated points. As we have seen, this practice was not without confu
 sion. Although Steiner included many theorems, not every proposition was illustrated.

 Steiner referred to figures economically, often using one figure to illustrate several
 constructions.

 In the published version of the article, Gergonne signed his initials as the draftsman

 for all the engraved figures in his journal, and clearly took care in his layout. In order to

 Tom YlX.ptan.l.pag. 3?-<f4 •

 Fig. 12 Steiner's Figures (Steiner 1828d)

 J.2). (p.Jtcit.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 448

 J. Lorenat

 fit all of Steiner's figures on a single sheet (our Fig. 12), the figures were not arranged

 linearly, but almost in a clockwise fashion beginning with figure one in the lower left

 corner. In Figure 5 there were two ellipses, otherwise the conics were circles, or as in

 his Figure 6, partial circles. If we consider when figures were invoked, they remain

 linked to preliminary and more particular theorems rather than the general results

 derived through projection and reciprocity.

 Despite the elementary nature of the figures, they contained recent geometric inno

 vations. Specifically, both Steiner's Figure 3 and his Figure 4 indicated an infinite

 point P' as the intersection of parallel lines. As in the figures of Poncelet in his Tratte,

 the point at infinity was suggested as being off the page (Poncelet 1822). In general

 izing his theorems, Steiner referred to cases where the points of intersection passed to

 infinity or were situated at infinity. These procedures of projection, perspective, and

 reciprocity maintained an analogy to constructive results yet extended beyond their
 constructive limitations.

 The aphoristic style that Steiner perceived in his introductory letter to Gergonne

 was observed and criticized by his readers. An anonymous reviewer in the Bulletin

 summarized Steiner 1828d as containing too many theorems even to list within the

 bounds of the review. The reviewer continued that while Steiner's fruitfulness might be

 impressive, his complicated presentation required extraordinary patience and fortitude

 even for a well-disciplined reader.

 This memoir indicates, in M. Steiner, a great force of mind, and much habituation

 to the resources of geometry; but the manner of the author's proceeding, and the

 often rather complicated figures and constructions, to which he has recourse,

 make the going slow and the reading painful. (Anonymous 1828, 245)41

 In conclusion, the reviewer recommended the use of analytic geometry, or some other

 of "the broad methods [les larges methodes] from the school of Monge," to render

 Steiner's results with less difficulty and greater brevity. In fact, the reviewer had already

 read Plücker's article [also reviewed in (Anonymous 1828)], which did exactly that.

 3.3 Pliicker proves Lame's theorem: "Recherches sur les courbes algebriques

 de tous les degres" (1828)

 Plücker's research on algebraic curves appeared only 30 pages later in the same Annales

 volume (Pliicker 1828b). Steiner's article had been classified as pure geometry and

 Plücker's was classified as analytic geometry. Though either article might have fit

 equally well under the heading geometry of curves, their disparate classifications

 contrasted with their proximity. Further, Plücker's research was succinct and driven

 toward a clearly enunciated goal. He promised to deduce a great number of properties

 of algebraic curves, while refraining from calculation. Plücker would continue these

 investigations with respect to algebraic surfaces in another essay.

 41 "Ce memoire decele, chez Μ. Steiner, une grand force de tete, et beaucoup d'habitude des ressources

 de la gfom6trie; mais la maniere de proceder de l'auteur, et les figures et constructions, souvent assez

 compliquies, auxquelles il a recours, en rendent la marche lente et la lecture penible."

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 449

 The article comprised three sections. The first motivated the research with a review

 of Cramer's paradox and a discussion of well-known curve properties. Pliicker cited

 Gabriel Cramer as the first geometer to have noticed, in his Introduction ä I'analyse

 des courbes algebriques (1750), that a planar curve of degree m was completely deter
 mined by — 1 points, but two planar curves of this degree could intersect

 in up to m2 points. When m > 2, there was an apparent paradox, since different

 curves could share as many or more points than the number required to completely

 determine one of them. For instance, when m = 3 two planar curves could intersect

 in 9 points, which should determine a single curve of degree 3. Following Cramer,

 Pliicker explained this seemingly "surprising" result by remarking that when com

 pletely determining a planar curve one always assumed the given points were chosen

 "by chance and contain no particular common relation." Turning to his own research

 in the theory of osculating curves and its geometric interpretation, Pliicker had met

 several similar theorems that initially appear rather "singular," but were "very fruitful

 with beautiful corollaries." Though these theorems had appeared elsewhere (Pliicker

 did not say where precisely), he would reproduce them here in a more developed
 manner followed by some of their applications.42

 The second section contained Plücker's two main theorems and their proofs, these

 were the only theorems labeled and enumerated in the text. Pliicker began with an

 analytic representation of the properties discussed in Section I, showing that if one
 represented two curves of any degree m > 2 as

 then the equation of the same degree

 Μ = 0, Μ' = 0,

 μΜ + Μ' = 0,

 in which μ is a constant indeterminate coefficient, would express an infinity of other

 curves of degree m passing through the m 2 points of intersection of Μ, M'. But if one

 found an arbitrary new point on one of the curves, one could find μ from the result

 ing linear equation, and so the curve containing the new point would be completely

 determined. Pliicker continued with this line of reasoning in the case where there were

 ΗΠ ' ^ ~ 2 given points (one fewer than to completely determine a conic). He
 then invoked the principle of duality, which extended the result from curves of a given
 degree and fixed points to corresponding curves of a given class and fixed lines. Fol

 lowing these dual results, Pliicker demonstrated his Theorem I in parallel columns.43

 42 Plücker would return to Cramer's Paradox in the second volume of his Analytisch-geometrische Entwick
 lungen, published in 1831 (Plücker 1831,242).

 43 In all theorems in this article, Plücker consistently described both given and deduced points and lines as
 "fixed," perhaps in order to fix the general equation of the second-order curve.

 "ΤΗέΟΚΕΜΕ I. Toutes les courbes du m.'eme degr£ qui passent par les 2^ ■ 2^2 - 2 memes points

 fixes, se coupent en outre aux m2 — (2tjti · 21^2 — 2), autres memes points fixes."

 "THEORfeME I. Toutes les courbes du m.'eme classe qui passent par les 2^jti · 2ij2 _ 2 memes droites

 fixes, se coupent en outre aux m2 — (2ijti · m^· — 2), autres memes droites fixes."

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 450

 J. Lorenat

 THEOREM I. All the curves of mth degree that

 THEOREM I. All the curves of mth class that are

 pass through the same 2^1. ZL+I _ 2 fixed

 points will also meet in m2 - (™+_L . m+1 _ 2)

 other fixed points

 tangent to the same - 2 fixed lines,
 are also tangent to m2 - - 2) other
 fixed lines

 As an example, and still in parallel columns, Plücker detailed the case of third

 degree curves passing through the same eight points and thus meeting in a ninth fixed

 point. The parallel dual case treated third-degree curves tangent to the same eight lines

 and thus tangent to a ninth fixed line. Similarly, fourth-degree curves passing through

 thirteen points would meet in an additional three fixed points, and so on. Returning to

 a single column of text, Plücker noted that some of the points could be of higher order

 and so not necessarily unique.

 Plücker then continued to consider the situation when the coefficients of the repre

 sentative equations were not indeterminate, but instead subject to certain conditions,

 which would serve to lower the number of necessary fixed points for the theorem's

 hypothesis. Plücker summarized these results in Theorem II, presented in only one
 column.

 Given η coefficients of the general equation of mth degree in two variables,

 or given η linear equations among all or part of these coefficients; then all the

 curves represented by the general equation, so modified and passing by the same

 ■ <ψ - (η+2) fixed points, will meet in the same m2 - ^±1. ϋψ + („+2)

 other fixed points, (ibid, 101)44

 Plücker concluded his second section with a reminder that the theorem required the
 inequality, η > ίηρ ■ - 1.

 In the third and final section, Plücker demonstrated the fruitfulness of Section II,

 by showing assorted examples of easily deducible curve properties, including Lame's

 Theorem. In particular, Plücker focused on consequences of Theorem II, which could

 be applied to second-degree curves. In this case, given η coefficients or η linear equa

 tions containing the coefficients, then all the curves passing through 4 — η fixed points

 would have η additional fixed points in common.

 Plücker considered a general equation of a second-degree curve in two indetermi

 nate variables with six coefficients.

 Ax2 + By2 + Cxy + 2Dx + 2Ey + F = 0. (1)

 Then if F was supposed known, any combination of four coefficients, equations con

 taining coefficients, or points on the curve (e.g., one coefficient and three points)

 would give an infinite number of curves passing through the same four points. This

 relationship formed the basis for all Plücker's subsequent investigations in this article.

 44 "Etant donnas η coefflciens de liquation genirale du m.'eme degre ä deux ind&ermin&s, ou encore
 itant donnees η equations liniaires entre tous ou partie de ces coefficiens ; toutes les courbes reprisent^es
 par liquation generale, ainsi modifiee et passant par les — (n + 2) memes points fixes donnes,

 se couperont en outre aux m2 - 2^ti . 21+2 (n 2) autres memes points fixes."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications..

 451

 Plücker began with the special case of the equilateral hyperbola. In rectangular
 coordinates, the equation representing an equilateral hyperbola would have coeffi
 cients such that A + Β = 0. Such an equation reduced the number of necessary

 givens in equation (1). Drawing from this condition, Plücker determined that all
 equilateral hyperbolas sharing three given points would meet in a fourth point.

 Since systems of two perpendicular lines could be considered as hyperbolas, Plücker

 applied the property to show that the three heights of a triangle concur in the same

 point.45

 Plücker returned to the general conic. From (1), Plücker concluded that knowing

 either ratio j or § would give two conjugate diameters of the curve, where one would
 be parallel to one of the coordinate axes. Thus all conics with two conjugate diameters

 parallel to two fixed lines and passing through three fixed points would meet in a fourth

 fixed point, and conversely.

 In particular, the equation of a diameter whose conjugate was parallel to the x-axis

 would be By + Cx + Ε = 0. So if the ratio J- were given, then one would know
 the intersection point of the given diameter with the >'-axis. That is, if the >'-axis met

 the curve, then the intersection point would be the midpoint of the chord intercepted.

 Further, given any coordinate point (a, b) on the diameter's extension, one could

 conclude that Bb + Ca + Ε = 0. Similarly, if one were given another point (a', b'),

 now on the extension of the diameter whose conjugate was parallel to the y-axis, then
 Aa' + Cb' + D = 0.

 Continuing this investigation with a given line of the form ax + ßy + γ =0,
 Plücker found that the equation of the diameter whose conjugate was parallel to this

 given line would be a(By + Cx + E) = ß(Ax + Cy + D), a linear equation relating
 A, B, C, D, Ε. One could then be given one, two, three, or four equations of the same

 form containing Α, Β, C, D, Ε. In the last case, and supposing one of the coefficients

 as given, the curves would be completely determined except for the last term F. From

 these considerations, Plücker deduced "immediately" [sur-le-champ] that all conics

 passing through three given points and in which the conjugates of the diameters that

 were parallel to the same fixed line concurred in the same fixed point, would meet at a

 fourth point. Further, if any number of conics passed through the same four points, the

 conjugates of their diameters parallel to the same fixed line would concur in a fixed

 point.

 The latter result, in which we recognize Lame's theorem, Plücker indeed attributed

 to Lame, giving a precise citation of the Annales VII, page 229. He suggested that the
 theorem could be "completed" as follows.

 If the line to which the diameters are parallel turns on one of its points, the point

 of concurrence of the diameters describes a conic, the geometric locus of the

 centers of all conics through the four given points (*).

 45 Though not relevant to the remainder of his argument, Pliicker's unexpected triangle result provided a

 striking contrast to Steiner's proof of the same result, merely 70 pages earlier in the same journal.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 452

 J. Lorenat

 If two conics intercept, on the same given line, chords whose midpoints coincide;

 then the same thing will occur for all the conics which, passing by the four points

 of intersection of these two, intercept the given line, (ibid, 105)46

 Finally, Pliicker generalized the result for conics passing through 4 -n given points,

 which would then have conjugate parallel diameters meeting in η points. Pliicker
 explained that if η = 4, then the conics would be similar and concentric such that

 the given points of intersection would pass to infinity. Plücker's consideration of this

 special case shows an attention to Poncelet's innovations in the Traite des proprietes

 projectives in which he established the common points at infinity among similar,
 concentric conics.

 Pliicker used coordinate equations without digressing into computation. He pre
 sented the necessary equations representing conjugate parallel diameters as known,
 from there the reader only needed to count the number of coefficients and the num

 ber of givens in order to reach the desired result. The entire article remained within

 the system of rectangular coordinate equations. The conic section was represented

 exactly by (1), and Pliicker seemed to use the two terms of reference (conic and equa

 tion) interchangeably in his proofs. Specific conics, such as the equilateral hyperbola,

 were designated with respect to their coordinate relations in (1). Plücker's only men

 tion of constructing the determined conics was to point out that the construction of a

 fourth point shared by two conics would be very easy and one could then find all the

 points one desired. Nowhere did he give a constructive procedure and there were no

 problem solutions, only theorems and proofs: That this was geometry, and not alge

 bra, was emphasized in the names of things, equations represented geometric objects.

 While equations and not figures were the form of representation, the objects remained

 conic sections, diameters, parallel lines, hyperbolas, and points of intersection. Just as
 Steiner's figures were nowhere to be seen in his theorem statements, so, too, Pliicker

 made no mention of his coordinate equations and coefficients when stating theorems.

 Though Lame and Pliicker both used coordinate equations to represent geometric

 objects, we begin to see how the label "analytic geometry" carried dissonant connota

 tions in the context of the two different publications over ten years apart. Lame would

 introduce the use of abridged notation in 1818, but in 1817 he relied upon standard

 coordinate equations to represent curves and surfaces. In Lame's exposition, the equa

 tions became increasingly complex and numerous. While his paper did not include
 a great deal of calculation, this was because Lame left the elimination of variables

 to the reader and simply showed the end result. In part relying upon the technology

 developed by Lam6, Pliicker could use symmetry and the best choice of coordinate

 axes to simplify his equations. Pliicker further avoided calculation by emphasizing that

 the curves could be determined, without showing how one might use a given equa

 46 "Si la droite, ä laquelle les diam&tres sont paralleles, tourne sur l'un quelconque des points de sa direction,
 le point de concours des conjuguis de ces diam&res decrira une conique, lieu geomitrique des centres de

 toutes les coniques passant par les quatre points donnes (*)."

 "Si deux coniques sont telles qu'elles interceptent, sur une meme droite donnee, des cordes dont les milieux

 coincident; la meme chose aura lieu pour toutes les coniques qui, passant par les quatre points d'intersection

 de ces deux lä, couperont la droite donn6e (*)."

 The asterisk will be explained in Sect. 3,4.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 453

 tion to find the exact coefficients. These specific, computationally derived, results

 were not Plücker's aim. With these techniques, his form of analytic geometry without

 calculation appeared more frequently in this article than it had in his earlier research.

 As pointed out in Cournot's 1828 review, Plücker often progressed toward already
 known results, rather than making new discoveries (Cournot 1828, 178). However,

 his approach to these known results incorporated recent developments that had not

 yet been represented through coordinate equations. Gergonne had introduced dual

 columns that showed corresponding geometric results side-by-side in 1824, but they

 had been used almost exclusively in non-coordinate geometry since that time. In this

 article, Plücker used dual columns to state his theorems and showed how to apply

 polar reciprocity in his final example, where he provided an equation that represented

 when one point with coordinates (a, b) lay on the polar of another point (a', b') with

 respect to the second-order curve (1).

 Aaa' + Bbb' + C(ab' + ba') + D(a + a') + B(b + b') + F = 0

 Plücker deduced from the symmetry of equation that the result was reciprocal—the

 point (a', b') lay on the polar of the point (a, b).

 Plücker further incorporated new geometric practices with his use of common

 points at infinity shared by any concentric conics. Poncelet had originally motivated

 this choice of terminology to provide an interpretation within "pure geometry" of

 the imaginary points from "analytic geometry," where one could in general represent

 points of intersection for any two second-degree equations. Plücker did not provide a

 coordinate representation for these points, although the step of sending points or lines

 to infinity was not strictly constructive either. Within research articles, it was becom

 ing a common procedure, even in articles that Gergonne designated as "elementary

 geometry" [such as in Steiner (1828c)]. Plücker demonstrated a strong familiarity with

 contemporary research, and an eagerness to expand the domain of analytic geometry.

 With the new geometric objects developed by Poncelet and the new abridged notation,

 the practice of using coordinate equations to solve geometry problems was evolving.
 His review in the Bulletin (two pages after Steiner's) credited Plücker with demon

 strating, without any sort of calculation, a multitude of properties of second-order lines
 (Anonymous 1828).

 3.4 Gergonne's footnote, citation, and text

 The asterisk in Plücker's declared completion of Lamp's theorem (Sect. 3.3) referred

 the reader to a footnote by Gergonne who succinctly stated that "this is precisely

 what was demonstrated on page 106 of the preceding volume." Gergonne's note was

 perhaps not precisely Plücker's statement, but certainly a special case. There, Gergonne

 had given a proof that the conjugates of the parallel diameters of all the ellipses

 circumscribed to the same quadrilateral concur in a point and this point was constantly

 on the perimeter of the hyperbola which was the locus of centers of the ellipses

 (Gergonne 1827). The first part of the result was attributed to Lame, although a different

 text than Plücker's citation. As reference in an accompanying footnote, Gergonne

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 454

 J. Lorenat

 pointed to "a very elegant proof of this proposition, as well as many other interesting

 things, in a little work of Lame, Examen des differentes mithodes, etc." (Gergonne
 1827, 106).47

 Gergonne, although proving the extended version of this theorem, attributed the

 original statement to an article by Steiner in Crelle's Journal from 1827 written in

 response to a question posed by the geometer Etienne Bobillier in the Annales on

 finding an ellipse closest to a circle given certain constraining conditions (Steiner

 1827b).48 Despite admiring what he described as Steiner's elegant theorem, Gergonne

 expressed dissatisfaction with the proof, claiming that it too often relied upon what

 Steiner described as "generally known" results, while they were not well known at all.

 Gergonne did not attempt to reconstruct Steiner's proof, instead taking the material in

 his own direction. While Steiner's proof had been constructive and figure-based, Ger

 gonne's proof relied upon calculations with coordinate equations and did not include
 descriptions of figures. Accordingly, Gergonne did not consider this a translation or

 abridgment of Steiner, but claimed it as an independent result. Like Pliicker, Ger

 gonne began with the same general form of a conic, Eq. (1). Unlike Pliicker, he then

 introduced many other variables to serve in algebraic, trigonometric, and differential

 calculations, which were eventually simplified to reach the desired conclusions. The

 proof only applied to ellipses and resulting hyperbola loci, not a general second-order

 curve. Further, Gergonne made no comment on the particularity of his version nor

 whether one might be able to extend the results to other conic sections.

 Readers of the Annales, and certainly Steiner among them, might have known that

 Steiner had already given another version of Lame's Theorem in an earlier context. On

 the one hand, Lame's theorem and its proof was known, as the common citation in all

 three articles demonstrates. On the other hand, Steiner's extreme brevity (his article

 runs less than two full pages in Crelle's Journal-Gergonne's analytic proof of the

 same results goes for ten), certainly demanded a great deal of background knowledge

 on the part of his reader. However, we suggest that Gergonne's proof in the Annales

 was also motivated by an opportunity to advertise his prowess in analytic geometry, as

 he had done earlier with the Apollonius problem. Steiner himself made no reference

 to this earlier result when returning to Lame's theorem the following year, and as we

 have seen his statement of the theorem took quite a different form without conics or

 conjugate diameters in this later version, and it is only through Gergonne's reference

 that we are able to identify the two results as following from the same source, further

 attesting to the popularity of proving Lame's theorem.

 That Lame's theorem was repeatedly re-proven was not a statement against the validity

 of Lame's original proof. Then why prove Lame's theorem again and again? Certainly,

 47 "[...] une demonstration fort eligante de cette proposition, ainsi que beaucoup d'autres choses interes

 santes, dans un petit ouvrage de Μ. LAMß, ayant pour titre : Examen des differentes methodes, etc."

 48 This example of cross-pollination between journals shows the overlapping audience between the publi
 cations from Berlin and Montpellier in the late 1820s.

 3.5 Conclusions

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 455

 none of these texts aimed at a comprehensive or systematic survey of properties of

 conic sections. Steiner's collection of theorems had little overarching design. Similarly,

 Plücker described his own applications as a chance assortment of possible results. Both

 geometers hinted at selecting examples from a vast wealth of other similar results. With

 Lame's theorem, either geometer might have simply cited the well-known result, but

 chose instead to use the opportunity to show off their particular methods. Yet, neither

 geometer attempted a self-contained exposition. Steiner pointed the reader vaguely to

 Carnot for the rationale behind finding a point of determinate ratio. Even less explicitly,

 Plücker introduced several equations with the preface "one knows," while his use of

 coordinate equations assumed a familiarity with the second-degree equation for conic

 sections, a topic common in textbooks on analytic geometry or algebra applied to

 geometry.49

 Although Plücker and later Steiner promoted new methods over new results, the

 resulting theorem statements in their articles obscured the derivation and innova

 tion. Alongside the association of projective techniques with modern geometry, they

 described their methods as "elementary," thus further connecting their texts, if not to

 Euclid, then at least to Apollonius. Certainly, the problems and theorems about planar

 geometric objects seemed to adhere to this tradition. Steiner and Plücker stated their

 theorems without revealing their respective methods. In his proofs and figures, Steiner

 defined each point and line with respect to a given conic section. However, this conic

 section remained unmentioned in the subsequent theorem. Since three non-collinear

 points uniquely determined a circle, there was no need to explicitly describe it. Plücker

 stated that the representation of geometric objects with coordinate equations was well

 known, but no coordinate equations appeared in his theorems. Instead, "all conics"

 implied the general second-degree equation in two variables with six coefficients that

 Plücker had introduced earlier in his article.50 For both geometers, the method could
 not be inferred from the individual results.

 In 1832 Steiner published his first book, Systematische Entwicklung der
 Abhängigkeit geometrischer Gestalten von Einander, mit Berücksichtigung der
 Arbeiten alter und neuer Geometer über Porismen, Projections-Methoden, Geome

 trie der Lage, Transversalen, Dualität und Reciprocität, etc., where he developed a
 public formal statement of his personal geometric method (Steiner 1832). However,

 even in this context, Steiner did not exclude or denigrate other geometric methods.

 To the contrary, in prefacing a list of posed problems and theorems for his readers,

 he offered the option of employing and practice his method or of following another
 method instead (Steiner 1832, 439). In this later text, Steiner differentiated a spe

 cific type of pure intuition in geometry. In particular, he claimed that stereometry and

 three-dimensional geometry could be better understood without means to make them

 graspable by the senses [Versinnlichungsmittel], such as figures or equations. Instead,

 one could correctly perceive these constructions [Gebilde] only through the use of

 49 To take one example among many, in Lacroix's popular Traite elementaire de trigonometric rectiligne et

 spherique, et d'application de I 'algebre a la geometrie he demonstrated that Ay2+Bxy+Cx2 + Dy+Ex =

 F is the general form of the equation for all conic sections, drawing upon results proved in elementary
 geometry and algebra (Lacroix 1807, 154-172).

 50 In these articles, neither geometer addressed the degenerate conic composed of two straight lines.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 456

 J. Lorenat

 inner imagination [innere Vorstellungskraft] (ibid, 306). This statement from Steiner

 marks a departure from the kind of geometry employed in his planar solution to the

 Apollonius problem and proof of Lame's Theorem, in which he relied on figures to

 introduce constructions and support textual explanations.

 Steiner's desire for systematicity, unity, and intuition was not immediately apparent

 in these shorter articles, many of which Steiner presented as excerpts from his longer

 work. Steiner cited these virtues in his correspondence and unpublished work from

 1826 onward [excerpted in Lange (1899)], but these claims did not manifest pub

 licly until his first monograph.51 Like his article on the Apollonius problem, Steiner's

 monograph began with definitions built up from relationships between coplanar points

 and lines. This feature was absent in many of his other articles in the Journal and the

 Annales. Steiner's earliest publications were in part aimed at establishing priority

 and independence in his research domain. In the context of circle relations and the

 Apollonius problem, Steiner was able to achieve both a thorough, systematic exposi
 tion in an article format. However, not only Steiner, but also Gergonne (1817b) and

 Poncelet (1817), often previewed their newest research on conic sections by merely

 listing results or providing solutions without proof. While his specific results could

 appear disjointed and even unexpected, Steiner suggested a uniform and followable

 form of geometry in his overarching pattern of proofs, constructions, and definitions.

 In his proofs, Steiner began with what he wanted to show and worked backward to

 initial conditions, a strategy that could be used to extend a particular result to fur

 ther cases. Similarly, in his research on tangent circles, Steiner methodically extended

 his definitions from points, to two circles, to sets of circles in the plane, in space,

 or on the surface of a sphere. As discussed above, Steiner's argument structure was

 perhaps more imitable in his mode of generalization through projection, perspective,

 reciprocity, and points at infinity. In this way, Steiner demonstrated an applicable

 method of discovery and achieved some systematic unity at this structural level that

 was sometimes obscured by the proliferation of new results.

 Plücker's methodological position emerged more powerfully in his Analytisch

 geometrische Entwicklungen (Plücker 1828a). In the preface, he described his method
 as "new" and "pure analytic geometry" such as that of Gaspard Monge. Plücker
 drew attention to his method in order to differentiate his results from those recently

 announced by Steiner in the first two volumes of Crelle's Journal and pointed out

 that Steiner had merely stated his findings, often without proof, so seemed to be

 51 Steiner's lifelong dedication to these higher principles is attested by Jacobi's 1845 letter of recommen

 dation for Steiner to receive a full professorship, in which Jacobi summarized Steiner's contributions over

 the past twenty years. Jacobi described Systematische Entwicklung as a holistic and exemplary text for all
 of mathematics.

 Thus he revealed the Organismus through which diverse manifestations in space are interconnected,

 he has not only promoted geometric synthesis, but also established a model of a perfect method and
 execution for all other branches of mathematics. (Jahnke 1903,278)

 Indem er so den Organismus aufdeckte, durch welchen die verschiedenartigsten Erscheinungen in
 der Raumwelt miteinander verbunden sind, hat er nicht bloss die geometrische Synthese gefördert,

 sondern auch für alle anderen Zweige der Mathematik ein Muster einer vollkommen Methode und

 Durchführung aufgestellt.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 457

 "following in the footsteps of Poncelet." Yet, as suggested by Crelle's letter of rec

 ommendation described above, Plücker's preface was not necessarily indicative of his

 monograph's contents, the first volume of which PI ticker had written before reading

 the work of either Poncelet or Steiner. Moreover, we suspect that Plücker may have

 directly belittled Steiner's recent publications as derivative in order to further contrast

 the independence of his own work.

 In Plücker's form of analytic geometry examined here, he began with a general

 initial theorem pertaining to curves of any degree. He then proceeded to focus on the

 more particular case of second-degree curves. His arguments were clearly introduced

 and his use of coordinate equations was straightforward, but did not suggest applica

 bility beyond variations on the same theme of four given conditions to determine a

 set of conic sections because the number of variables was so crucial to the argument.

 For Plücker the use of coordinate equations to represent geometric objects opened

 a path toward simplification for analytic geometry, a contribution that in his view

 outweighed discovering particular theorems or problems. Plücker remained vocally

 committed to his analytic geometry throughout his career. In a letter to Poncelet from

 1835, he explained his recent findings on the relationship between curves of any order
 and their duals:

 I have still not decided if I will print the general results that I have reached all

 together or in a memoir, in German or in French. Regardless, I still must make

 it analytic geometry. (Plücker 1835a)52

 His subsequent publication of these results in 1835 (summarized in French in Crelle's

 Journal and proved in German in his monograph System der analytischen Geometrie)

 employed homogeneous coordinates, exhibiting a form of analytic geometry only

 introduced five years prior and thus beyond the scope of Monge's publications (Plücker
 1834, 1835b).

 By the end of their careers, Steiner and Plücker had become emblematic of the

 competing methods of analysis and synthesis. Contrary to these stereotypes, neither

 exhibited an orthodoxy of method in these early articles. Further, as responses to their

 publications show, the line between pure and analytic geometry was but faintly drawn

 and could be characterized neither in terms of calculation nor by the presence of fig

 ures. Both Steiner and Plücker used some calculation and both geometers provided

 constructions based in figure manipulation (in Plücker's monograph and his articles in

 Crelle's Journal, there are illustrated figures too). The tools of figures and calculation

 were at times complementary and certainly served different purposes, one could not

 replace the other. For Steiner and Plücker, a proof using algebraic computation of

 coordinate equations without translation into figures would not qualify as a geometric

 solution. Analogously, while the common (ideal) chord between two non-intersecting

 conics could be easily portrayed in a linear equation, drawing such an object defied

 common sense (and in part explains why the less figurative term "radical axis" was

 often preferable). As we can see by comparison with the contemporary geometries of

 52 "Je ne suis pas encore άέάάέ si je ferai imprimer les r6sultats g6n6raux auxquels je suis parvenu, le tout
 ensemble ou par mimoire, en allemand ou en franfais. Malgre moi je dois encore faire de la giomitrie
 analytique."

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 458

 J. Lorenat

 Gergonne, Poncelet, and Lame, as well as the wider reception and attempted classifi

 cations of their work, it does not make sense to speak only of synthetic geometry for

 Steiner and analytic for Plücker. Their ways of doing geometry were peculiar to them.

 Within constructive, planar geometry, evolving techniques allowed addressing the

 same problem from numerous different approaches. Geometers emphasized the dif

 ferences between their methods in part to compensate for the similarity of their results

 when describing their work, or when their work was described by others. In 1839,

 Crelle wrote a letter of support for Plücker to the ministry of culture, in which various

 styles of synthetic geometry were lumped together in order to differentiate Plücker's
 contributions.

 The analytical opposed, or rather next to its ruling synthetic method, by which

 Poncelet, Möbius, etc. and especially Steiner have accomplished so much that is

 so admirable, can succeed as well in all results, however the further development

 of mathematics occurs almost more with the improvement of method than the

 results; because the methods are the tools to promote still further new results;

 and to the improvement of the analytic method in geometry, in my opinion, Herr

 Plücker has in turn acquired meaningful and significant worth by his earlier and

 now the present writings. (Ernst 1933, 31)53

 From a different perspective, we have seen how French mathematicians associated

 Steiner and Plücker as German geometers. As Steiner was of Swiss origin and Germany

 as a nation had yet to exist, this designation appears to be derived from their common

 language. Similarly, Crelle's Journal, published in Berlin, was considered a German

 publication. The association with German scholars and "complication," as mentioned

 in Cournot's review of Plücker (Sect. 2.6), may have also had its origins in linguistic

 differences more than mathematical ones. As "foreigners," the French reception of

 both geometers emerged through the influential filter of Gergonne and his journal.
 Gergonne appeared to respect and value the contributions of Steiner and Plücker,

 but, as comparisons between manuscripts and publications reveal, he exercised strong

 editorial intervention. Whether neutral or critical, this label imposed by their French

 colleagues may have further prompted Steiner and Plücker to distance themselves
 from each other.

 This same muting of idiosyncrasies between Poncelet and Steiner as synthesists or

 between Gergonne and Plücker as analysts, each of whom saw the other's work as very

 different, could be perceived as an apparent dichotomy. The image of geometry that

 appeared in the late nineteenth century portrayed their predecessors as separated and

 ultimately calcified by a spurious methodological divide. In support of this image, this

 next generation of geometers, especially those who wrote biographies and histories

 53 "Auch die der analytischen gegenüberstehende, oder vielmehr neben ihr bestehende synthetische Meth
 ode, mit welcher Poncelet, Möbius usw. und besonders Steiner so Vieles und Bewunderungswertes geleistet

 haben, mag zu allen Resultaten ebenfalls gelangen können, indessen kommt es bei der weiteren Entwick

 lung der Mathematik fast noch mehr als auf die Resultate auf die Vervollkommnung der Methoden an;

 denn die Methoden sind die Werkzeuge, um immer noch weitere neue Resultate zutage zu fördern; und

 um der Vervollkommnung der analytischen Methode in der Geometrie hat sich nach meiner Überzeugung
 Herr Plücker seinerseits schon durch seine früheren Schriften und jetzt wieder durch die vorliegende, ein
 wesentliches und bedeutendes Verdienst erworben."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications.

 459

 like Alfred Clebsch, Gaston Darboux, Felix Klein, and Gino Loria, cited the frequent

 methodological claims made by their predecessors. Yet, as we have seen, the method

 ological claims did not always coincide with the qualities of the particular geometer

 or of the recurring content.

 Just as the choice of a problem or theorem did not limit what geometric method

 could be applied, so the designation of one or another geometric method did not limit

 the author's particular approach. Rather than static and opposing methods, Steiner and

 Plücker respectively allied their work to evolving practices that changed in response
 to their contributions.

 While Klein pointed to the opposition between Steiner and Plücker as mirroring the

 opposition between synthetic and analytic methods, his personal description of each

 geometer belied his classifications of methods that we considered in our introduction.

 Klein provided a nuanced overview of Pliicker's geometric method dominated by
 his skillful "internal intuition" [inneren Anschauung] (Klein 1926, 122). To Klein,

 Plücker appeared as visually focused on the "true geometric image of forms" [die

 wahre geometrische Gestalt des Gebildes], rather than calculations (ibid, 125). In

 summarizing Steiner's contributions, Klein noted his systematic treatment of geometry

 and peculiar "art of instruction." As an example, Klein relayed how Steiner's devotion

 to the Socratic method extended so far as to not include figures in his geometry lessons.
 Instead,

 [...] the active thinking of the listener should produce such a clear picture in his

 mind that he could dispense with the sensory evidence, (ibid, 128)54

 So, while Plücker, the analytic geometer, emphasized the visual and intuitive proper

 ties of geometry, Steiner, the synthetic geometer, excelled at systematizing but often

 avoided graphical representations.

 References

 Anonymous. 1826. 142. Annales de math^matique pures et appliquöes; par Μ. Gergonne; Tom. XVII,

 nos. 2 et 3, aoüt et septemb. 1826. Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et
 chimiques 6: 271-274.

 Anonymous. 1827.152. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquöes, par Μ. Gergonne; Tom. XVIII, nos.

 1 et 2, juill. et aoüt 1827. Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et chimiques
 8:172-174.

 Anonymous. 1827. 216. Annales de mathimatiques pures et appliquöes, par Μ. Gergonne; Tom. XVII,
 nos. 9 et 10, mars et avril 1827. Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et
 chimiques 7; 273-279.

 Anonymous. 1828.195. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquies; par Μ. Gergonne; Tom. XIX, nos 1

 et 2; juillet et aoüt 1828. Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et chimiques
 10: 241-245.

 Aronhold, Siegfried. 1902. S. Aronhold an O. Hesse. 18.12. 1849. Journal ßr die reine und angewandte

 Barbin, Evelyne. 2009. L'association cröatrice de l'analyse et de la g6om£trie selon Gabriel Lamέ. Bulletin

 Mathematik 124: 64.

 de la Sabix 44:101-111.

 54 das lebendige Mitdenken des Hörers sollte ein so deutliches Bild in seiner Vorstellung erzeugen,
 dass er das sinnlich Angeschaute entbehren könnte."

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 460 J· Lorenat

 universitäres de Nancy.

 Bioesmat-Martagnon, Lise (ed.). 2011. Elements d'une biographie de l'espace projectif. Nancy: Presses

 Blasjö, Viktor. 2009. Jakob Steiner's Systematische Entwickelung: The culmination of classical geometry.

 The Mathematical Intelligencer 31(1): 21-29.

 Bobillier, Etienne. 1827. Geometrie de situation. Recherches sur les lois ginirales qui rigissent les lignes

 et surfaces de tous les ordres. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVIII: 157-166.

 Bourbaki, Nicolas. 1960. Elements d'histoire des mathematiques. Paris: Hermann.

 Βογέ, Anne. 1999. Jacob Steiner, un mathematicien romantique? La Pense'e numerique 23: 323-332.

 Boyer, Carl B. 1956. History of analytic geometry. New York: Scripta Mathematica.
 Brianchon, Charles Julien. 1817. Memoire sur les lignes du second ordre. Paris: Bachelier.
 Brianchon, Charles Julien, and Jean Victor Poncelet. 1820. Geometrie des courbes. Recherches sur la

 determination d'une hyperbole &)uilat£re, au moyen de quatre conditions donn6es. Annales de math
 ematiques pures et appliquees 11: 205-220.

 Carnot, Lazare. 1801. De la Correlation des figures de geometrie. Paris: Crapelet.

 Carnot, Lazare. 1803. Geometrie de position. Paris: Duprat.
 Chasles, Michel. 1828a. Geom£trie de Situation. M6moire sur les proprietes des systfemes de sections

 coniques, situies dans un meme plan. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVIII: 277
 301.

 Chasles, Michel. 1828b. Gdomitrie Pure. Memoire sur les projections stäriographiques, et sur les coniques

 homoth6tiques. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVIII: 305-320.

 Clebsch, Alfred. 1872. Zum Gedächtnis an Julius Ρ lücker. Göttingen: Dieterichschen Buchhandlung.

 Cooke, Roger. 2005. The history of mathematics: A brief course. Hoboken: Wiley-Interscience.

 Cournot, Auguste. 1827. 267. Transformation et division des figures sphferiques, au moyen de construc

 tions graphiques; par M. Steiner. (Journ. der Mathem., de Crelle; t. 2, p. 45). Bulletin des sciences
 mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et chimiques 8: 298-303.

 Coumot, Auguste. 1828. Analytisch-Geometrische Entwicklungen-Developpemens de Giometrie analy

 tique; par Dr J. Plücker. Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, astronomiques, physiques et chimiques
 10: 178-179.

 Darboux, Gaston. 1904. A survey of the development of geometrical methods. Bulletin of the American

 Mathematical Society 11(10): 517-543.

 Develey, Emmanuel. 1812. tlemens de geometrie. Paris: Vve Courcier.
 Didiez, N.J. 1828. Cours complet de geometrie. Paris: Bachelier.
 Dronke, Adolf. 1871. Julius Plücker Professor der Mathematik und Physik an der Rhein. Bonn: Friedrich

 Wilhelm Universität.

 Durrande, Jean Baptiste. 1820. Gtomötrie ölimentaire. Thiorie elimentaire des contacts des cercles, des

 sphöres, des cylindres et des cones. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XI: 1-67.

 Eccarius, Wolfgang. 1980. Der Gegensatz zwischen Julius Plücker und Jakob Steiner im Lichte ihrer

 Beziehungen zu August Leopold Crelle. Annals of Science 37(2): 189-213.

 Ernst, Wilhelm. 1933. Julius Plücker; Eine zusammenfassende Darstellung seines Lebens und Wirkens als

 Mathematiker und Physiker auf Grund unveröffentlichter Briefe und Urkunden. Bonn: Rheinischen
 Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität.

 Eves, Howard. 1990. An introduction to the history of mathematics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders College

 Publications.

 Fano, Gino. 1907. Gegensatz von synthetischer und analytischer Geometrie in seiner historischen Entwick

 lung im 19. Jahrhundert. Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften 3(4): 221-288.

 Friedelmeyer, Jean-Pierre. 2011. L'impulsion originelle de Poncelet dans l'invention de la geometrie. In

 Bioesmat-Martagnon 2011: 55-158.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1810. Reflexions sur l'usage de l'analise algibrique dans la geomitrie. Notice des

 travauxde l'Academie du Gard 1: 171-196.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1814. Geometrie analitique. Recherche du cercle qui en touche trois autres sur une

 sphöre. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees IV: 349-359.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1817a. Giomitrie analitique. Recherche du cercle qui en touche trois autres sur un

 plan. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees VII: 289-303.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1817b. G&>m6trie de la rfegle. Solution et construction, par la geometrie anali

 tique, de deux problümes ddpendant de la geometrie de la regle. Annales de mathematiques pures et
 appliquees VII: 325-334.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Synthetic and analytic geometries in the publications... 461

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1817c. Reflexions sur Γ article precedent. Annales de mathematiques pures et

 appliquees VIII: 156-161.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1817d. Philosophie mathematique. De l'analise et de la synthase, dansles sciences

 mathematiques. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees VII: 345-372.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1821. Questions resolues. Solution du premier des problemes de göomitrie proposes

 ä la page 228 de ce volume. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XI: 379-400.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1827. D6monstration d' un thioreme relatif aux lignes du second ordre circonscrites

 ä un meme quadrilatere, renfermant la solution du premier des trois problfemes de geomitrie 6noncis
 ä la page 284 du pricedent volume. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVIII: 100-110.

 Gergonne, Joseph-Diez. 1828. Letter from Gergonne to Plücker, Montpellier to Bonn, 9 August 1828.

 Plücker Letters FA Vol 2A.2B. Archives of the National Research Council, Ottawa.

 Gray, Jeremy. 2005. Jean Victor Poncelet, Traiti des Propri6t6s Projectives des Figures. In Landmark

 Writings in Western Mathematics, ed. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 366-376. Oxford: Elsevier.

 Gray, Jeremy. 2010. Worlds out of nothing: A course in the history of geometry in the 19th century. London:

 Jahnke, Eugen. 1903. Schreiben Jacobis an den Staatsminister v. Eichhorn betreffend Jakob Steiner. Archiv

 Klein, Felix. 1893. A comparative review of recent researches in geometry. Bulletin of the New York

 der Mathematik und Physik 4: 277-280.

 Mathematical Society 2: 215-249.

 Klein, Felix. 1926. Vorlesungen über die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert. Berlin: Springer.

 Kline, Morris. 1972. Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times. New York: Oxford University

 Springer.

 Press.

 Kötter, Ernst. 1901. Die Entwickelung der synthetischen Geometrie von Monge bis auf Staudt (1847).

 Jahresbericht der Deustchen mathematiker-vereinigung 5(2): 1-484.

 Lacroix, Sylvestre Franfois. 1807. Traite elementaire de trigonometrie rectiligne et spherique, et

 d'application de l'algebre ä la geometrie, 4th ed. Paris: Courcier.

 Lam6, Gabriel. 1817. Geometrie analitique. Sur les intersections des lignes et des surfaces. Extrait d'un
 memoire präsente ä l'acadimie royale des sciences, en ddcembre 1816. Annales de mathematiques
 pures et appliquees VII: 229-240.

 Lame, Gabriel. 1818. Examen des differentes methodes employees pour resoudre les problemes de geometrie.

 Paris: Vve Courcier.

 Lange, Julius. 1899. Jacob Steiners Lebensjahre in Berlin, 1821-1863. Berlin: Georg Reimer.

 Lorenat, Jemma. 2015. Figures real, imagined and missing in Poncelet, Plücker, and Gergonne. Historia

 Mathematica 42(2): 131-262.

 Loria, Gino. 1887. II passato ed il presente delle principali teorie geometriche. Torino: Carlo Clausen.

 Nabonnand, Philippe. 201 la. Deux droites coplanaires sont secantes. In Clements pour une biographie de

 t'espace projectif, ed. Lise Bioesmal-Martagon, 159-195. Presses universitaires de Nancy - Editions
 de l'Universiti de Lorraine.

 Nabonnand, Philippe. 2011b. L'argument de la g6n6ralite chez Carnot Poncelet, et Chasles. Justifier en

 mathematiques. 17-47. Editions de la Maison des sciences de l'homme, Paris.

 Plücker, Julius. 1827. Giomötrie analytique. Memoire sur les contacts et sur les intersections des cercles.

 Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVIII: 29-47.

 Plücker, Julius. 1828a. Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen, vol. 1. Essen: G. D. Baedeker.

 Plücker, Julius. 1828. Geometrie Analytique. Recherches sur les courbes algibriques de tous les degres.

 Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XIX: 97-106.

 Plücker, Julius. 1831. Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen, vol. 2. Essen: G. D. Baedeker.

 Plücker, Julius. 1834. Solution d'une question fondamentale concernant la theorie generale des courbes.

 Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 12: 105-108.

 Plücker, Julius. 1835a. Lettre ä Jean-Victor Poncelet. janvier, 1835. Correspondence de Jean-Victor Poncelet.

 Archives de I'Ecole poytechnique, Palaiseau.

 Plücker, Julius. 1835b. System der analytischen Geometrie. Berlin: Dunker und Humblot.
 Plücker, Julius, and Arthur Schoenflies. 1904. Über den wissenschaftlichen Nachlass Julius Plückers. Math

 Poncelet, Jean Victor. 1811. Problemes de Giometrie. Correspondance sur 1't.cole polytechnique 11(3):

 ematische Annalen 58: 385-403.

 271-274.

 Ä Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Poncelet, Jean Victor. 1817. Philosophie mathematique. Reflexions sur l'usage de l'analise algebrique dans

 la giomitrie; suivies de la solution de quelques problemes dependant de la g6om6trie de la regie.
 Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees 8: 141-155.

 Poncelet, Jean Victor. 1821. G£om&rie elemental re. Construction geometrique d'un cercle qui en touche

 trois autres donnes sur un plan ou sur une sphere, d'un c6ne droit que en touche trois autres de meme

 sommet, et d'une sphere qui en touche quatre autres dans l'espace. Annales de mathematiques pures
 et appliquees XI: 317-322.

 Poncelet, Jean Victor. 1822. Traite des proprietes projectives des figures. Ouvrage utile a ceux qui s 'occupent

 des applications de la geometrie descriptive et d'operations geometriques sur le terrain. Paris: Bache
 lier.

 462 J. Lorenat

 Poncelet, Jean Victor. 1866. Traite des proprietes projectives des figures. Ouvrage utile a ceux qui s 'occupent

 des applications de la geometrie descriptive et d'operations geometriques sur le terrain, vol. II, 2nd
 ed. Paris: Mallet-Bachelier.

 Poncelet, Jean Victor, and Louis Cauchy Augustin. 1820. Geometrie des courbes. Rapport ä l'academie

 royale des sciences. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XI: 69-83.

 Schoenflies, Arthur. 1909. Projektive Geometrie. Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften mit

 Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen 111(5): 389-480.

 Simon, Max. 1906. Über die Entwicklung der Elementar-Geometrie im XIX. Jahrhundert. Leipzig: B. G.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1826a. Einige geometrische Betrachtungen. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathe

 Steiner, Jakob. 1826b. Einige geometrische Sätze. Journal fir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 1:

 Steiner, Jakob. 1826c. Fortsetzung der geometrischen Betrachtungen. Journal für die reine und angewandte

 Steiner, Jakob. 1827a. Aufgaben und Lehrsätze. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 2:

 Steiner, Jakob. 1827b. Auflösung einer geometrischen Aufgabe. Journal für die reine und angewandte

 Steiner, Jakob. 1827c. Geometrische Aufgaben und Lehrsätze. Journal für die reine und angewandte Math

 Teubner.

 matik 1: 161-182.

 38-52.

 Mathematik 1:252-288.

 287-291.

 Mathematik 2: 64-65.

 ematik 2: 96-98.

 192.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1827d. Geometrische Lehrsätze. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 2: 190

 Steiner, Jakob. 1828a. Brief von Steiner an Gergonne von 3.5.1828. HS 92: 84. Jakob Steiner Teilnachlass.

 Hochschularchiv der ΕΤΗ Zürich.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1828b. Geometrie de situation. Demonstrations de quelques theoremes. Annales de mathe

 matiques pures et appliquees XIX: 1-8.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1828c. G6om£trie elementaire. Recherche des relations entre les rayons des cercles qui

 touchent trois droites donnees sur un plan et entre les rayons des sphöres qui touchent quatre plans

 donnes dans l'espace. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XIX: 85-96.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1828d. Geometrie pure. Döveloppement d'une serie de theoremes relatifs aux sections

 coniques. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XIX: 37-64.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1828e. Manuskript: "Developpement d'une serie de theoremes relatifs aux courbes et aux

 surfaces du second ordre". HS 92: 85. Jakob Steiner Teilnachlass. Hochschularchiv der ΕΤΗ Zürich.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1832. Systematische Entwickelung der Abhängigkeit geometrischer Gestalten von Einander,

 mit Berücksichtigung der Arbeiten alter und neuer Geometer über Porismen, Projections-Methoden,

 Geometrie der Lage, Transversalen, Dualität und Reciprocität, etc. Berlin: Fincke.

 Steiner, Jakob. 1931. Allgemeine Theorie über das Berühren und Schneiden der Kreise und der Kugeln

 worunter eine grosse Anzahl neuer Untersuchungen und Sätze vorkommen in einem systematicschen

 Entwicklungsgange dargestellet. ed. Rudolf Fueter and Ferdinand Gonseth. O. Fussli, Zurich.

 Steiner, Jakob, and Joseph-Diez Gergonne. 1827. Geometrie pure. Theorie generale des contacts et des

 intersections des cercles. Annales de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVII: 285-315.

 Struik, Dirk. 1948. A concise history of mathematics. New York: G. Bell and Sons Ltd.

 Sturm, Charles. 1826. Giomötrie analitique. Memoire sur les lignes du second ordre. Annales de mathema

 tiques pures et appliquies XVI: 265-293.

 Sturm, Charles. 1826. Geometrie des courbes et surfaces. Memoire sur les lignes du second ordre. Annales

 de mathematiques pures et appliquees XVII: 173-199.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:58:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

