 

 

 

 

The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity. Analysis, heuristic, projections,

lemmatic fragmentation
Author(s): Fabio Acerbi
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 5 (September 2011), pp. 471-497
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41287704
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:19 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (201 1 ) 65:47 1^97
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-0 10-0076-8

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity.
 Analysis, heuristic, projections, lemmatic fragmentation

 Fabio Acerbi

 Received: 1 1 November 2010 / Published online: 19 December 2010

 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract The article analyzes in detail the assumptions and the proofs typical of

 the research field of the geometry of burning mirrors. It emphasizes the role of two

 propositions of the Archimedean Quadratura parabolae , never brought to bear on this
 subject, and of a complex system of projections reducing a sumptdma of a parabola
 to some specific linear lemmas. On the grounds of this case-study, the much-debated

 problem of the heuristic role of analysis is also discussed.

 1 Introduction

 The research domain of the geometry of burning mirrors has been a long-lived one.

 Diocles, the main character in the field, was a contemporary of Apollonius; he mentions

 an earlier contribution by Dositheus, the addressee of most of the surviving treatises of

 Archimedes; he corrects, in his treatment of spherical burning mirrors, a proposition of
 the Euclidean Catoptrics. Anthemius of Tralles, the latest datable author from whom

 we have interesting technical contributions, was active in the sixth century of our era.

 Thanks to a small number of simplifying hypotheses, the study of burning mirrors was

 given a prominent geometrical connotation: the result is a subgenre mid-way between

 the writings of pure geometry and the more diffusely argumented treatises of applied
 mathematics. The surviving studies are short tracts, treating particular problems in

 the theory of conic sections or, in the case of spherical mirrors, in elementary plane

 geometry.

 Communicated by Alexander Jones.

 F. Acerbi (E3)
 CNRS, UMR 8163 «Savoirs, textes, langage», B.R 60149, 59653 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France
 e-mail: fabacerbi@gmail.com

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This very circumscribed research subject became the ideal domain for a subtle series

 of variations on a single theme, offering as side products two pointwise constructions

 of a parabola burning at a given distance (that is, with given vertex and parameter) and

 the first attestation of the focus-directrix property. I shall first (Sect. 2) quickly review

 the "external" evolution of the field, discuss its main hypotheses, and describe the

 available sources. I shall then offer a detailed analysis of the technical results, setting

 them in a historical perspective. The main interpretative points of this article are the

 472 F. Acerbi

 following:

 (1) Showing that there is a very strong link between the proofs of the focal properties

 of a parabola (Sect. 3) and of a circumference (Sect. 4). I shall also suggest that a
 spur to carrying out the investigation of the focal properties of a parabola was a

 concern with showing that the property of the subtangent is characteristic of the

 curve (in ancient jargon, it is a sumptdma of it), namely, a property uni vocally

 determining it (Sect. 5).

 (2) Making the connection between the Dioclean proof of the focal properties of the

 parabola and the method of analysis and synthesis explicit (Sect. 3) and discussing,

 on the basis of this example, the alleged heuristic value of the analysis (Sects. 5,

 6). I shall also clarify the reason why Diodes' treatment of the parabola is divided

 in two parts (proof of its focal properties and construction with given vertex and

 parameter) and assess the technical and historical import of it (Sect. 6).

 (3) Showing that all the attested proofs, a newly discovered text in Arabic probably

 coming from a Greek source included, can be viewed as successive refinements of
 one basic idea, and outlining a historical development of the domain of research

 radically different from those that have been proposed so far (Sects. 4-7). I shall
 emphasize the role of two propositions of the Archimedean Quadratura parabo-
 lae , never brought to bear on this subject, and of a complex system of projections

 reducing a sumptdma of a parabola to some specific linear lemmas (Sect. 7).
 (4) Finally, identifying and discussing the process of singling out, from Diocles to
 later authors, a 4-point lemma as the "technical" core of the proof, to be reused

 and adapted in different geometric configurations (Sects. 6, 7). More generally, I

 shall use this example as a basis to briefly argue that such a "sensibility to struc-
 ture", displaying in the identification of the "core" technical lemmas, became a
 prominent feature of the late approach to mathematical research, witnessed in its

 most spectacular form by the fragmentation of the corpus we observe in Pappus'
 Collectio (Sect. 8).

 2 The research domain of the geometry of burning mirrors. Available texts

 The study of the visual rays (emanating from the eye and making visual perception
 possible) was in Greek antiquity kept distinct from the study of light rays, although

 the related disciplines started from the same hypotheses. This division was a canonical
 one, and we read an account of it in an extract from Geminus (Def. 135.12, in HOO
 IV, 104.9-106.13). The historical record at our disposal, however, attests for a divi-
 sion still unaccomplished in the first treatise dealing, albeit marginally, with burning

 mirrors: Euclid's Catoptrica. In this study, after prop. 28 has emphasized the strategic

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 473

 role of the middle point of the radius of the sphere when objects are seen in concave

 spherical mirrors, prop. 30 studies, passing from the visual to the solar rays, the burn-

 ing properties of the same mirrors. Even if it is unsafe to assume that the Catoptrica
 as we read it can be assigned recta via to Euclid, Diodes' testimony in the preface

 of his On burning mirrors suggests that the prime mover of the whole tradition was

 exactly Catoptrica 30. In Diodes' treatise, the separation among the research domains

 is completed, remaining a remarkable feature of all subsequent elaborations.

 The sources available in Greek are the short and incomplete tract On surprising
 mechanisms by Anthemius of Tralles, whose manuscript tradition depends entirely
 on the opening bifolium of the Vat. gr. 218 (critical editions in MGM , 78-87, and
 CG, 349-59). It contains approximate constructions of an elliptical mirror and of a
 parabolic mirror burning at a given distance. In the first instance (MGM, 78-81), the

 construction is grounded on the identification of single points on the line, resulting

 from the equality of the angles that the "broken" straight line drawn from a point of the

 ellipse to the two foci makes with the tangent to the line through that point (cf. Con.

 111.48). The transition from the approximate solution to the curve is poorly argumented

 by Anthemius. He shows first that the isolated points on the line he determines in the

 above way satisfy the property that the sum of their distances from two fixed points
 A, B is constant, and concludes: 'if we stretch a chord that is fixed around points
 A B and passes through the origin of the rays that are about to be reflected, the said
 line will be traced, that will be a part of the so-called ellipse' (MGM, 81). It seems

 thus as if Anthemius thinks that the ellipse is defined by this construction, whereas in

 Apollonius, Con. 111.52, one finds only the proof of the converse. At about the same

 period as Anthemius we must assign the anonymous of th efragmentum mathemati-

 cum bobiense, a very short and incomplete fragment preserved in palimpsest in the

 ms. Ambros. L 99 sup. {MGM, 87-90). The latter contains an elegant proof of the focal

 properties of a parabola and a partial result about spherical mirrors.

 The other two sources have been transmitted in Arabic translation only (the Arabic
 Anthemius does not add anything new; see CG, 286-315 and Jones 1987). One of
 them is Diodes' On burning mirrors , in its extant form a compilation of quite dispa-

 rate results, some of which we read also in a fairly divergent Greek version in Eutocius
 ( AOO III, 160.2-174.4). Only five propositions of Diodes' treatise deal in fact with

 burning properties of mirrors (Toomer 1976, pp. 44-71 = CG, 102-1 16). They are as
 follows :

 Prop. 1: focal properties of parabolic mirrors, followed by the constructions
 of a paraboloid with exact burning properties and of mirrors burning along a
 circumference (2 alternative solutions) or, more generally, along a closed path.
 Prop. 2 and 3: focal properties of spherical mirrors.
 Prop. 4 and 5: pointwise construction of a parabola using the focus-directrix

 property.

 The second source in Arabic is a tract of a certain Dtrums (CG, 155-213), dis-

 playing a series of lexical and syntactical features strongly suggesting that it is the
 translation of a Greek writing (CG, 155-157). The first part of this work contains
 an uninteresting lemma and paraphrases of propositions extracted from Apollonius'

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 474 F. Acerbi

 Conica (Con. 1.1, 3, 4, 6, 11, 20, 33, 35). An anonymous redactor inserted them in
 place of the first two books of the original treatise, probably containing analogous
 material. Six propositions follow: props. 10-13 about parabolic mirrors, props. 14-15

 about spherical mirrors.

 Diocles (Toomer 1976, pp. 34-44 =CG, 98-102) precedes his exposition with

 interesting preliminary remarks. Among other things, he outlines the historical con-
 text in which the domain of research developed and points out clearly which were

 the main assumptions underlying the process of mathematical modelling of burning

 mirrors. Diocles asserts that the discoverer of the focal properties of the parabola was
 Dositheus: 'one of those problems, namely the one requiring the construction of a

 mirror which makes all the rays meet in one point, is the one which was solved prac-
 tically by Dositheus' (Toomer 1976, p. 34). A problem is raised by the verbal form
 designating Dositheus' achievement, amila-ha, that Rashed translates 'construit' (CG,
 98). As we see from his translation, Toomer (cf. also 1976, pp. 16 and 140) favours
 instead a material meaning, and asserts that Dositheus did not propose a geometric

 proof of the result. If the Greek verb was kataskeuazein , then it is not clear whether it

 had only practical connotations or it was employed metonymically for 'to prove' (cf.

 for instance Pappus, Coll. 111.21). A rigorous proof was in fact well within reach for

 a contemporary of Archimedes: the focal property, as we shall see, is an immediate

 consequence of two properties that were well known before Apollonius. An 'approx-
 imate' or mechanical construction would have raised Diocles' criticisms, who reacts

 against this in the case of spherical mirrors.

 After a description of the parabolic mirror, Diocles expounds properties and use

 of spherical burning mirrors. One finds a clear reference to Catoptr. 30, and then the
 following statement (Toomer 1976, p. 38):

 an ingenious method has been found for a burning-mirror to burn without being

 turned to face the sun; instead it is fixed in one and the same position, and indi-

 cates the hours of the day without a gnomon. It does this by burning a trace to

 which the rays are reflected: the reflecting produces a trace for the position of

 the hour which is sought.

 It has long been supposed that the mirror indicating the hours without a gnomon

 should be a parabolic one, and the first of Diocles' constructions of a mirror burning
 along a circumference has been regarded as directed to this end (Toomer 1976, pp.
 143-144; Hogendijk 1985). However, the most likely hypothesis is that it is a spherical

 mirror, since any such surface has an axis of symmetry at every point: therefore, it

 always presents to the sun a portion capable of good burning performances (Sesiano
 1988).

 The proof of the focal properties of a paraboloid requires that the rays coming from

 the sun are parallel. Diocles, following a long-standing tradition, formulates this con-
 dition as the request that the earth be considered as a point. He discusses the issue at

 length in his preface, probably because this assumption, which is absent in the Catop-
 trica , was the break-through idea that allowed one to set up a soluble model. Diocles

 expressly asserts that this hypothesis is strictly applicable only to the model developed

 in the treatise, and that the falsity of an unqualified statement does not prevent one to
 consider it as acceptable in a restricted context.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 475

 A further, implicit, hypothesis has been assumed already in the Catoptrica : it is

 enough to study a suitable section of a spherical mirror in order to determine its prop-

 erties; the mirror is then obtained by rotating the section. In the spherical case, in fact,

 an incident and a reflected ray always lie in one and the same plane (El. XI.2), which

 is univocally determined by the further constraint that the mirror image be located
 along the line joining the object with the centre of the sphere ( Catoptr. def. 5); this
 plane identifies a great circle on the surface of the sphere as a section. In the case of

 a paraboloid, one supposes by analogy that the plane of reflection passes through its

 axis. Therefore, one needs only to study the focal properties of a parabola, the mirror

 being again obtained by rotation. All of this entails that any burning mirror must have
 an axis.

 3 Parabolic burning mirrors

 A parabola was obtained, before the Apollonian reform, by cutting a right-angled cone

 with a plane perpendicular to one of its sides. It is not difficult to show that the resulting
 line is univocally determined by the following «principal» sumptdma (see Fig. 1): if
 from a point A of a parabola of vertex V a straight line AH is dropped perpendicular
 to the axis, then

 s(AH) = r(VH, a),

 where s(AH) is the square described on straight line AH , r(VH,a ) the rectangle
 contained between straight lines VH and a (a notation used henceforth), a is a given
 segment, called "upright side" (cf. Con. 1. 11, where the validity of the condition is
 extended to the "ordinates" referred to any diameter). The sumptdma was often used

 in the "ratio form", where the upright side is "factored out": if Af is another point on

 the parabola and straight line A'Hr is dropped perpendicular to the axis, then (cf. Con.
 1.20)

 VH : VH' :: 5 (AH) : 5 (A'H') .

 If from A we draw the tangent AB and the perpendicular to it AC as far as their

 intersections with the axis, then a triangle ABC is produced which is right-angled at
 A and let me call it the fundamental triangle associated to A. Of the two abscissas
 determined by the perpendicular AH , BH is called subtangent , HC subnormal. One
 shows that

 (1) the subtangent is bisected by the vertex of the parabola, BV-VH ,
 (2) the subnormal is constant and equal to half the upright side, HC=a/2.

 These two basic properties were known at least as early as Archimedes (cf. Quadr. 2
 and Con. 1.35; Fluit. II.4 and Con. V.13, 27, respectively). In enunciating the subtan-
 gent property, he asserts that it is an elementary result and does not bother to prove it.

 It is important to keep in mind that the subtangent property holds with respect to any

 diameter, the perpendicular to the axis being replaced by the ordinate dropped from A

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 476 F. Acerbi

 Fig. 1

 a

 D // / | '

 B A F E H C

 (this is the so-called "oblique conjugation"), while the subnormal property obviously

 holds only with respect to the axis ("orthogonal conjugation").

 I now propose an analysis of prop. 1 of Diodes' On burning mirrors , clarifying

 which properties of reflection of light rays on a line do depend on the nature of the line

 and which do not (the crucial assumptions are in italics). As a by-product, the reason

 behind a surprising feature of Diodes' proof will become clear, namely, the fact that he

 assumes that the reflected rays concentrate on a single point at a well-defined distance

 from the vertex, and proves that reflection occurs at equal angles.

 Let us suppose that the line has an axis BC and that a light ray parallel to the axis

 meets the line at A (Fig. 1 again). Let ABC be the fundamental triangle associated

 with A, and AF the reflected ray. If reflection occurs at equal angles , then the normal

 AC bisects the angle between incident and reflected ray; moreover, the incident ray
 being parallel to the axis , each of the two halves of this angle is equal to angle ACF'

 finally, the incident and the reflected rays make equal angles also with the tangent AB ,
 any of these angles being equal to angle ABF: therefore the triangles ABF and AFC
 are isosceles on bases AB and AC, respectively. Since AF is common, it results that
 BF=FC. Conversely, if this equality holds, then reflection occurs at equal angles (all
 deductive steps can be inverted). Now, let a perpendicular AH be dropped from A to

 the axis of the line. If the line is a parabola , then two further constraints are imposed:

 HC is constant and the vertex of the parabola is the middle point of BH. Accordingly,

 let us mark on the axis a segment VE equal to half the upright side of the parabola: by
 the property of the subnormal one has V E = a/2 = HC. Let us now turn back to the
 crucial equality BF=FC: it holds if

 VF = FE (1)

 BV = EC (2)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity All

 Of these equalities, (1) determines where to place the intersection of the reflected ray

 with the axis (namely, at a distance from the vertex equal to 1/4 of the upright side),

 the bright idea being to realize that (2) depends only on the system tangent-normal

 attached to a point of the parabola, independently of any considerations about reflected

 or incident rays. To see this, it is enough to observe that, on the one hand, the property

 of the subtangent gives BV= VH , while, on the other hand, VE is such that VE=HC'

 adding EH to both sides of this equality gives VH = EC' from this and from B V = VH ,

 (2) immediately follows by transitivity. One has only to reassemble the several pieces

 of the proof in a consequent way.

 As said above, that an analysis of this kind underlay Diodes' proof of his theorem

 is suggested by the fact that he proves the equality of the angles and assumes reflection

 on a single point of the axis of a parabola. Of course, this presupposes that the parabola

 was already identified as the line enjoying the exact focal properties. How could this
 guess be made? We shall return on this in Sect. 5. After Diodes' proof is known,
 it is reasonable to restore the "most natural" logical order, namely, the one starting

 from the equality of angles to prove that, in the case of a parabola, the reflected rays

 concentrate on a single point on its axis. This is done by Dtrums in his prop. 10. His
 proof can most naturally be viewed as singling out what really is crucial in Diodes':
 the fact that ABF is an isosceles triangle. Dtrums' elegant argument amounts to an
 application of El II.8 to the four points HFVB , namely, in this order: projection of

 the point of incidence on the axis/focus/vertex/ intersection with the axis of the tangent

 through the point of incidence. In fact (Fig. 1), since BF=FA, by El. 1.47 one has that

 s(BF) = s(AH) + s(FH),

 but, by El. II.8,

 s(BF) = s(FH ) + 4 r(HV, VF),

 since BF=HV + VF : therefore,

 s(AH) = 4r(HV, VF),

 that is, the principal sumptdma , referred to the axis, of a parabola with vertex V and

 upright side 4 VF. This move allows Dtrums to bypass the property of the subnormal
 and eliminate the most contrived part of Diodes' proof. As we shall see in Sect. 6,
 El. II. 8 applied to the same configuration of points yielded the same result features in
 Diodes' prop. 5: this shows that Dtrums' approach is a refinement of Diodes' proof,
 and hence depends on it.

 Finally, the anonymus bobiensis adopts the same deductive approach as Diodes,
 while still perceiving that triangle AFC is irrelevant (Fig. 1 again). Its proof that AFB

 is isosceles is independent of Dtrums'. The idea is to show that the straight line joining
 the focus with the middle point D of AB - point D being determined by the property

 of the subtangent as the intersection of AB with the tangent through the vertex - is

 perpendicular to AB itself. This is an easy consequence of the characteristic property

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 of the parabola and of the property of the subtangent. For from BH=2BV and by
 similar triangles, one has AH=2DV. From this and

 478 F. Acerbi

 s(AH) = 4 r(HV, VF)

 it results

 4 s(DV) = 4 r(HV, VF ),

 that is,

 s(DV) = r(HV , VF) = r(BV , VF).

 It follows that, if DV is perpendicular to BC , triangle BDF is right-angled at D.

 Before passing to the spherical mirrors, I briefly discuss two points.
 First, some more details about El II.8. It is a four-point lemma whose basic con-

 figuration is a line AB cut at a chance point C ; one makes BD = CB on AB produced:
 it results that

 s(AD) = s(AC) + 4r(AB, BC) :

 the greater square can be obtained from the lesser one by application of a "double

 gnomon". In adapting this lemma to the geometry of burning mirrors, two cases may

 occur, depending on whether projection H falls between the focus F and the vertex V

 or not (Fig. 1 represents the second alternative). Once the segments have been identi-
 fied allowing the application of the lemma, one has in both cases that s(FB) = s(FH) +
 4r(HV,VF ), as we have seen. A moment's reflection shows that the equality BV=VH

 (namely, the property of the subtangent) proves crucial in allowing the application of
 the lemma.

 Second, and most importantly, I explain why all of the above proofs hold only with

 reference to the axis, namely, in orthogonal conjugation. This issue will prove crucial

 in the subsequent discussion of the focus-directrix property.

 (1) Diocles. He employs the property of the subnormal, which holds only if the ordi-
 nate AH is orthogonal to the diameter, that is, only if the diameter of reference
 coincides with the axis of the parabola.

 (2) Dtrums. He applies El. 1.47 in order to have s(BF) = s (AH) + s(FH), and this of

 course holds only if triangle AHF is right-angled at H , that is, again, only if the

 ordinate AH is orthogonal to the diameter.

 (3) The anonymus bobiensis. The relation s(DV) = r(BV,VF) entails that triangle BDF
 is right-angled at D only if DV is perpendicular to BC. Since DV is the tangent
 through the vertex, it is perpendicular to the diameter identifying that vertex if
 and only if the ordinate AH is (Con. 1.17, and cf. Archimedes, Quadr. 1).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 479

 C M F F' H V B

 Fig. 2

 4 Spherical burning mirrors

 Before answering the question left open in the preceding section, let us turn to the

 spherical burning mirrors. Let a semicircumference be given, C be its centre and CV

 its axis (Fig. 2). Let us assume as usual that the incident rays are all parallel to the axis.

 In Catoptr. 30, it is shown that the rays coming from a single point on CV produced

 meet, after reflection, on the segment CV only. Therefore, C is the limiting point of

 incidence for these rays, this limit being attained only by the reflection of a ray along

 CV itself. This fact remains true even if the point from which the incident rays emanate

 'translates at infinity', in such a way as to make the rays parallel. Diodes' first result

 (prop. 2) consists in refining the determination of the limiting point in the hypothesis
 that the rays are parallel: this is the middle point M of radius CV (cf. Catoptr. 28).
 For, let us suppose that a ray parallel to CV and incident at A be reflected as AF. Let
 CA be joined, and let the fundamental triangle ABC be considered. We have seen in
 the preceding section that the equality AF=FC does not depend on the nature of the
 line. But AF > FV (El. III.7): therefore, FC > FV , and point F lies between M and
 V . After that, Diocles claims, but does not prove, that the nearer to V a ray falls, the
 nearer to M will it meet CV, when reflected.

 The preceding proof implicitly assumes that the rays meet CV after one single

 reflection. Dtrums deals with the issue of multiple reflections; further properties of the
 reflected rays are investigated by Diocles and the anonymus bobiensis. These results
 can be summarized as follows. Between the semicircumference and its axis CV, let

 us adapt in succession half of the side of a regular hexagon, of a square and of an
 equilateral triangle inscribed in the circle that completes the semicircumference. Let

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 480 F. Acerbi

 them be in this order: AH , A'F', A"M (recall that M is the middle point of CV). Let

 us now consider the point of intersection with CV of rays parallel to it and falling on

 arc A" V. It is easy to show that the ray falling on the mirror at A" is reflected at V .

 As a consequence, only those rays falling on arc A"V intersect the radius CV after
 one single reflection. Those falling on the complementary arc still intersect CV, but

 after multiple reflections. In prop. 14(a), Dtrums shows that in this case, the inter-
 section with radius CV will take place on segment F'V only: for otherwise, the rays

 intersecting MF' would form, at their last reflection, acute angles with the radius of
 the semicircumference drawn from C to the point of incidence. This is impossible for

 rays intersecting CV after multiple reflections.

 Let us now return to the case of a single reflection and consider the ray falling at

 A': since A! F' is half the side of an inscribed square and since reflection occurs at

 equal angles, Af F' itself is the reflected ray. Therefore, the rays falling on arc A!' A!
 will arrive on segment F'V (Dtrums, prop. 14(b)), and those falling on arc A'V will
 arrive on segment MF' (Dtrums, prop. 14(b), and the same is proven in the Bobbio

 fragment). But why mark point A? Because Diocles shows in his prop. 3 that the rays

 falling on arc AV arrive, after one reflection, on a segment MF such that FV > 5 MF
 (and therefore MF < 1/12 CV): a spherical burning mirror of small opening angle
 concentrates the solar rays well enough. Dtrums' prop. 15 has no geometrical content

 that is independent of prop. 14.

 The relationships among the several versions are clear: both th efragmentum bob-

 iense and Dtrums' results are refinements of Diodes'. In particular, Diocles seems

 not to have caught the importance of the ray reflecting perpendicular to the axis of the

 mirror. On the other hand, it is not entirely clear if he appreciated the limiting role of

 the arc subtended by the side of an equilateral triangle: the introduction of such an

 arc in prop. 3 seems motivated by the aim of providing a simple construction of the
 arc with which the proof will deal, namely, AV (Diocles never mentions the inscribed

 polygons). The relationships between Dtrums and the remains of th efragmentum bob-
 iense are even clearer than this; the proof of Dtrums' prop. 14(b) is identical with the

 one in the fragment. The coincidences between the two versions are so strict as to
 make one suspect that one of them is a compilation of the other or, more likely, that

 they draw from a common source. In this case, Dtrums would have performed a more
 selective abridgement, by eliminating the originality claims made by the anonymus
 bobiensis.

 5 Guessing the focal property of the parabola

 Let us now return to the question asked in Sect. 2: how to guess that the parabola is

 the line enjoying the exact focal properties. The problem seems desperate in a mod-
 ern perspective only, since one has to establish a criterion singling out the parabola

 among infinitely many curves. Yet, this argument neglects the fact that Greek geome-

 try knew only of a limited number of 'established' varieties of line: a preliminary, and

 reasonable, strategy is to see if any of them have the preferred property.

 Even when not granting this, authors such as Dositheus or Diocles had a guide
 in their search for exact burning mirrors: the approximate focal properties of the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 481

 circumference. The 'fundamental triangle', quite a natural object to single out in the
 case of a circumference since the normal there coincides with the radius, does not

 depend on the nature of the curve, and hence it can be transferred identically to the

 analysis of reflection on any line. In the case of the parabola, this triangle acquires
 a special relevance, after one realizes that two well-known properties of the parab-
 ola, namely, the properties of the subtangent and of the subnormal, impose further
 constraints on two of its elements: the reflected ray (that is, the median relative to

 the hypotenuse), and the perpendicular from the point of incidence to the axis. It is

 really a very short step from here to conceiving an analysis such as the one leading
 to Diodes' proof. In assessing my proposal, one must also bear in mind the role of
 tradition, which operates as a motive force in all fields of Greek mathematics: it was

 only natural to try to refine the partial investigations about spherical mirrors made in
 Catoptr. 30, having as goals both a satisfactory analysis of spherical aberration and
 finding a surface with exact focal properties.

 The investigations in the domain of burning mirrors were thus very likely done

 first on the sphere, and the analysis of this problem suggested the main technical tools

 needed to find an exact solution. This is a first phase that can rightly be termed as

 'heuristic', and on a global level: the aim is to single out a corpus of notions and tools

 developed during the solution of a problem, and to export it to attack another prob-
 lem, still unsolved and hopefully connected with the solved problem. For instance,

 recall that the limiting point on the axis of the semicircumference is placed at 1/4 of

 the diameter, and suppose that the conjecture was made that the line with exact focal

 properties is the parabola. Why not suppose that the focus is located away from the

 vertex at exactly 1/4 of the upright side? Of course, the parallelism is by and large

 imperfect, since the diameter of a circumference cannot be said to 'correspond' in any

 simple mathematical manner to the radius of a circle, but it remains true that diameter
 and upright side are the only dimensional parameters attached to a circle and to a

 parabola. Is it not by conjecturing that mathematical research proceeds?

 After the mathematical tools have been identified, a local analysis comes into play.

 The argument expounded in Sect. 2 justifying the discovery of the focal property might

 well be the 'analysis' that is not made explicit by Diocles (an analysis of a theorem ,
 one must stress). It is clear that the argument in Sect. 2 is neither an exact inverse

 of the attested synthesis nor an approximate construction, just as the analysis that is

 proposed in the next section leading to the focus-directrix property of the parabola
 will not be an inverted synthesis or an approximate construction. There is much more

 freedom in the heuristic phase than the one we are used to thinking. In this perspective,

 all the analyses reconstructed in the literature are marred by a degree of arbitrariness,

 ably concealed by the fact of being an exact inversion of an attested synthesis, making

 them nothing but rhetorical exercises pointing more to the cleverness of their redactors

 than to some historically sound substrate. The reconstructed analyses, in fact, oscil-
 late between the two extreme poles of overdetermination (they must be the inverse of

 known syntheses) and underdetermination, when approximate constructions (having

 a sense only after an exact solution has been found) or logically inconsistent guessings
 are allowed to serve as analyses. On the contrary, a heuristic analysis can at the same

 time be non-approximate and non-formalized: the one that we shall see leading to the

 focus-directrix property is a perfect example. An attested analysis, however, precisely

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 482 F. Acerbi

 because it is written and thereby is in a strong sense 'formalized', need not be identical

 with the heuristic analysis, nor, a fortiori, an attested synthesis needs to be identical

 with the inverse of the heuristic analysis.

 6 The pointwise construction of the parabola: Diocles

 Constructing a mirror burning at a given distance, that is, a parabola with given vertex
 and focal distance, is a problem, not a theorem like the one establishing the focal

 properties of a parabola, and therefore requires a different approach. In order to solve

 it, Diocles, Dtrums and Anthemius adopted the following deductive progression: they

 singled out first a particular sumptdma allowing them to set up a pointwise construction

 of a line with exact focal properties; they subsequently showed, in a separate propo-

 sition, that the points determined in this way lie on a parabola, identified as the line

 enjoying the 'principal' sumptdma that we have seen at the beginning of Sect. 2. This

 is nothing but a variant of the canonical strategy for solving a locus theorem, where

 the constraint in the enunciation identifying the locus is reduced to a sumptdma of a

 known curve, and eventually, for instance, in the case of conic sections, to a 'principal'

 sumptdma in one of its forms.

 Diocles' particular sumptdma is nothing but the property of equidistance of any

 point on the parabola from the focus and from a given line, nowadays called 'direc-

 trix'; Dtrums performs a more complex construction, details of which we shall see in
 the next section; Anthemius elaborates a non-rigorous version of Diocles' construc-
 tion.

 Let us thus turn to prop. 4 of On burning mirrors (Fig. 3). Fixing the focal distance

 VF of a parabola amounts to assuming some parameters of the curve as given: the
 focus, the vertex, and the axis are given in position, the upright side (4 times VF) or,

 alternatively, the 'breadth' FK of the parabola is given in magnitude. To see the last

 point, recall that the principal sumptdma of a parabola with upright side 4V77, applied

 to the point K orthogonal ordinate of which falls on the focus, gives

 s(FK) = r(VF , 4VF).

 fROM this, one immediately obtains FK=2VF. Doubling VF beyond V as far as R ,
 one has FR = FK. Diocles completes the square KFRS and draws diagonal KR ( KR is

 tangent to the parabola at K ; cf. Con. 1.33).

 Diocles goes on to determine points on the curve other than V and K. To this end,

 he proposes a simple construction of the points that have the same distance from the

 focus F and from the straight line RS. Given in fact a point H on FV, a point B is taken
 on VR such that HV= VB (and therefore FB=HR since V is the midpoint of FR). A

 circle is then traced with centre F and radius FB: the circle intersects the perpendicular

 erected from H at A. The proposition ends with the claim that all points A determined
 in this way lie on a parabola (namely, the one with upright side 4VF and vertex V).

 How could Diocles have conceived this construction? Did he know that the property

 of equidistance of any point from the focus and from a given line is a sumptdma of
 a parabola? Complex and ingenious answers have been proposed; as we shall see in

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 483

 Fig. 3

 K S

 ////^

 F H Vl B R

 a moment, Knorr even ventured to call into play the extreme resource of 'plain good
 luck' (1983), and proposed accordingly that the approximate construction compiled
 by Anthemius was the source of Diodes' exact solution. As a matter of fact, things are

 far simpler than that: the fact that the parabola enjoys the focus-directrix property is

 actually immediate ; moreover, as the property is stated as an equality, it automatically

 follows that it is a sumptdma. To prove this, let us notice first that, in order to construct

 a mirror burning at a given distance, the problem of identifying the line concentrating

 the rays at one single point must be supposed as solved. We may thus assume that the

 proof of prop. 1 is known (Fig. 4).

 Recall the pivotal equality, AF=FB. From point //, let a segment HR=BF be

 cut off on the axis, on the same side as V . It is enough to show that the position of
 R is univocally determined by F and V , which are given if the assigned curve is a
 parabola. But from

 let HV=BV (by the property of the subtangent) be subtracted: one obtains

 HR = BF

 VF = VR.

 But V and F are given: therefore, R is also given. End of proof. In other terms, starting

 from whatever point H which is the projection on the axis of a parabola of a point A

 on the line, and cutting off from the axis a segment HR equal to the distance of A from

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 484 F. Acerbi

 Fig. 4

 | A

 B ! R v' F H c

 the focus, the endpoint R of the segment is always the same. As HA is perpendicular

 to the axis, point A is equidistant from the focus and from a straight line through R

 perpendicular to the axis.

 The characterization of the parabola by means of the focus-directrix property allows

 one to set up a pointwise construction of the line using only plane methods. Diocles
 does this in prop. 4, as we have just seen. In prop. 5, he shows that, by 'inverting'

 and formalizing the argument just expounded, the curve resulting from the pointwise

 construction is a parabola. In fact (going back to Fig. 3), the arrangment of the points

 FHVB is suitable for an application of El. II.8, and this theorem provides the crucial

 equality entailing that any point identified by its equidistance from a point F and a

 straight line RS satisfies the sumptdma of a parabola with axis along VF, vertex V and

 upright side 4 VF. For let us consider one such point A, of which projection on FR is
 H. Let us cut off, on the opposite side from V, a segment VB=VH (and therefore,
 FB = HR). By El II.8 one has that

 s(FB) = s(FH ) + 4r(HV, VF).

 But FAH is a right-angled triangle, so that

 s(AF) = s(FH)+s(AH).

 Therefore, if we stipulate AF=FB (= HR ), as Diocles does at the end of his construc-
 tion, then we have

 s(AH) = 4 r(HV, VF) = r(HV , 4VF),

 and point A is on the parabola with upright side 4 VF and vertex V.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 485

 The problem of the heuristic behind Diodes' construction was put forward with
 force by Knorr (1983), in the only sustained attempt at assessing the relationships

 among the several authors involved in researches about burning mirrors. It is worth-
 while to discuss his reconstruction in detail. (Knorr did not know Dtrums' treatise; the

 analysis offered in CG, passim , simply states, repeatedly and without really arguing

 the case, the mutual independency of all contributions involved, a thesis that is refuted

 throughout this article.)

 prop. 1, 4 and 5:

 Knorr (ibid., p. 59) starts by pointing out two deductive drawbacks in the series of

 (a) It is nowhere stated nor proved that the parabola enjoys the focus-directrix prop-

 erty;

 (b) The curve as constructed in [prop. 4] does not satisfy the property of the burning

 mirror established in Proposition 1', since this proposition 'defines the parabola

 in terms of the ordinate-abscissa property, not the focus-directrix property'.

 According to him, these supposed lacunae can be amended by supposing that props

 4-5 are the relics of the analysis, which would have led Diocles to the proof of his

 prop. 1 . As a matter of fact, Diocles' reduction strategy is exactly the canonical one for

 solving a locus problem, as we have seen at the beginning of this section. Apparently,

 Knorr did not appreciate this point, as from his perspective, the characterization of

 the curve with exact focal properties in terms of the property of equidistance from a

 given point and a given straight line must logically and temporally precede the proof of

 prop. 1 : only afterwards, the same property of equidistance shall be proven to identify

 a parabola. After the curve has been identified, it becomes relatively easy to set up a

 direct proof such as the one that we read in prop. 1 . According to Knorr, Diocles would

 have kept the superfluous props. 4 and 5 in his treatise as 'vestiges of the preliminary
 analytic investigation' (ibid., p. 60).

 Knorr puts much emphasis on the heuristic character of the analysis because he

 thinks that the technical difficulties arising in trying to reduce the construction of the

 curve with exact focal properties to the one identified by the equidistance of its points

 from a given point and a given straight line could not be overcome by a Greek geom-

 eter. In his words (ibid., italics in the original): 'One thus requires a way of reducing

 the construction of the ray-focusing curve to the curve defined by the focus-directrix

 property. Now, if the problem is framed in this manner, it would seem to be beyond

 the capacities of Greek geometry. For the focal property specifies the curve through
 the orientation of the tangent at each point; [...] But to work out the curve from its

 tangent entails, in effect, finding the solution of a differential equation. Lacking any

 method comparable to the differential triangle, the Greeks were at great disadvantage
 as far as the finding of solutions to such problems is concerned. On the other hand,

 once a solution was found, by whatever method, even a fortuitous one, its proof could
 be provided in rigorous fashion [...]'. Knorr even wonders (ibid., italics mine):'Why,
 then has Diocles injected consideration of this ostensibly irrelevant property as if it
 were somehow the essential characteristic of the burning curve?'.

 In order to get out of the impasse , Knorr submits that what we read in Anthemi-

 us was a relic, even if relating to the ellipse, of the preliminary heuristic leading to
 Diocles' construction (ibid., pp. 60-63); however, he is forced by his own argument to

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 486 F. Acerbi

 suppose that this approximate construction was arrived at by pure chance: 'Anthemius
 has been helped along to no small degree by plain good luck' (ibid., p. 62).

 We see here a historian surrendering to his own prejudices: whenever a rigorous

 analysis is (regarded as) not available, it is replaced by a non-rigorous argument that
 is ascribed to an author who is early and shadowy enough, in order not to destroy
 his reputation. Dositheus is such a character, to whom an 'approximate construction'
 can be very fittingly attributed on the basis of what Diocles says in his prefatory
 epistle (see Sect. 2). In Knorr's view, Anthemius' construction should be ascribed to

 Dositheus. This construction is grounded on the simple remark that the tangent to the

 line at the point of incidence of a ray bisects the angle between the incident ray pro-

 duced and the reflected ray. The construction starts from the outer edge of the mirror,

 which is supposed to be given, as well as the point where burning must occur. Using

 these assumptions and the focus-directrix property, Anthemius builds his composite

 mirror; the Greek text ends abruptly before the proposition is completed. In analogy

 with what we read in the case of an elliptical mirror, Knorr surmises that the missing

 portion of Anthemius' tract should have contained a 'proof of the fact that a curve

 having the focus-directrix property is a parabola. The Arabic translation and the ver-
 sion revised by 'Utarid (CG, 286-315) show that this was not the case: Anthemius

 was only interested in transcribing arguments with an explicit practical import. Knorr

 further identifies the 'missing proof' of Anthemius' work with what is contained in

 the Bobbio fragment (ibid., pp. 63-70). In doing this, he inserts himself in a tradition
 of scholars (among whom Heiberg 1883, pp. 127-129 features) who entertain the

 illusion that history of Greek mathematics is a game of complete information.

 Knorr' argument does not stand up because of two unwarranted, and demonstrably

 false, assumptions. The first is that an analysis revealing the crucial role of the focus-

 directrix property might be conducted only by explicitly using the tangent. The second,

 of an ideological nature, is that a property so important (to us) as the focus-directrix

 could not be reduced to the status of mere functionality to a pointwise determination of

 a parabola, as indisputably happens in Diocles' approach and as Knorr himself has to

 recognize (1983, p. 59): 'the role of the [given] line is so submerged in the construction

 that one strains to view Diocles as working toward the solution of a problem of locus
 as such'.

 The first assumption, whose anachronistic nature is revealed by the long quotation

 above, is falsified by the very simple analysis proposed at the beginning of this section,

 which, in my opinion, has the additional virtue of being a direct consequence of the

 focal property established in prop. 1 , and is in fact an immediate development of the

 argument set out in that proof. Yet, Knorr had at his disposal an analysis not depending
 on prop. 1: it was enough to 'invert' props. 4-5. For, once a point B is given on the
 axis of a parabola having vertex V and focal distance FV given (Fig. 3 again), it is
 enough to mark point H such that H V = VB , draw the perpendicular HA from the axis

 and take its intersection with the circle of centre F and radius FB , to have the point A

 the tangent through which meets the axis at B. Very likely, Knorr regarded the use of

 El. II. 8 as too contrived, since it assigns no explicit role to the tangent.

 This suggests that the whole story can be read in a different perspective: the focal

 properties of the parabola were obtained as a by-product of an attempt at proving that

 the property of the subtangent is a sumptdma of the curve. About the relevance of this

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 487

 property to the eyes of the ancient geometers it is not necessary to spend so many

 words. Recall in fact that the property of the subtangent was well known to Archi-

 medes, that the attested proof in Con. 1.33 and 35 can be transferred identically to

 orthogonal conjugation, and that precisely El. II.8 provides a crucial result in the final

 step of the proof of Con. 1.33, a reference that both Eutocius (it is almost certain that

 the postponed explicative closing the theorem at AGE I, 100.21-22, must be ascribed
 to him) and Heiberg ( AGE I, 101 in int.) have misinterpreted as a reference to El.
 II.5. As a consequence, the focal property proves crucial to employ the subtangent
 as a method to construct a parabola with given vertex and parameter (cf. Con. 1.52,
 that, however, does not lead in an immediate way to a pointwise construction) and

 makes it possible to solve by reduction a particular case of the problem of tracing a

 conic section after some of its tangents are known (it is a particular case since one of

 the tangents must pass through the vertex; an alternative method follows from Con.
 III.41).

 As for the second assumption, the historiographical debate about the first appear-

 ance of the focus-directrix property is biased by the relevance that this characterization

 has assumed in the modern characterization of conic sections. Of this property, there is

 no trace in Apollonius' Conica as they are now extant (recall that it holds in reference

 to the axis only, and therefore it is not a sumptoma that can be referred to any diameter).

 Yet, to mention just one consideration that could have suggested including it, had it
 been known, use of the focal property of the parabola would have greatly simplified

 the expression of the new parameter when the reference diameter is changed in Con.

 1.49 - it is simply four times the distance of the vertex of the new diameter from the
 focus.

 Toomer (1976, pp. 16-17) surmised that Diocles himself was the discoverer of the

 property in the case of the parabola, its validity being extended after him to the other
 conic sections. The few lemmas Pappus offers, at the very end of book VII of his
 Collectio , for the Euclidean Loci on a surface are alleged to support this reconstruc-
 tion. Pappus (partly) proves in VII.313-318, by reduction to the principal sumptoma
 of a conic section used before Apollonius, the following locus theorem:

 Let a straight line AB be < given > in position, and G given in the same plane, and

 let be DG drawn across, a perpendicular DE , and let the ratio of GD to DEG <be

 given >. I say that D touches a section of a cone, and if the ratio be equal to equal

 a parabola, if less to greater an ellipse, if greater to less a hyperbola.

 It is the only attestation in the ancient corpus of the fact that the focus-directrix

 property is a sumptoma of the several conic sections (the formulation as a locus bears

 this out exactly). The really interesting point in Pappus' proof is, from our perspec-
 tive, the following. He first reduces the just quoted locus to another one, solved in
 VII.314-317 (the reduction is immediate). The enunciation of this locus reads thus
 (Fig. 5):

 Given two <points> AB and GD at right angles, let the ratio of the square of
 AD to the squares of GD DB <be given>. I say that G touches a section of a
 cone, whether the ratio is equal to equal a parabola or greater to less or less to

 greater.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 488 F. Acerbi

 Fig. 5

 'g

 B D zj E A

 Therefore, the sumptdma here assumed is nothing but a generalized focus-directrix

 property modified by squaring the ratio and applying El. 1.47 to the distance from the
 focus (the same sumptdma identifies a hyperbola, one of the two loci whose inter-

 section solves the problem of trisection of an angle, at Coll. IV.68). It is important to

 stress that this is a generalized formulation of the focus-directrix property: the ratio of

 the two distances is given in square. Even if the reduction to the 'unsquared' form is

 an immediate consequence of El. 1.47, it obviously works one way only. Accordingly,
 the generalized formulation holds in any conjugation, while, as we have repeatedly
 seen, the 'unsquared' one - as well as the focal property that is strictly linked with
 it - holds in orthogonal conjugation only (this is one more reason 'explaining' as to
 why the focus-directrix property was not 'seen' by the Greek geometers).

 Let us see how the locus is solved, considering only the case of the parabola (Coll.

 VII.315). In order to reduce the condition

 to the principal sumptdma

 s(AD) = s(GD) + s(DB)

 s(GD) =r(4BZ,DZ ),

 one has 'only' to make the rectangle r(4BZ,DZ) appear in place of s(AD) - s(DB).
 This can be done in two ways. One possibility is to follow Diocles: bisect AB at Z and
 mark E such that DZ=ZE' and apply El. II.8 to the four points BDZE. As AD=BE ,
 it immediately results that

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 489

 s(AD) - s(DB ) = s(BE) - s{DB) = 4r(BZ, DZ).

 Pappus chooses another route. He marks E such that BD = DE and applies EL II.6 to
 the four points BDEA. Thus he has

 s(AD) - s(DB ) = r(BA,AE ),

 which in turn is equal, by marking Z such that BZ-ZA and by observing that

 AE = AB- BE = 2BZ - 2BD = 2 DZ,

 to 4 r(BZ,DZ).

 One wonders what proposition of the lost Euclidean treatise might have required

 Pappus' lemma. Zeuthen (1886, pp. 210-215 and 367-371) observes that, if Pappus
 had to make such a lemma explicit, then the focus-directrix property should have
 been taken for granted in the Loci on a surface. Zeuthen's remark can be completed

 by the conjecture that the most "natural" place where the property was established, of

 course in the above form of a sumptdma formulated as a constraint identifying a locus ,

 is in Aristaeus' Solid loci (an inference that is another product of the illusion that

 history of Greek mathematics is a game of complete information). As a matter of fact,
 what Pappus proves is which conic section must be associated with which ratio, his
 formulation implying that the connection between the (generalized) focus-directrix

 property and conic sections has to be taken for granted. In sum, if one is not willing

 to venture in empty conjecturing, then a minimal hypothesis is that the property had

 been employed in the Loci on a surface as an intermediate step in the analysis of some

 locus , but that it was simply considered as a sumptdma of a conic section.

 7 The pointwise construction of the parabola: Dtrums and Archimedes

 The pointwise construction of a parabola proposed by Dtrums in his props. 12-13 fol-

 lows Diodes' scheme but does not resort to the focus-directrix property. As a matter

 of fact, Dtrums solves a different problem from that of constructing a parabola having

 vertex and focal distance given. What is given are three particular points: one is the

 vertex, and the other two are the endpoints of the same ordinate; it is required to draw

 the parabola passing through them. As is the case with Diocles, the particular position

 of the points makes the three tangents through them given in position as well, and from

 this, it is easy to determine the parabola pointwise using, for instance, the proportions

 derived by Apollonius in Con. 111.41. Dtrums does not follow this route: his procedure
 has as its model the Archimedean proofs in Quadr. 4 and 5. Some peculiarities of
 Dtrums' proofs can in fact be explained only as a reworking of analogous features of
 those of Archimedes' proofs, as we are going to see. Let us read first Quadr. 4 (AOO
 II, 268.5-270.3, and see Fig. 6):

 Let it be a segment ABG contained by a straight line and a section of a right-
 angled cone [scil. a parabola], and from the middle of AG a < straight lino

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 490 F. Acerbi

 Fig. 6

 G

 bJH-

 /

 ~Q

 BD be drawn parallel to the diameter - or let it itself be a diameter - and let the

 joining straight line BG be produced.

 Then, if another < straight lino ZQ be drawn parallel to BD cutting the straight

 line through BG , ZQ to QH will have the same ratio as DA to DZ.
 Let a <straight lino KH be drawn through H parallel to AG: therefore it is as
 BD to BK in length, so DG to KH in power - for this has been proven. There-
 fore, it will be as BG to BI in length, so BG to BQ in power - for DZ KH are
 equal - therefore, lines BG BQ BI are in proportion, so that BG to BQ has the
 same ratio as GQ to QI: therefore, it is as GD to DZ, so QZ to QH. And equal to
 DG is DA: it is thus manifest that DA to DZ has the same ratio as ZQ to QH.

 In Quadr. 5 the result is extended, with a simple proof that is omitted here, to show

 that

 AZ : ZG :: ZQ : QL

 holds, where L is the intersection of ZQ and of the tangent through G. Archimedes

 needs this new result as it is the central one in the mechanical method of quadrature of

 a segment of a parabola. On the other hand, while appearing in Dtrums' prop. 12, the
 result is completely useless in Dtrums' approach, as he applies prop. 12 in prop. 13
 without any need to introduce the tangent. A hasty redaction of prop. 12 is suggested

 by other elements too - the enunciation states two results: one referring to the propor-

 tion obtaining with the point on the tangent; and the other to the proportion obtaining

 with the point on the secant through the vertex. In the conclusion itself, the author

 observes that the introduction of the tangent is without effect; before this, he sets out
 a convoluted argument that can be replaced by a single application of convertendo.
 These steps are completely useless as a support to the subsequent construction, which
 can be effected using the proportion (identical with the Archimedean one established

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 491

 Fig. 7

 ML K

 The proof gives a simple method for determining a parabola passing through three

 points with the special properties listed above: A and C are the endpoints of the same
 ordinate, and B is the vertex of the diameter conjugated to that ordinate. The con-

 struction of the problem and the beginning of its synthesis may well be identical with
 Dtrums' (CG, 201-202, and see Fig. 8):

 Posons la droite AC diametre d'un cercle, qui est le bord du miroir ardent que
 nous voulons construire [...] cherchons a trouver la parabole que nous trains
 sur les points A, B et C et sur l'axe BD. Joignons la droite AB et menons du

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 at the end of Quadr. 4 and that I shall call (*)) to which these steps are initially applied.

 Let us read then the relevant portion of the text. As I am unable to directly translate
 from Arabic, I transcribe the French version (CG, 200-201, and see Fig. 7):

 Soit la section parabolique ABC te BD son diametre; soit la droite ordonnee AC;

 [. . .] soit la droite MKI parallele au diametre, qui traverse la section au point K.
 [...]

 Joignons la droite CB et prolongeons-la jusqu'au point L; menons du point K
 une droite parallele a la droite CA , soit KG ; joignons egalement la droite KC
 qui coupe la droite BD au point E. On a dans la section le rapport de DB a BG
 egal au rapport du carre de AD - c'est-a-dire le carre de CD - au carre de KG
 et le rapport du carre de CD au carre de KG est egal au rapport du carre de DE
 au carre de EG: le rapport de DB a BG est done egal au rapport du carre de DE
 au carre de EG. Et en raison de ce que nous avons demontre a ce sujet, on a le
 produit de DB par BG egal au carre de BE et le rapport de DB a BG - qui est
 egal au rapport du carre de AD au carre de Dl - est egal au rapport du carre de
 DB au carre de BE; mais ceci est egal au rapport du carre de IL au carre de LK.
 on a done egalement en longueur le rapport de IL a LK egal au rapport de DA
 a DI.

 492 F. Acerbi

 Fig. 8

 g y^///////

 H'AI E

 A

 c

 point E - qui est entre A et D - une droite parallele a BD , soit la droite EH.
 Joignons la droite CK et prolongeons-la jusqu'a qu'elle coupe la droite EIH au
 point H' alors le point H est sur la parabole que nous trains sur les points A,
 B et C. [. . .] Menons la droite EH , qu'elle coupe la droite CB au point G. Si on
 construit la parabole, le rapport de GE a EH est egal au rapport de BD a DK et

 le rapport de BD a DK est egal au rapport de BD a El' et ceci est egal au rapport
 de DA a AE' la parabole qui passe par les points A, B et C passe done par le
 point H.

 The synthesis of the problem, namely, to show that H lies on a given parabola,
 can be completed by inverting either the passages of Dtrums' prop. 1 1 or those of
 the Archimedean proof: as we have read, Dtrums omits this part of the synthesis and
 satisfies himself with observing that proportion (*) holds, the rest being obvious since

 all passages of Archimedes' proof can be inverted. As a consequence, point H on ZQ
 satisfying (*) satisfies also the principal sumptdma in ratio form of the parabola of

 given vertex and passing through two given points lying at the extremes of the same
 ordinate. Our discussion will focus henceforth on a comparison between the proofs of

 Dtrums' prop. 12 and of Quadr. 4; accordingly, prop. 13 of Dtrums will be left out.

 In order to better understand the relationships between the two propositions, it is

 useful to set in parallel the deductive steps in a schematic manner, as follows:

 Archimedes'. Enunciation of the principal sumptdma of the parabola in the ratio

 form; identification of four segments, two of which are parallel to the ordinate, and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 493

 two to the diameter; projection on the secant through the vertex of the four segments,

 pairwise independently, in such a way as to make the projection of two segments

 coincide: the three resulting projections A, B, and C satisfy a proportion of the kind

 A : B :: s( A) : 5(C) :

 therefore, the three projections satisfy a continuous proportion with middle term C;
 application of EL V.12 or of V.19; the four resulting segments are projected back,

 pairwise independently, a pair on the ordinate and the other pair on the parallel to the

 diameter through the arbitrary point: one obtains the final proportion (*).

 Dtrums : Enunciation of the principal sumptdma of the parabola in the ratio form;

 identification of four segments, two of which are parallel to the ordinate, and two

 to the diameter; projection on the axis of the four segments, pairwise independently,

 using as an auxiliary line, the line joining the given point and the arbitrary point (two

 of these segments already lie on the axis); application of a technical lemma proven in

 prop. 1 1 ('Si on partage une droite en parties telles que le rapport du carre de Tune des

 partie au carre de la partie intermediaire soit egal au rapport de la droite toute entiere

 a la partie qui reste, alors le produit forme de a droite toute entiere par la troisieme

 partie que nous avons mentionnee est egal au carre de la droite composee de la partie

 intermediaire et de la partie qui reste'): therefore three suitable combinations A, C,

 and B of the projections satisfy a continuous proportion with middle term C: therefore

 three projections satisfy a proportion of the kind

 A : B :: s( A) : s( C);

 the first ratio gives, via the principal sumptdma in ratio form, a ratio between the

 squares on the ordinates; A and C in the second ratio are independently projected back

 from the axis on the parallel to the diameter through the arbitrary point: one obtains

 the same final proportion (*) as Archimedes'.

 There are two essential differences between the two proofs:

 (1) Archimedes projects on the secant through the vertex and the given point; Dtrums

 projects on the axis. The key proportion A : B :: 5(A) : s(C) is different in the
 two authors, since it is strictly correlated with the choice of the projections: as a

 matter of fact, it is quite difficult to obtain Archimedes' projection from Dtrums',
 and vice versa. In both cases, the two proportions are the natural ones after the
 projection is chosen.

 (2) The most surprising feature of Dtrums' approach, however, is that he singles out
 as prop. 11a four-point technical lemma, whose role is analogous to El. II. 8 in
 Diodes' construction, and this allows him to determine by plane methods the
 single points of a parabola by means of a sumptdma which is hardly perspicuous.
 It would have been much more immediate to offer a pointwise construction of

 the parabola on the grounds of the first part of the Archimedean proof (see Fig. 6

 again): after one knows that BG , BQ , and BI are in continuous proportion, it is
 enough to notice that B, G, and Q are given. Therefore I is also given, and the
 construction of a point on a parabola can be effected by slightly modifying the
 one in Dtrums.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 494 F. Acerbi

 In fact, the lemma proved by Dtrums in his prop. 1 1 must have constituted a well

 known technical tool, since we find it in Pappus', Coll. VII.89-90, 220-221, and 277,

 who offers five proofs, only slightly different one from another, whereas Dtrums pro-

 ceeds by reductio. The first two proofs of Pappus are among the lemmas referring to
 Apollonius' Sectio determinate whose connection with the determination of conic

 sections starting from given points was established long ago (Zeuthen 1886, pp. 195-

 202). The third and fourth occurrences are in the part dealing with Euclid's Porisms.

 The fifth proof is a lemma to Con. V. The transmitted Arabic text of book V does not

 make it clear to which proposition Pappus' lemma refers, but some of the surrounding
 lemmas pertain to material related to the group V.51-55. Add to this the resonance
 (only a resonance, since the four points do not lie on the same straight line) with the

 fundamental lemma in the construction of the locus known as "Apollonian circles" (cf.
 Coll. VII. 185 and 223), and Zeuthen's remark (1886, pp. 59-62) that the proportion
 derived in Quadr. 4 shows that the parabola satisfied certain particular cases of the
 four-line locus.

 8 Lemmatic fragmentation

 The useless complications in Dtrums' proof, even if he might well be considerably
 later than Archimedes, cannot be explained by simply invoking his low technical level
 or accidents of transmission: the copy is too conformal to the Archimedean model

 and, at the same time, the complications are inexplicable if viewed only in the context

 of adapting the original proof to the contingent exigencies of constructing a parabola

 passing through three points. As we have seen, in fact, Quadr. 4 offers itself, so to

 speak, as an effective synthesis of this problem, dictating the form of the construction.

 I submit that the attested modifications of the Archimedean original had a strategic

 goal, and it is of no importance whether this has happened with Dtrums or he found
 some paradigmatic examples in the tradition. The goal was to give prominence to

 either of the distinctive features of the construction (projection and technical lemma),

 even if the resulting construction gets considerably more involved.

 Yet, it is not easy to disentangle the complex relationships between the identifi-
 cation of the lemma and the choice of the projection. It may be that the choice of
 the projection induced the necessity of elaborating a series of steps that eventually
 coalesced in the lemma. In favour of this hypothesis, one may argue that the axis of a

 parabola is connected in an invariant way to the curve, whereas the secant introduced

 by Archimedes is not. On the other hand, the choice of the projection might have been
 dictated by the need to give prominence to a lemma that has manifold applications.
 As a matter of fact, the presence of the lemma in the tradition might have suggested

 modifying Archimedes' projection, which presents itself as a most "natural" one: let
 us recall in fact that the position of the diameter can be made to depend on that of

 the (points on the) ordinate, and that this projection is already formulated in oblique
 conjugation. The combination of two contravariant canonizing elements - a standard
 projection that can be exported to any conjugation and a lemma to be used in other
 contexts - produces a proof that has many "links" with a larger class of problems but

 that surely is not the simplest possible one. All in all, my impression is that, at least

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 495

 when Dtrums redacted his version, extracting the lemma was the primary aim, as I

 shall briefly argue in what follows.

 Dtrums' whole approach displays a feeling for what we nowadays would call 'struc-

 ture' : the linear lemmas are the real core of a proof, beyond the contingent geometrical

 embellishments; and the fact that they can be applied in disparate configurations tes-

 tifies to their belonging to an order of mathematical reflection that somehow extracts
 the 'essential geometrical content' - sequences of points on a straight line - from a

 particular geometrical configuration. The linear lemmas dictated the directive lines of

 mathematical research: as basic demonstrative tools, they imposed their own presence

 in the proofs, thereby conditioning the kind of available results. Pappus' Collectio is

 the place where this tendency comes to its extreme and results in a disintegration of

 the corpus.

 I have surveyed the H-point lemmas presented in the ancient mathematical corpus ;

 the following prospect lists them, indexed by the number of points involved and by the

 presence or absence among the assumptions of any relation among figures constructed

 on the segments cut off by the points (the index 'g' means that the lemma is formulated

 in the language of the givens; * marks the lemmas stating an inequality; kiri precedes

 occurrences of linear lemmas assumed in a Pappian proof, but not proved by him).

 relation not assumed relation assumed

 3 pts El. II.2-4, 7-8, X.33/34, XIII. 1 -6, XIV. 1 1 , Coll

 59/60, Coll. VII.192# V.78*-9*, 83, VII.305g
 4 pts El. II.5-6, 9-10, X.34/35, Coll. VII.89-90, 216-21,

 41/42*, Coll. V.49-50, 267-9, 277

 VII.54*-5*, in 142-3, 186, 191

 5 pts Coll. VII.56*, 70-1 , 79, Coll. VII.60-3, 68-9, 72,

 111-2, in 189, 228, 77-8, 80, 83-5,86-8, 91-8,
 239, 249-50, 263-6, 307* 117,1 89-90, 270-1 , 308

 6 pts Eutocius in Con. 11.23 Coll. VII.99-1 10

 n pts

 four results.

 lemmas.

 (4) Pappus' lemmas for Apollonius' Sectio determinata are contained in Coll. VII. 68-
 1 19. It is no surprise, then, to find so many linear lemmas (39 in all, most of which

 five-point lemmas) in this chapter range of the Collectio. Other chapter ranges in
 Coll. VII, with the number of associated linear lemmas, are: De sectione rationis
 et spatii : 43-67 (9); Neuseis : 120-157 (2); Tactiones I: 158-184 (0); Loci plani
 II: 185-192 (6); Porismata I (7): 193-232; and Conica : 233-311 (16).

 (5) All the occurrences of three-point lemmas in the second column refer to a segment

 cut in extreme and mean ratio.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 One might even suggest that the whole book X of the Elements should be included

 in the list. I add just a few remarks.

 (1) Eutocius' lemmas to Apollonius' Conica coincide with those in Pappus, the only

 exception being a lemma to Con. 11.23.

 (2) The lemmas in Coll. VII. 217, 219 and 228 prove three results each; VII.95-7

 (3) VII.69, 78, 84-5, 87-8, 92, 94 are alternative proofs of the immediately preceding

 496 F. Acerbi

 (6) Among the lemmas to the Neuseis are included some interesting n-point-and-2-

 line theorems that will not be discussed here (Coll. VII. 120-5).

 It may well be that such a feeling for structure is a consequence of cultural factors

 such as the phenomenon of canonization of literary products and the prevalence of
 a rhetorical curriculum, entailing a renewed attention to the building blocks of any

 chain of argument. What is more, the lemmas may become a central research tool if
 one is obsessed by the ideology of the 'discovery' and by reconstructing the heuris-
 tic methods of the 'ancients'. In this perspective, there is relevance in the fact that

 the identification of the parabola via the focus-directrix sumptdma split into three

 branches, depending on the technical lemma employed (add to them the sumptdma of

 the parabola, established by Pappus, Coll. IV.79, in orthogonal conjugation but valid
 with reference to any diameter, where the "core" lemma is El. II.5):

 (1) El. II.8 (used also in Data 86 and in Diophantus, Pol. num. 1-3, Metrica 1.26, but

 elsewhere not to be found in the ancient corpus ), applied by Diocles to produce

 a pointwise construction, even if, as we have seen at the end of Sect. 6, it may

 yield a proof that the (generalized) focus-directrix property is a sumptdma of the
 parabola.

 (2) Dtrums' lemma, applied to produce a pointwise construction.
 (3) El. II.6, applied by Pappus in the context of a locus theorem, showing that the

 (generalized) focus-directrix property really is a sumptdma.

 One should not, however, regard the interest in singling out lemmas as a typical attitude

 of late antiquity: book II of the Elements and Apollonius' three Sectiones (a warning:

 these are problems, not theorems) are there to show that the opposite is true, but this

 is another story.

 9 Sources and their sigla

 The abbreviations of the titles of the writings of mathematical authors are self-explan-

 atory, as for instance El. = Elements , Con. = Conica , Coll. = Collection propositions
 are referred to by book and number, as for instance "£/. 111.15". Pappus' Collectio is

 cited by book and chapter. Other sources are cited according to the following sigla:

 AGE : Apollonii Pergaei quae graece exstant, cum commentariis antiquis , edidit et

 latine interpretatus est J. L. Heiberg. 2 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1891-1893.

 AOO: Archimedis opera omnia , cum commentariis Eutocii , iterum edidit J. L. Hei-

 berg. 3 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1910-1915.

 CG: Les catoptriciens grecs I. Les miroirs ardents. Textes etablis, traduits et com-

 mentes par R. Rashed. Paris, Les Belles Lettres 2000.

 HOO' Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia , recensuerunt G. Schmidt

 (vol. I), L. Nix et W. Schmidt (vol. II), H. Schoene (vol. Ill), J. L. Heiberg (vol.
 IV et V). 5 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1899-1914.

 MGM : Mathematici Graeci Minores , edidit J. L. Heiberg. Det Kongelige Danske Vide-

 nskabernes Selskabs, Historisk-filologiske Meddelelser XIII, 3. K0benhavn,
 Bianco Lunos Bogtrykkeri 1927.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The geometry of burning mirrors in Greek antiquity 497

 References

 Heiberg, J.L. 1883. Zum Fragmentum mathematicum Bobiense. Zeitschrift fiir Mathematik und Physik

 (hist. -lit. Abth.) 28: 121-129.

 Hogendijk, J.P. 1985. Diocles and the geometry of curved surfaces. Centaurus 28: 169-184.
 Jones, A. 1987. On some borrowed and misunderstood problems in Greek Catoptrics. Centaurus 30: 1-17.

 Knorr, W.R. 1983. The geometry of burning-mirrors in antiquity, lsis 74: 53-73.
 Sesiano, J. 1988. Les miroirs ardents de Diocles. Museum Helveticum 45: 193-202.

 Toomer, G.J., ed. 1976. Diocles , On burning mirrors. Berlin: Springer.
 Zeuthen, H.G. 1886. Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Altertum. Kopenhagen: A.F. Host & Sohn.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:19:11 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

