 

 

 

 

The language of the "Givens": its forms and its use as a deductive tool in Greek

mathematics
Author(s): Fabio Acerbi
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 65, No. 2 (March 2011), pp. 119-153
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41134343
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:25 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (201 1) 65:1 19-153
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-010-0072-Z

 The language of the "Givens": its forms and its use
 as a deductive tool in Greek mathematics

 Fabio Acerbi

 Published online: 19 February 201 1

 © Springer- Verlag 201 1

 Abstract The aim of this article is to present and discuss the language of the
 «givens», a typical stylistic resource of Greek mathematics and one of the major
 features of the proof format of analysis and synthesis. I shall analyze its expressive

 function and its peculiarities, as well as its general role as a deductive tool, explaining

 at the same time its particular applications in subgenres of a geometrical proposition
 like the locus theorems and the so-called «porisms». The main interpretative theses
 of this study are the following: the language of the «givens» (1) is the standard idiom

 in which "existence and uniqueness" of a mathematical object was proved, (2) was
 conceived as an unified framework reducing to a strictly deductive format disparate
 argumentative steps such as deductions, constructions, and calculations.

 1 Introduction

 The aim of this article is to present and discuss the language of the «givens», a typical

 stylistic resource of Greek mathematics and one of the major features of the proof

 format of analysis and synthesis. I shall analyze its expressive function and its pecu-
 liarities, as well as its general role as a deductive tool, explaining at the same time
 its particular applications in subgenres of a geometrical proposition like the locus
 theorems and the so-called «porisms». This article is organized as follows. Section 2

 presents the basic features of the language of the «givens», most notably the "species"
 of the predicate «given». I shall set the language in the context of the several kinds
 of propositions where it is applied and of the archetypal definitions (Data def. 1-4)

 were it was first introduced. Section 3 comments on these definitions and provides

 Communicated by Bernard Vitrac.

 F. Acerbi (S)

 CNRS, UMR 8163 «Savoirs, Textes, Langage», B.R 60149, 59653 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France
 e-mail: fabacerbi@gmail.com

 S Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 120 F. Acerbi

 a preliminary logical setup capturing an essential aspect of the idiom: the species

 of «givens» are the predicative counterparts of some fundamental relations: identity,

 equality, congruence, similarity, and parallelism. Section 4 deals with the question
 of the ontological status of a «given» object, namely, whether it is a particular or a

 generic mathematical entity. In particular, the phenomenon of the use of the article in

 identifying given objects is discussed on the basis of a large sample of textual data.
 Section 5 presents some alternative idioms to the one of the «givens»; among other

 things, it highlights the peculiar demonstrative format displayed by the propositions
 pertaining to the research field of "gnomonics" (the theory of sundials). Section 6
 clarifies the role played, in a proof by analysis and synthesis, by what I shall call a

 «chain of givens». In Sect. 7 it is explained how they were used to validate calculations.

 Section 8 expounds the deductive function of these chains; it contains also a detailed
 account of their application in contexts other than the "canonical" analytical proofs,
 namely, Hero's Metrica, Ptolemy's Almagest, Diophantus' Depolygonis numeris, and
 the explication of an unexpected link between a Heronian evolution of the analytical
 method and the Stoic analysis of syllogisms. This section presents also the main inter-

 pretative theses of this study: the language of the «givens» (1) is the standard idiom
 in which "existence and uniqueness" of a mathematical object was proved, (2) was
 conceived as an unified framework reducing to a strictly deductive format disparate

 argumentative steps such as deductions, constructions, and calculations.

 2 The species of the «givens» and their use in different kinds of propositions

 The basic features of the language of the «givens» are best understood if we read the

 enunciations of some typical kinds of propositions where it is used. No interpretative

 problems are raised by the enunciations of problems, where the predicate «given»

 qualifies the geometrical objects starting from which the required construction must
 be performed, as in El 1.23 (EE I, 32.12-14):

 TTpòç xfì 8o0eíqr) evGeíoc Kai xa> irpòç amf{ armeíco xf' 8o6etcri ycovíoc
 e')0')Ypá|x^icp ïariv ycovíav e')9')Ypamiov a')aTT|aaa6ai.
 On a given straight line and at a point on it to construct a rectilineal angle equal
 to a given rectilineal angle.

 A little effort is required to follow the enunciation of a locus theorem, for instance one

 out of the three by Charmandrus added as preliminary to Apollonius' Plane loci. It is

 the transposition of the definition of a circle as a geometrical locus', a point is said «to
 touch» a line when it is contained in it {Coll. VII.24):

 êccv euOeíocç xcò ueyéGei 8e5ouévTK xò ëv népaç f' 8e8ou6vov, tò êxepov
 anexai Qécei 5e5ou€VTK iTepic^peíaç koíXtiç.
 If one end of a straight line given in magnitude be given, the other will touch a

 concave arc given in position.

 Some difficulties arise with the enunciation of a theorem in Euclid's Data (prop. 40),

 where it is apparently required to prove that a triangle is «given in form» (EOO VI,
 70.2-3):

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 2 1

 èòcv xpiyœvoi) émaxti xcov ycovuòv 8e8ouévn r' xœ ueyéOei, 8é8oxai xò
 xpíycovov xœ eïSei.

 If each of the angles of a triangle be given in magnitude, the triangle is given in
 form.

 A similar request is formulated in theorems having a more transparent geometrical
 content, such as Pappus, Coll. IV.ll:

 Teipánhevpov to ABrA op0f|v ě%ov xtjv vrrò ABr ycovíav Kai SoQeîgav
 €Káaxr|v xcòv AB Br TA AA evOeiôv. ôeîÇai 5o96Îaav xf|v eTTiCevyvwu-
 oav xà A B orneia.
 <Let it be> a quadrilateral AB F A having angle ABT right, and <having> each
 of the straight lines AB BF FA A A given: to show that the <straight line>
 joining points A B is given.

 A problem entirely formulated in the idiom of the «givens» is Pappus, Coll. VII.294;
 it introduces the technical clause Trapa Géaei, where the predicate «given» is under-
 stood:

 Qéoei 8e5ou6vcov xœvAB Ar, àyayeîv TTapàOéaei xf|vAE Kai ttoiéîv 8o-
 Qeîaav xf|v AE.

 AB FA being <given> in position, to draw AE parallel to <a line> in position
 and to make AE given.

 Serious difficulties may arise with an enunciation from Euclid's Porisms, in the

 strongly elliptical form transmitted by Pappus, Coll. VII. 18:

 èòcv ccttò ô')o SeSouevcov armeícov Tipòç Qéoei SeSouévnv evGeîai kXolgQ-
 ôciv, àTTOxé^vti 8è |iía otó Qéaei SeSouévnc evGeíaç Trpòç xœ Itt' a')xriç
 6e8op,€vq) CTiixeicp, àTToxe|ieî Kai f[ èxépa otò éxépaç Xóyov ě%o')aav
 Sooévxa.

 If straight lines from two given points be inflected on a line given in position,

 and one cuts off <a segment> from a straight line given in position up to a given
 point on it, the other too will cut off from another <line given in position a
 segment> having a given ratio <to the first>.

 These enunciations bear out two facts.

 (1) The predicate «given» has two functions: an object can be given (a) because
 it is assigned by hypothesis or (b) because can be obtained from the assigned
 objects by means of geometrical constructions or of theorems. In the latter case

 the object is proven given. It is not always straightforward to distinguish between
 the two functions, especially in the case of porisms (see Sect. 6 infra).

 (2) Several species of «being given» are specified, namely, «in magnitude», «in
 position», or «in form», depending on the geometrical object to which the pred-
 icate is applied and on the point of view from which the former is considered.

 This point is clarified if we read the archetypal definitions Data 1^, to which I
 add def. 9 for the sake of comparison (EOO VI, 2.4-10 and 4.3-5 - notice that

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 122 F. Acerbi

 in all definitions the dative of respect has the article; this often disappears in the
 applications, as we shall repeatedly see):

 6e8oii€va xœ ueyéOei Xeyexai %copia xe kgci y pappai kgci ycoviai,
 oíç ôi)vá|xe0a ïaa TTOpíoccaGai.
 Xóyoç 6€8óa8ai téyexai, w ô')váp,e0a tòv gcòxòv TropíaaaGai.
 ex>Qvypa'i'ia GXT||¿axa xco €Ï5ei 5€5óa8ai X^yexai, ¿>v aï xe ycoviai
 ôe Solevai eiai Kaxôt jiíav kgù oi Xóyoi xœv TTX£i)pcov Trpòç àXXfíkac,
 SeSonévoi.
 xfi Qeaei 8eSóa8ai X^yovxai ar||ieíá xe kcci ypam-ioù kgù ycovíai, a
 xòv ccòxòv àei xóttov €Tré%ei.
 HeyeSoç 'ieyeQovq ôo9évxi |ieíÇóv êoxiv, õxav, occupe Oévxoç xov
 ôoGévxoç, xò Xoittòv xô ai)xô ïaov fj.
 Given in magnitude are said figures, lines, and angles for which we can
 provide equals.
 A ratio is said to be given for which we can provide the same.

 Rectilineal figures are said to be given in form for which are given both the

 angles one by one and the ratios of the sides to one another.

 To be given in position are said points, lines, and angles which always hold

 the same place.

 A magnitude is greater than a magnitude by a given when, if the given one
 is subtracted, the remainder be equal to the same.

 In the same way, a circle is given in magnitude only when its radius is given
 in magnitude; it is given in position and magnitude when its center is given in

 position and its radius in magnitude (Data def. 5-6); similar definitions apply to

 segments of circles, which can be given in magnitude (def. 7) or in position and

 magnitude (def. 8). A triangle can be given independently in position, magnitude,
 or form.

 3 The "givens" as predicative counterparts of relations

 The definitions allow us to highlight the following, fundamental points:

 (1) What is at issue in the definitions is introducing a predicate: the verbal form

 téyexai «is said» is in fact typical of the definitions of predicates. In the case
 when terms or relations are defined, «to be» (cf. def. 9 just read) or «to call»

 are used; the two verbs are equivalent, as is borne out by a comparison of El.
 VII.def.17-8. The only exceptions to this practice can be found in El. V.def.ll
 and X.def.l. Furthermore, the verb iTOpiaaoGai «provide» alludes to construc-
 tive issues (notice the middle form), whereas the modal connotation 8')vá|ie0oc
 «we can» underlines the existential import and to the role of the mathematician.

 Finally, the definitions must be referred to all forms of the verb «to give», even if

 in defs. 1-4 only nominal forms of the perfect tense appear (this tense is here to

 be taken in its aspectual value of «accomplished present»). In the course of the
 treatise, however, one finds quite frequently the aorist participle or finite verbal
 forms.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 123

 (2) The language of the givens is the formal "predicative" pendant of some rela-

 tions, which are of crucial importance both in geometry and in number theory

 and whose transformations make up the deductive fabric of any proof. The rela-

 tions at issue are equality (to which «given in magnitude» corresponds), identity

 («given» for ratios), similitude («given in form»), congruence, intended as coin-
 cidence by superposition («given in position»). The mechanism of formation
 of such predicates, which is explicit in the definitions, is the following. Each
 of them is obtained from the corresponding relation by "saturating" one of its
 entries: in symbols g(*) = 3a:R(a,*), where the existential connotation is, as
 we have seen, expressly formulated in the definition. For instance, to predicate
 «given in magnitude» of an angle A amounts to claiming «there is an angle
 that has been made equal to A», where the verb «to make» generically refers to
 the same galaxy of unspecified operations alluded to by the verb «to provide».
 A similar mechanism of partial saturation is at work in the notions of «expri-
 mability» (relation of commensurability saturated by a reference straight line,
 said «exprimable»; cf. El. X.def.l and 3) and of «right angle». The latter is a

 predicate, but this ultimate subspecies of angle is defined as the one such that its
 adjacent is equal to it (El. I.def.10), and the definition itself gives the mode of
 «providing» the two (right) angles involved. As a consequence, to assert that a
 right angle is given is a paradigmatic application of Data def. 1: for this reason,

 and not because it has a well-defined "value", a right angle is always given.

 (3) Ratios deserve a separate definition because they are «given» tout court and,

 most importantly, because two ratios are said to be «the same», not «equal» : the
 predicate «given» applied to them comes from the saturation of the relation of
 identity, not of equality. It is a mistake to say, as Proclus and Marinus do (iE,
 205.13-206.1 1, and EOO VI, 256.12), that two magnitudes are «given in ratio».

 (4) The definition of «given in form» has its model in El. Vl.def . 1 : «Similar rectilin-

 eal figures are such as have both their angles severally equal and the sides about the

 equal angles in proportion». This fact is prima facie surprising, since the redactor

 might well have included a direct reference to similitude, in line with what we read

 in def. 1: *«Given in form are said figures for which we can provide similars».

 The attested definition, which obviously results from combining El. Vl.def. 1 and

 def. 1 *, was probably suggested by concerns of deductive economy, since it does

 nothing but reducing the notion of «given in form» to the predicates «given in
 magnitude» and «given» for ratios. However, in the applications similitude can
 directly feature in the inferences, as we shall see in the next section.

 (5) The only relations one finds in the definitions of the Data are: «to be greater/less

 by a given» (def. 9-10), and «to be greater/less by a given to ... than in ratio»
 (def. 11-12). The latter can be written in symbols in the following way: A is
 by a given magnitude C greater than in ratio to B when (A - C):B is a given
 ratio. All of these are two-place relations, and the initial segment of the Data (up
 to prop. 21) proposes a systematic treatment of the "group properties" of these
 relations with respect to some basic operations. Here is a concise list. Stability
 of the predicate «given» under composition or subtraction of given magnitudes
 (3-4). Stability of the relation « to have a given ratio» under separando (5) and
 componendo (6). Transitivity of the relation «to have a given ratio» (8); its

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 124 F. Acerbi

 extension to equal multiplicities of magnitudes in a given ratio (9). If two mag-
 nitudes are added to the same, and the sums are given, either the magnitudes
 are equal or they differ by a given magnitude (12). Prop. 10-11 and 13-21:
 detailed analysis of the relation «magnitude by a given greater than in ratio to
 a magnitude» (=1). Its stability under componendo and separando (10-1 1); its
 connections with the relation «to have a given ratio» (=2): transitivity of their

 combination (13). If given magnitudes are added (14) or subtracted (15) to mag-

 nitudes in a given ratio, the resulting magnitudes are either in relation 1 or in

 relation 2; if, on the other hand, from one of them a magnitude is subtracted and

 to the other a different magnitude is added, then only relation 1 may hold (16). If

 two magnitudes are in relation 1 with respect to the same magnitude, they are to

 each other either in relation 1 or in relation 2(17). If one magnitude is in relation

 1 with respect to two magnitudes, the latter are to each other either in relation 1

 or in relation 2(18). Transitivity of relation 1 (19). If magnitudes in a given ratio

 be added (20) or subtracted (21) from two given magnitudes, the remainders are
 to each other either in relation 1 or in relation 2.

 It appears, thus, that picking out 1 as a significant mathematical relation is

 linked with the requirement of completing the "group properties" of the pivotal

 relation 2 under the two basic manipulations of componendo and separando.

 (6) The above abstract network can be set up only for magnitudes, to which issues of

 constructibility do not pertain. In order to treat geometrical objects one must intro-

 duce the concept of position. However, the correspondence relation/predicate set

 by def. 4 cannot be placed on the same logical level as the others. As we shall see,

 the move amounts to an attempt, necessarily unsuccessful even if it can be read

 as an adaptation of the relation of identity to a geometrical context, at "formaliz-

 ing" the constructions as logical objects. The difficulties resulting from this move

 immediately show up in the Data: they include the embarrassing presence of the

 adverb àeí «always» in def. 4, the fact that, in the applications, the redundant

 negation of the predicate «given in position» is introduced by means of the verb

 HcTcnUTTTeiv «to change position» (prop. 25-30, 38, and 42), the inconsistency

 of propositions such as 25-30, that simply amount to a rewriting of def. 4.

 (7) Of particular interest are defs. 13-15, that an anonymous scholiast ascribes to

 Apollonius {EOO VI, 264.2-3). They read {ibid, 4.15-20):

 KaxT|Y|iévT| écrciv f] olito ôeôo|xévo') Gr''ieíox> ein Géoei eùOeîccv
 àyo'iévr' e-òOetcc êv Ô€ÔO|iévíi ycovíoc.
 àvT|YM-évT| êoTiv i] ànò ôeôojiévoi) cruieíoi) irpòç Géaei evOeícc
 àyo|iévT| e')0eía è v ôeôojiévn Y^víoc.
 TTCcpà Oéaei êcrcív i' ôià ôeôo|iévo') Gr''ieíox> Géaei eòQeía napáXXr[-
 Xoq òcYO|xévT|.

 A straight line drawn in a given angle from a given point to a straight line

 in position is dropped.

 A straight line drawn in a given angle from a given point on a straight line

 in position is raised.
 A line drawn through a given point parallel to a straight line in position is

 parallel to a line in position.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 25

 The fact that the defined terms are not used in the Data (but for the verb Kaxayeiv

 «to drop» see Data 37 and 67 aliter - admittedly very dubious occurrences) does not

 entail that they are surely spurious, even if one should add that defs. 13 and 14 do not

 define (species of) «givens». A strong case of inauthenticity can be set up, on internal

 grounds, for def. 15: the need for such a definition can be felt only as a consequence
 of a misunderstanding of a peculiar expression occurring, for instance, in Data 28
 and 35-8. Yet, in the light of the considerations developed in the preceding points it

 is easy to see the rationale behind the introduction of the notion of Trapa Béaei: to

 offer a predicate identifying a class of parallel straight lines, insofar as they have the

 same "direction", as a counterpart to the relation of «parallelism». Of course, one must
 emend the received definition 15: the qualification «through a given point» must be

 eliminated as spurious, and probably arising from a contamination with the statements

 in Data 28 and 35-8 themselves. Otherwise, the definition identifies a single straight

 line, which is given in position (this is exactly what is established in Data 28). To show
 that a certain straight line is napa Béaei features among the «things sought» in the
 last proposition of book III of the Euclidean Porisms (Coll. VII.20). The expression
 is also attested in Apollonius, Con. II. 46 and 49 (bis), where it is always question

 of a straight line drawn napà Qéoei and through a given point, and at several places
 in Pappus, Coll. IV.51-2 (these are the transcriptions of two attempts at defining the

 quadratrix as the projection of a surface locus), VII.26 (one of the enunciations of the
 second book of Apollonius' Plane loci), 294, 312 (the latter is a lemma to Euclid's
 Loci on a surface). We see thus that the idiom Trapa Oéaei is an ancient one; the
 redactor of def. 15 probably regarded it as necessary to introduce this notion among
 the definitions in order to canonize a widespread linguistic practice.

 4 Is a «given» object particular or generic? The use of the article

 in identifying given objects

 One might well wonder whether a «given» object is (and was considered) particular or

 generic. In order to assess this problem of ontological commitment, and in the absence

 of any explicit hint on the side of the Greek mathematicians, one must turn to linguistic

 features. In our instance, everything hinges upon the presence or absence of an article

 in front of the predicate «given».

 Manifold examples of this phenomenon come from the enunciations of problems:

 the object that must be constructed has no article, but the «givens» always have one,
 both in the enunciation and in the setting out, as we read in El. I.I (EE 1, 7.2-6 - I use
 the definite article in the translation too):

 éTTiTnçôoBeíariç evQeíaç TTeTTepaojiévriç tpíycovov ioóiT^eupov aaxmjGa-
 a9ai.

 ěatco à ôoOeîoa euOeîa TTeTTepaap,evT| f] AB.
 ôeî ôf| etti Tflç AB eùOeiaç xpíycovov ioónhevpov owcfiaaoGai.

 On the given finite straight line to construct an equilateral triangle.

 Let it be the given finite straight line AB.

 Thus it is required to construct an equilateral triangle on the straight line AB.

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 One might argue that we are here facing a defect of generality, since the given straight

 line is after all a generic one (and for this reasons I used the indefinite article in the

 translations offered in the preceding sections). Why not give an indefinite linguistic

 expression to the designation of a generic object? The problem can be given two com-

 plementary solutions: one of them is purely grammatical (Federspiel 1995), the other
 is semantical and contextual.

 126 F. Acerbi

 The grammatical reason is that, when a substantive is qualified by a participle in

 attributive position further determined by a complement in prepositional form, the

 participle must be preceded by the article, as in -p eiç xòcç ttocp<xà,à,t|A,oi)ç còOeíocç

 €')0eí(x ejnTÍTTTODGa «a straight line falling on parallel straight lines» (enunciation
 of El. 1.29, EE I, 41.6). The predicate ôoGév, however, is never preceded by such a

 prepositional complement. Therefore, as the construct without the article is in princi-

 ple possible, the solution adopted as canonical is the consequence of a stylistic choice,

 consistently pursued in the whole ancient corpus.

 The second answer is complementary to the first. The propositions of the Elements

 where an object is qualified as «given» are invariably problems of construction, and

 what is given is the object starting from which the construction must be performed.

 The main verb of the enunciation of a problem is in the infinitive, with a jussive con-

 notation. The context is a dialectical one, where a questioner proposes a geometrical

 object to be acted upon and a respondent must perform the construction. Therefore,
 the object given in a problem is «present» to the active mathematician in a stronger
 sense than an object assigned in a theorem. To better assess this point, recall that
 Tipó$kr''ia «problem» is a déverbal from TrpoßccMeiv and has therefore the proper

 meaning of «what is proposed», or, better still, of «what is put forward»; see inprimis

 Aristotele, Top. A 4. An "etymological" usage of this verb in a mathematical context

 can be found in the prefatory letter to Archimedes Con. sph., AOO I, 246.6, 248.1 1,
 250.24, 254.21, the last three occurrences in the beautiful terminological short circuit

 TTpoßccAAexai/TTpoeßaAAexo xáôe Gecopfjaai «it is/was proposed to investigate this».
 In a mathematical text all of this is a fiction, but the linguistic canon still bears traces
 of it.

 It is a surprising fact prima facie that the article is always absent in the Data, as we

 see with prop. 78 (EOO VI, 150.2-8):

 éccvôoGèv etôoçiTpóç xi opGoyœviov Xóyov e%r' ôeôo|xévov, Kai pAcc -nhev-
 pcc iTpòç piav uteupccv À,óyov e%r' ôoGévxa, ôéôoxai xò òpooyobviov xcò
 eïÔ€i.

 ôoGèv yàp eîôoç xò AZB iTpóç xi opGoyœviov xò TA kóyov éxéxco ôeôo|xé-
 vov, koù eaxœ À,óyoç xfjç ZB irpòç xf|v EA ôoGeiç. téyco, öxi ôéôoxai xò
 TA xô eïôei.

 If a given form have a given ratio to some rectangle, and one side have a given
 ratio to one side, the rectangle is given in form.

 In fact, let a given form AZB have a given ratio to some rectangle FA, and let
 the ratio of ZB to E A be given: I say that F A is given in form.

 What has been said above makes it clear why the article is absent: this is a theorem and

 not a problem - no proposition of the Data can be a problem - and the status of the

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 27

 geometrical data is altogether different. What is at issue is transferring the predicate

 «given» from some objects to others; the fact that «given» qualifies geometric entities

 is incidental: the Data deal with mathematical objects qua given, not with mathemat-

 ical objects an incidental trait of which is to be given, as is the case with the «givens»

 of a problem. What happens in the Elements is exactly the opposite.

 An analysis of the occurrences of the predicate 8o9ev allows us to better assess the

 issue. Let us start with the differentiated use of the participles So0é v/òeòo'ie vov. The

 former is a passive aorist, the second a middle perfect with passive value; the former

 expresses the punctual aspect of an action and is more suited to feature in suppositions

 (namely, the specific parts of a proposition whose main verb is at the imperative: setting

 out, construction); the latter, which in the whole Euclidean corpus can be found only

 in the Data, has an aspectual value of «accomplished present», without any temporal
 connotation. This aspectual trait is prevalent over the resultative one; otherwise one

 should expect that the perfect be the preferred form in the inferences, both in the inter-

 mediate steps and in the conclusion, or whenever reference is made to a magnitude that

 was stated or proven given - yet the distinction has no value in the Data, where the

 two forms are used indifferently. We find only the aorist in the Elements, where ôoGév

 «given» is predicated exclusively within suppositions. As for the two occurrences of

 a present participle in the corollary to El. IV.5 and in the determination of VI.28 (EE I,

 159.15, and II, 90.6), the first is surely spurious, the second probably is, and at any rate

 should be corrected to a perfect participle. In the Data we find both aorist and perfect
 participle, in a ratio 1,128/509; this value is somewhat an exception, but it is easily

 explained by the different character of the propositions of the Data, and the present

 participle is absent. In Apollonius' Conica the ratio aorist participle/perfect participle

 is 1 80/1 1 , with two occurrences of present participle, one within a partial setting out in

 11.49 and one in the determination of 11.53 (AGE 1, 276.23 and 3 10.22). The only other

 occurrence in a determination (Con. 11.50) is a perfect participle. In the Archimedean

 corpus the ratio is 1 19/15 (of the latter, 14 items are found in Spin, the remaining one

 being in Fluit.), with two occurrences of present participle, one in the setting out of
 Sph. cyl. II. 1 and one in the determination of II.7 (AOO 1, 258.13 and 208.13). Even if

 the sample is very reduced, it can be that the present participle was felt suited for the
 determinations. If one is willing to propose emendations, then, one should correct the

 perfect participle in Con. 11.50 (the opposite proposal was made in Federspiel 2000,
 pp. 374-376). In Hero's Metrica one finds 339/0, with two occurrences of a present

 participle, one in the setting out of III. 13 and one in the determination closing 11.15
 (HOO III, 164.15 and 132.11).

 As for the presence or absence of the article, I have checked, in Apollonius and in
 Archimedes, the occurrences of ôoOév analogous to those in the Elements, namely,
 such as to mark assigned magnitudes at their first occurrence in an enunciation or in

 a setting out (of course, one must exclude the items in absolute genitives, where the
 article in front of the participle is necessarily absent).

 This is not a large sample. As both authors solve a number of problems by anal-
 ysis and synthesis, most of the occurrences of participial forms recorded above are

 within chains of givens, where the participle is invariably in a predicative position and

 hence without the article. In Apollonius the relevant occurrences are in the problems
 Con. 1.52-60, II.4, II.44-7, 49-51, 53 (I exclude the four occurrences in 1.8 and the

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 128 F. Acerbi

 two in 11.14, in expressions like «every given straight line», where the participle has
 the article). If we exclude also II.4, which is surely an Eutocean interpolation, the

 other problems present such linguistic peculiarities as to suggest that they are earlier

 redactions integrated by Apollonius in his treatise (Federspiel 2008). Within this small

 corpus one finds a usage at variance with the one in the Elements only in the enuncia-
 tions of 1.52 and 56 (AGE I, 158.21, 174.28): the expressions areêv ôoGeícTi ycovíoc
 and 6V ycovíoc ôo0eíar| «in a given angle», to be compared with the analogous è v xf|
 SoOeÍGTi ycovíoc in EL 1.42, 44-5. Other occurrences without the article in the same

 propositions are either further qualified by a determinative of indefiniteness xivoç or
 by a dative of respect Oéoei «in position», or have the perfect participle ôeôojiévov
 (ibid., 158.24, 25, 176.11). Therefore, the sample is not comparable to the one of the

 Elements, even if the last occurrence corresponds to the one at 174.28 (the latter in the

 enunciation, the former in the setting out). However, the two eccentric designations
 in Con. 1.52 and 56 occur within identical clauses having a strong formulaic conno-

 tation, involve the substantive ycovicc, that is notoriously recalcitrant at receiving the

 article (Federspiel 1995, pp. 290-293), and, most importantly, are at variance with the
 formulation of three identical clauses contained in propositions 1.54, 59-60, where
 one finds the article (AGE I, 166.19, setting out, 184.28-186.1, enunciation, 188.24,
 instantiated citation of 1.59). Therefore, in 1.52 and 56 one is led to suspect scribal

 slips responsible for the missing article. As for Archimedes, the situation is even worse

 than with Apollonius: only one occurrence without the article, in the prefatory epistle
 to Con. sph. (AOO I, 25S.13).

 An analysis of the sample of occurrences of ôeSo^ie vov leads to the same conclu-

 sions. Only two occurrences in Apollonius have the article (1.55 and the second one in

 11.50), but the absence in the others is forced either by the fact that the participle is in

 predicative position (11.47), or by their being inserted in citations of enunciations of
 the Data (11.46, 49, first and third one in 50, within citations of Data 28, 28, 29, and

 90, respectively), or by the fact that they are the subject of clauses in eKKeiaGco, whose

 character is necessarily indefinite (11.51 bis, in the former strengthened by a tic), or,

 finally, by its being qualified by the dative of respect Béoei «in position» (1.52), that

 imposes an indefinite form. The only residual occurrence without the article is in the

 setting out of 1.56, dictated by the parallel formulation of the enunciation. In Archi-

 medes the only occurrence without the article is the one at the beginning of the setting

 out of Spir. 8.

 I conclude that the variant with ôoOév without an article in presenting the givens

 of a problem, although permitted by Greek language, was not regarded as admissible.

 Granted, it is possible that the presence of the article is merely a stylistic trait, but it

 remains that this choice provides the objects given in a problem with a particularizing
 connotation that cannot be found elsewhere in the corpus.

 5 Alternative idioms. The testimony of Marinus of Neapolis

 The late fifth-century Neoplatonic commentator Marinus of Neapolis, a pupil of Pro-
 clus, wrote a short introduction to Euclid's Data in the form of Prolegomena (edited in

 EOO VI, 234-256). Marinus discusses in detail three notions to which, on the basis of

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 29

 definitions by synonymy, earlier authors tried to reduce the predicate «given», namely,

 TeTccyjiévov «ordered» (ascribed to Apollonius, in his General treatise and in the

 Neuseis), yvcbpifiov «known» (ascribed to the renowned gnomonist Diodorus), ptixov

 «exprimable» (to Ptolemy). Marinus added to them the notion of TTÓpijiov «provided»,
 whereas he introduced and quickly dismissed as simplistic and arising from a usage
 limited to the Elements the following definition: given is «what is established in a

 supposition from the proposer of a problem».

 Marinus first sets out definitions of the alternative notions and of their opposites,

 clarified by mathematical examples. A discussion follows of the mutual relationships
 among the extensions of the four notions. The six possible pairings are systemati-
 cally reviewed. The result is that the extensions of the four notions can be put in a
 decreasing order in this way: «known» > «provided» > «exprimable, while «ordered»
 can only be said to have a non-empty intersection with the others (the discussion in
 Michaux 1947, pp. 27-33, about an alleged logical mistake committed by Marinus,
 is wrong: the text is unambiguous and does not admit Michaux' interpretation). By
 using coextensivity with KaTaÀ/rprTÓv «cognitively accessible» as a criterion, Mari-
 nus claims that the best definition where only one predicate is involved is the one
 employing as a synonym TTÓpip,ov «provided». His choice is prima facie surprising,

 since this is without doubt the notion that is less easily grasped, but it is enough to

 recall that Data def. 1-2 contain in the definiens the verb TTopi£ea9oci «to provide»
 to realize that Marinus had no real alternatives.

 He then passes on to the definitions containing a conjunction of two of the basic

 notions. The tradition seems to exclude «exprimable», and Marinus discusses the resid-

 ual three pairings, adding also the combination «ordered and exprimable». By using

 the criterion that in a good definition the definiens is coextensive with the definiendum

 or obtainable from it by conversion, he finally establishes that the best definition of

 this kind is «known as well as provided» (which is of course redundant on the very
 grounds of his own analysis of the extensions of these notions).

 Only a few resonances with Marinus' analysis can be found, preserved in authors

 preceding him. Proclus' discussion of the notion of «given» is nothing but a list of

 four subspecies (in position, in ratio, in magnitude, in form), followed by uninteresting
 examples (iE, 205.13-206.1 1, repeated at 277.5-15). Marinus does not seem to draw

 anything from here, unless it be the erroneous idea that something can be given in

 ratio. In other contexts, we find conjunctions of the predicates introduced by Marinus

 in Proclus, ¿£48.12-13: «what is exprimable and knowable [yvcoaióv] in [geometry]
 can be determined by arithmetic ratios» and 204.9-10, where what is sought in a geo-

 metric proposition is further qualified as «what one has to know [yvcòvai] or provide
 [TTopiaaaGai]».

 In his description of the analytical corpus, Pappus introduces a link between

 TTopiGTÓv and ôoGév; because of the presence of the predicate «possible» and of
 the double modal connotation (TTopioxov instead of Tiópi|xov and «possible») this is a
 variant of the one-predicate definition adopted by Marinus (Coll. VII.2):

 In the case of the problematic kind, we assume what is proposed as something
 we know, then, proceeding through its consequences, as if true, to something
 established, if what is established is possible and can be provided [ôwcctòv Kai

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 130 F. Acerbi

 TTOptGTÓv] - what the mathematicians call "given" - what is proposed will also
 be possible [...].

 Pappus' formulation suggests that he is reporting a well-known definition. Two char-
 acterizations in the Prolegomena can be likened to Pappus' (Marinus ends his tract
 by referring to «Pappus' notes to the book [seil, the Data]» : EOO VI, 256.25). In the
 first of them, Marinus claims that the term «provided» «was also used by Euclid when

 he described all species of what is given». Since Pappus and Marinus employ differ-
 ent terms (that is, «provided» and «<what> can be provided»), and Marinus makes

 every effort to differentiate them, it is unlikely that they refer to the same description.

 It is more likely that what Pappus said corresponds to a second definition reported
 by Marinus and ascribed to unknown authorities: «it is given what we can provide

 [iTopiaaaGai ôwccjieGa] thanks to what we have set out in the suppositions and in
 the principles». In the latter case, then, an Euclidean authorship must be excluded,
 and in fact, the simplest interpretation is that the first characterization by Marinus
 actually refers to defs. 1-2 of the Data, where the verb iropif eo9at «to provide»,
 further qualified by a modal operator, features in the definiens. As a consequence,
 neither Marinus' second characterization nor Pappus' could be taken as a rewriting of
 the first two definitions of the Data in the form of an abstract definition of «given»

 (which, we must recall, does not appear in the Data): they would thus constitute the

 only trace of such a direct definition.

 I shall now discuss in detail the textual evidence related to the use of the four notions

 introduced by Marinus as synonyms of «given». A difficulty lies in the fact that three of

 the terms he introduces may or may not be read as carrying a modal shade: for instance,

 7TÓpi|xov can mean either «provided» or «<what> can be provided». I have chosen
 the first translation since Marinus himself makes a difference between TTÓpi^iov and

 TTOpiGTÓv, the latter carrying only the modal meaning. I have accordingly translated
 yvœpi^ov as «known» and not as «knowable». As for ptycov «exprimable», I have

 decided not to depart from a long-standing tradition of translation of this term, typical

 of the Euclidean theory of the irrationals.

 (1) texayixévov «ordered»
 This is the term offering the richest historical record.

 (/) The verb ènixácceiv is not frequently found in the geometrical domain: it

 appears in the canonical clause y^Y0Vòç cxv eïr| tò ê-rmccxOév «what was assigned
 would have come to be», closing a branch of a division of a problem into cases and
 whose first occurrence in the Elements is in 11.14 (the others are in IV. 1, VI.28, VII.31

 (bis), 32, XI. 1 1). Only one occurrence in a similar clause is found in Archimedes, Sph.

 cyl. 1.5; we find, on the other hand, a few references to the proposed problem as an

 éTTÍxccYna «assignment in Sph. cyl. 1.2 (bis), 3, 4, Con. sph. preface. This substantive
 designates in Pappus the several «assignments» of a complex problem; it features
 mainly in book VII of the Collectio (34 occurrences). Both this verb and the basic
 form xáaceiv are overwhelmingly abundant in Diophantus' Arithmetica, always in

 the sense of «setting», «giving» a number, without any shade of ordering; the expres-
 sion is sometimes resumed in the form «the given number». An analogous meaning
 can be recorded in El. VI.9 (bis), where one has to subtract from a given straight line

 an «assigned» part of it, and in VIII.2 (ter), where it is required to «find minimal

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 3 1

 numbers in continuous proportion, as many as one assigns»; see also Pappus, Coll.

 III.27 (ter), 66 (bis), 67, 72 (bis), 74, IV.74 (an expression analogous to the one in El.

 VIII.2, and the same holds for the one in III.67), VIII.25, 26. In Pappus it is frequently

 a ratio that is «assigned». Forms of xaaaeiv can be found in two alternative proofs of
 El. X (n. 19 and 22). In Apollonius' Conica, táaoeiv is employed in the first person
 to «assign» two straight lines in position (in 11.44), a perpendicular (46) or a point as
 given (47): AGE I, 264.26-7, 266.23^, 270.1.

 (ii) Let us be given two sequences of three terms: A, B, F and A, E, Z, and let

 the following proportions hold: A:B::E:Z and B:F::A:E. In this case (El. V.def.18)
 the second proportion is said to be Tetapay|xévT| «perturbed» (cf. El. V.def.18, 21
 (ter), 23 (quater) VII.8 (bis)). One might expect that in the complementary state of
 affairs, namely, the one described by the ex equali theorems V.20 and 22 and in which

 A:B:: A:E and B:F::E:Z hold, the proportion be said «ordered», and in fact this quali-

 fication is found in a definition alternative to V.def.17 preserved by some manuscripts
 (EE II, 3.17 in app.). That this was the original usage is attested by the occurrences in
 Archimedes, where the «perturbed disposition» is met in expressions like àvo^ioiœç
 TETccyiiÉvcûv Tcov Xóycov «once the ratios are ordered in dissimilar ways» and the
 terms in non-perturbed dispositions of sequences with indefinite multiplicities are
 said ó|ioicoc Texay^éva «ordered in similar ways» (AOO 1, 374.18,414.2,11, 194.22,

 196.15, 198.5; I, p. 260.28 and II, p. 434.6, respectively). On the other hand, the clauses

 by which the «perturbed» dispositions are expressly qualified as such in the Archime-

 dean texts look very much like later glosses inserted in the text exactly with the aim to
 make the link with the Euclidean jargon explicit (AOO I, 194.10, II, 194.22, 196.15,
 198.5). In Archimedes, however, xetayiievov was very likely not a technical term,

 insofar as its meaning is near to the current one. Once «perturbed», whose meaning is

 non-transparent and hence strictly technical, came to be introduced, Teletype vov as a

 designation of the non-perturbed disposition fell out of usage, the latter being simply

 identified by the absence of further qualifications. The presence of the expression in
 Eutocius' commentary to Archimedes' Aequil. (AOO III, 300.18 and 308.7) can easily
 be explained by adherence to the style of the main text.

 (in) A passage in Proclus (iE, 219.18-221.6) clarifies the notion of «ordered» as

 applied to problems, and shows at the same time that the term does not relate to issues

 of ordering only, as in the preceding example, but also of uniqueness as in Marinus'
 exposition. Commenting on El. 1. 1 , Proclus expounded some constructions of an isos-

 celes and a scalene triangle. The interest of such constructions, he points out, lies
 in the fact that they exemplify a general classification of problems, that he ascribes
 to Amphinomous, a contemporary of Speusippus and Menaechmus: according to the
 number of the essentially different constructions solving it, a problem can be ordered,
 intermediate, or unordered.

 (iv) Apollonius wrote a whole treatise on cxtaKxa «unordered» irrationals. The

 meaning to be given to the expression, very much as in the preceding point and as
 Proclus again suggests, is «not univocally determined by the construction». It is not
 clear whether «ordered» as applied to the irrationals studied in the Elements is an

 original denomination; maybe it was introduced by Apollonius.

 (v) In the theory of conic sections the adverb xeiay^évcoç «ordinatewise» is intro-
 duced to designate, within a formulaic expression that is quite complex and often

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 132 F. Acerbi

 formulated in severely abridged forms, what is still called the «ordinates» of a conic.

 Let us read the definition placed at the very beginning of Apollonius' Conica, that as

 a matter of fact refers to any line (AGE I, 6.23-29):

 Tráanç kccuttMtiç ypap,|ifjç, íyciç êaxiv êv èvi êmiréSa), 8iá|iexpov 'iev
 kccAxò e-òGeíav, íyciç f|Y|iévr| caro xfjç kcc^ttMtic ypccmiflc ttcccocç tòcç
 àyo^évaç êv xfj ypccmifì e')0eíaç evQeía xivi napaXXi'XoxK; ôí%a ôuxipeí,
 Kop')<()f|v 5è xfjç ypct|i.nfiç rò TTepaç xf|ç e')0eíaç xò iTpòç xfl ypa|i|j/n,
 xexayuevax; Sè ¿tu xf]v Siáuexpov Kaxflyöai émaxTiv xcov TrapaÀ,A,T|À,(ov.

 Of any curved line which is in one plane, I call that straight line the diam-
 eter which, drawn from the curved line, bisects all straight lines drawn in

 this line parallel to some straight line, and I call the extreme of that straight
 line on the line the vertex of the line, and I say that each of the parallels
 is drawn ordinatewise to the diameter.

 The underlined expression assumes in the course of the Conica a variety of verbal and

 nominal forms, such as f] xexccyiiévcoç Kccxay|xévr| «the <straight line> drawn down

 ordinatewise». Notice that it is false that a line having the property of the diameter

 exists for every line, and Apollonius must show that every conic section has at least
 one diameter (Con. 1.7), and actually infinitely many (1.46 and 11.44), whereas the

 ordinates relative to a diameter are parallel to the tangent passing through the vertex

 parallel to that diameter (1.17 and 32). Even if it is usually held that the origin of the

 expression, in fact quite obscure (it is not clear whether the adverb xexayp,évcoç was

 introduced in the theory of conic sections by Apollonius or before him and whether
 the three Archimedean occurrences 2XAOO II, 206.10, 436.2, 456.8, are spurious or

 not), is linked with the ordering of the «ordinates», the focal meaning is in fact «univ-

 ocally determined» (insofar as the direction of all ordinates is referred to one and the

 same diameter). In order to formulate this, admittedly quite complex, state of affairs
 a new term was needed, since the Euclidean species of «given» were not adequate: a

 possibility was to resort to a participial form of ôiôóvai qualified by a dative of respect
 such as xcc^ei «in order», but Apollonius or others choose the adverb xexayjiévcoç,

 probably because, if the other choice had been made, the formulation of the nominal
 designations of the ordinates would have contained a participle qualifying another
 participle, a construction that is not idiomatic in Greek.

 (ví) Other two testimonies before Apollonius confirm that the focal meaning of

 xexccynévoç in the mathematical domain was «univocally determined». The first one
 is contained in the peripatetic tract De lineis insecabilibus, 968b 18:

 àXXá 'ii'' ei nexpriefiaexai |iéxpco xivi xExavuévTi Kai copiaré vt| ypa^xfi
 But, in truth, if a determined and well-defined line will be measured by some

 measure

 The second one is in Archimedes, who repeatedly employed, at the beginning of Spin,
 the expression xòv xa%0évxa À,óyov ě%eiv «to have the assigned ratio» (AOO II,
 4. 14. 17.26, 20.20, 22. 19, 24. 16, 26.5). The first three occurrences, placed in the prefa-

 tory letter, repeat the enunciations of prop. 3-4, 7 of Sph. cyl II, changing ôoGévxoc (or
 xòv ccòxòv xco ôoQé vxi) in xccxOé vxcc. The other four occurrences can be found in the

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 1 33

 enunciations of prop. 6-9, within 4 identical clauses; the same ratio, in immediately

 subsequent clauses, is qualified as SoOeíç.

 (2) yvœpi|iov «known»
 In the Euclidean corpus, the term is attested only in the Óptica redaction A, in the
 peculiar problems 18-21. Marinus mentions Diodorus, the supporter of the synon-
 ymy of this predicate with «given», and asserts that he exemplified his position by

 references to rays and angles, objects that are typical of the optical domain. But there
 is more to the issue. This Diodorus must be identified with the renowned gnomo-

 nist, the author of an Analemma on which Pappus wrote a commentary {Coll IV.40).
 An Analemma is a treatise describing a method to determine univocally the angu-
 lar coordinates of a celestial object, for instance the sun, once the latitude of the
 observer and the hour are known. This was effected by a series of plane constructions

 performed on three planes defined with respect to three independent directions; the
 planes were then rotated in such a way that all the arcs on the celestial sphere get
 projected, for a given configuration of hour and latitude, on one and the same plane.

 On this plane, trigonometrical methods were then used to calculate the arcs (cf. Neuge-
 bauer 1975, pp. 848-856). The methods finds its origin in gnomonics, the theory of
 sundials.

 Of ancient Analemmas, we can read only Ptolemy's, which was transmitted in a
 palimpsest. An application of the method can be found in Hero, Dioptra 35, to deter-

 mine the distance between two cities along a great circle, once the parameters of a lunar
 eclipse observed in both places are known (add to these documents a short descrip-
 tion in Vitruvius, Arch. IX.7). Ptolemy' Analemma contains {POO II, 203-210) some

 propositions in analytical format: these consist of chains of givens, the omitted syn-

 theses being the determination of the numerical values of the sought-for magnitudes;

 the proof scheme is the same as the one we shall see at work in the metrological

 tradition (Sect. 7). Furthermore, an analemma is a method of projection: it deals pri-
 marily with rays and angles. Therefore, I submit that Diodorus might have proposed
 in his Analemma a definition of «given» as «what is known [...], even if it were
 not exprimable» (that is, not assignable in terms of numerical ratios); maybe he also
 used yvá)pi|iov in place of ôeÔo|iévov within analyses analogous to those proposed
 by Ptolemy. The latter consistently employed ôeôojiévov in his treatise (the presence
 of «notum» in Ptolemy' Planispherium, POO II, 227-59, is not significant since the
 text has been transmitted only as a Latin translation from Arabic), but it is not said that

 Ptolemy should have adhered to the linguistic idiosyncracies of his predecessors. On
 the contrary, a corroboration of my hypothesis about the Diodorean use on «known»
 in place of «given» comes from Opt. 18 A:

 to ôoGèv ft'|/oç yvœvai, ttt|À,íkov êcxív, íiXíoi) <t>aívovcoç.
 eoTco tò ôoBèv ï>'|/oç tò AB, Kai ôéov amò yvcòvai, ttt|Xíkov êatív. êatco
 |xèv ò'i'ia tò A, fiXío-o ôè ócktiç f] rA GX>'i$áX'ox>Ga x(ò Trépan tou AB
 lieyéOo-üc Kai ôif|x0co né%pi tou a owiaxoç. ěaxco ôè OKià f] AB xov AB,
 Kai KeíaBco exepóv ti |iéyeeoç tò eZ au^ßccMov ttì ccktîvi |if| ttccvtcoç
 KaTauyaCójievov x)tt' ainfiç KaTÔc tò Z iré paç.

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 134 F. Acerbi

 fÍpUOGTOci oí v eiç to ABA Tpíycovov ë Te pó v ti Tpiyœvov tò eZa. ěcmv

 apa, COÇ fj AE ITpÒÇ TTJV ZE, OÍ>TG)Ç fi AB TTpOÇ TTJV BA. CCÀÀ' Ó XflÇ AE ITpÒÇ
 TTiv EZ À,óyoç eau Yvœpiuoç Kai ó Tfjç AB âpa Tipòç ttjv BA Xóyoç eau
 Yvœpiuoç Yvœpiuov Se tò aB. yvcopiuov apa Kai tò AB.
 To know the value of a given height, if the sun appears.

 Let it be a given height AB, and let it be required to know its value. Let it be an

 eye A, a sun ray FA falling together with the extreme of magnitude AB, and let
 <the ray> be drawn across as far as the eye A. Let AB be a shadow of AB, and
 let some other magnitude EZ be placed falling together with the ray, not totally

 enlightened by it, at extreme Z.

 Therefore, on triangle ABA some other triangle EZA is fitted. Therefore, it is as
 AE to ZE, so AB to BA. But the ratio of AE to EZ is known: Therefore the ratio
 of AB to BA is also known. And AB is known. Therefore AB is also known.

 It is clear that this proposition can be considered a very elementary theorem in gno-
 monics. Its seemingly bizarre format amounts in fact to an analysis, whose aim is
 validating a procedure producing the tttíAakóttiç «value» of the shadow (cf. Sect. 7).

 This proof is thus a relic attesting for an approach typical of the marginal research

 domain of gnomonics.

 The last relevant occurrence of yvœpi^ov as a synonym of «given» is in Archime-

 des, Aequil II. 1-8, whose aim is to determine, by means of the method of exhaustion,

 the center of gravity of a parabola. Let us read the passage, at the beginning oí Aequil
 II.2, where the class of approximating figures is defined (AOO II, 168.2-9):

 et Ka eiç T^iâ|xa Trepiexop,evov otò e')6eíaç Kai òpGoycovun) kíovoi)
 TO|iâç Tpíycovov eyYpa<()ti tòcv avxàv ßaaiv e%ov tcò T^iá^iaTi koi í>'j/oç
 icov, Kat TTciÀiv eiç Tà KaTaXeiTió^ieva T|iájiaTa Tpíycova êyYpa<|)écovTi
 tccç amàç ßaaiac ě%ovTa toîç T^a^iáTeaaiv Kai fiyoç ïaov, Kai àei eiç
 toc KaTaXeiTTÓ^eva Tjiá|iaTa Tpíycova èYYpoc(t>é(DVTi tòv a')TÒv TpóiTov, tò
 ye volevo v a%%ia év tcò T^iá|iaTi Yvœpijxcoç eYYpá(|)eaoai 'kjeyecQco.
 If in a segment contained by a straight line and a section of a right-angled cone

 be inscribed a triangle having the same base as the segment and equal height, and

 again, in the segments that are left out, triangles be inscribed having the same
 bases as the segments and equal height, and in succession triangles be inscribed

 in the same way in the segments that are left out, let the resulting figure be said

 to be inscribed in the segment in a known way.

 Using only one term, the adverb yvcopí^icoc, Archimedes defines the generic object of
 a class of figures, that can be obtained recursively from the first one: a triangle that,
 of course, is itself inscribed yvcopíixcoç. The choice of the word is in line with what

 we have seen so far, since the procedure determines univocally, for a given segment,

 each figure that is inscribed yv(opi|x©c. The fact that the number of vertices is arbi-

 trary is crucial, since exactly this is required by the method of exhaustion: insofar as

 the figure inscribed yvœpiiicoç is arbitrary within a well-defined class, it is univocally
 determined.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 1 35

 (3) TTÓpijiov «provided»

 The term does not appear in the Euclidean corpus, but it is apparently connected with

 the meaning of «porism» alluded to in the title of the lost Euclidean treatise of the Po-

 risms. It seems to refer to the notion of existence, in a wider sense that does not require

 the construction of the «provided» object: in the Porisms, in fact, it is shown that some

 element of a geometric configuration is given, but its construction is not performed
 (see Sect. 6 below). In Apollonius, Con. 1.49, 50 (bis), 51 (bis) (AGEl, 146.12, 150.2

 and 6, 154.23 and 26), the «provided» object is a straight line determined as a fourth

 proportional: it is provided already in the enunciation but it is neither constructed nor

 features among the givens of the problems. Of some interest is also the use made by

 Hero, in Dioptra 13-14 and 25-30, of forms of the verb iropi^eiv in the sense of «to
 calculate», «to univocally determine» (about 20 occurrences at H 00 III, 230-6 and

 268-80). They are often supplemented with a modal connotation making it certain the

 synonymy with «given», via the intermediation of the definientes of Data def. 1-2.

 (4) pTjTÓv «exprimable»
 This is a technical term of the theory of irrationals, and it is ubiquitous in book
 X of the Elements. The line assigned as a reference is said to be the «exprimable
 », as are said also all straight lines commensurable with it, either in length or in
 power only. Also a domain commensurable with the square on the reference line is
 said to be exprimable. Once the exprimable is fixed, the complementary concept is
 õ&oyoç «irrational». Marinus' allusion to «to find [. . .] three exprimable straight lines
 commensurable in power only» sets the intended meaning in line with the one in
 the Elements, whereas his reference to Ptolemy seems to entail a conception of ex-

 primability of a metrological kind, taking into account only lines commensurable in
 length as exprimable. This is confirmed by a subsequent discussion, where Marinus
 claims that «exprimable by itself is what we know by means of some number with

 respect to the measure of position, a palm, as it were, or a finger» and that the ratio

 of the diameter of a square to its side is not exprimable» (in the Euclidean theory
 it is so).

 The same conception is behind the definitions of «exprimable» found in the pseudo-

 Heronian Definitiones 136.34-5 and in a number of scholia to El. X (for instance n.
 X.94 and 141, EE V,2, 127.13-25 and 145.4-8). In Definitiones 136.35 one finds
 also the adjective yvépijioc, whose connection with calculatory procedures we have

 just seen. Also in this characterization «known» works as a name of genre, very
 much like in the definition of «given» preferred by Marinus (HOO IV, 140.7-17;
 the opening definition is identical with the one in scholium n. X.9, EE V,2,
 93.17-18):

 They define a exprimable <line> also thus: exprimable is the one which is known

 [yvcopijiri] by numbers. This is not a definition of exprimable, but an incidental

 character of it. For when, for the sake of the argument, exprimables be fixed
 among those <resulting> from the one-foot exprimable, we know of each of
 them how many palms or fingers it is; for this reason, from incidental characters

 we say that an exprimable is known by numbers. «Exprimable» differs from
 «given» insofar as the exprimable is altogether given, whereas a given is not

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 necessarily exprimable. The exprimable is known in value and quantity, the given

 in value and magnitude only: and in fact, there are given irrational <lines>.

 136 F. Acerbi

 A scholium to the Data establishes a relation between the extensions of the notions

 of «given» and «exprimable» in the same way as Marinus and Def. 136.35 do, but
 ascribes the idea to Pappus (EOO VI, 262.1-7). In Pappus' commentary to El. X
 nothing about this issue can be found.

 Marinus' description presents a variety of idioms replacing the one of the «givens»,
 and this seems to reflect to some extent an uneasiness with the several meanings of
 «given» offered by the mathematical practice. When we pass from lexical issues to
 the actual use of the «givens», the situation gets even more complicated, as we shall

 see in the remaining sections.

 6 Proving by the «givens». Analysis and synthesis

 Until now, we have discussed the definitions of the several species of «givens». But

 how is a proof framed that employs the language of the givens? The purest form of
 application of the idiom as a deductive tool is found, most naturally, in the Data: let

 us read only in translation the proof of prop. 40 (EOO VI, 70.4-23), corresponding to

 the enunciation transcribed in the Sect. 2; references to propositions or to definitions
 of the Data themselves, or of the Elements, are added in brackets.

 For, let each of the angles of triangle ABr be given in magnitude: I say that

 triangle AB F is given in form.
 For, let a straight line AE be set out given in position and magnitude, and on
 AE at the points on it AE let a rectilineal angle EAZ be constructed equal to
 angle FBA (El. L23), and AEZ equal to AFB (El 1.23): therefore BAF as a
 remainder is equal to AZE as a remainder (El. 1.32).
 And each of the <angles> at A B F is given; therefore each of those at A E Z is

 also given (def. 1).
 Since then, on a straight line given in position AE and at a given point on it
 A a straight line AZ is drawn making a given angle, the one at A, therefore
 AZ is in position (29). Exactly for the same reason also EZ is in position (29):
 therefore point Z is given (25). And each of AE is also given (27): therefore
 each of AZ AE EZ is given in position and magnitude (26): therefore triangle

 AZE is given in form (39). And it is similar to triangle AB F (El. VIA): therefore

 triangle ABF is also given in form (def. 1 and 3y El. Vl.defl).

 Two remarks impose themselves.

 (a) The main steps of the proof are the following: a chance straight line is «set out»

 and two angles are constructed on it that are equal to those of the triangle that is given

 in magnitude. This amounts to providing an "alias" of the triangle; it is then shown
 that some of the elements of the "alias" are given: its angles first, then two sides in

 position, and finally the intersection of these sides and the remaining two extremes
 of them. Since their extremes are given, the sides themselves are also given in mag-

 nitude. As a consequence, the form of the "alias" triangle is given, and therefore, by

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 37

 similitude and def. 3, also the form of the original triangle given in magnitude is given

 (cf. remark 4 of Sect. 3). The proof may seem uselessly complicated and roundabout,

 but its form is in fact the only possible one once the fundamental definitions Data 1-3
 are formulated in the way they are (props. 25, 27, 29 applied in the text are, as we

 have seen, nothing but a rewriting of def. 4). The creation of the "alias" figure is the

 analytic counterpart of the "actualization" of the assigned magnitudes by means of

 the production of duplicates one finds in synthetic proofs such as the one of El. 1.22:

 the three straight lines with which to construct a triangle are first set out as segments

 aí A B F, then "reproduced in duplicate" as the sides of the triangle.

 In EL 1.22 as well as in Data 40, in order to construct the "alias", one must set out

 an object that is fixed by stipulation and is free of constraints induced by the assigned

 objects (in EL 1.22 a base straight line from which to "cut off' two of the three sides

 of the triangle, in Data 40 the straight line f[ AE): the verb èidceiaGcu is exactly what

 is needed to fill this function. In the analyses, the same function is assumed by the

 initializing verbal form y^yovéx© (cf. remarks 1 and 4 infra).

 (b) The inferences proving that an object is given are expressed in the language
 of the givens. It is not permitted to qualify an object as «given » simply starting

 from assigned entities, performing constructions on them or setting up demonstrative

 steps in a synthetic language, and finally attaching the label «given» to the object so

 obtained. As a consequence, it is of primary importance to identify and collect a series
 of deductive rules operating on «givens» and producing «givens» as output: the Data

 do exactly that, while leaving undecided what the term «given» must be taken to mean.

 This is the reason why such a meaning is never defined: what is really useful is to set

 out, in the form of definitions, zero-level rules of inference allowing to transfer the

 predicate «given» from an object to another by equality or identity. This is the primary

 function of Data def. 1-2; they are so cleverly framed that the first propositions of the

 Data do not have the axiomatic character that, for instance, El. 1.4 has. Propositions

 with this drawback can be found only from prop. 25, where «given in position» is first
 introduced.

 The universe of the Data is self-referential; the ones of the «porisms» and of the

 locus theorems have a clear geometrical rooting. The similarities between the enunci-

 ations of such kinds of propositions, both requiring to show that some object or some

 configuration is given, point to deep interrelationships, that are worth explaining in
 detail.

 Euclid's Porisms is lost and we can get an idea of its contents only from the informa-
 tion provided by Pappus: a broad outline of the treatise (Coll. VII. 13-20) and 38 lem-

 mas that in the Porisms were apparently taken for granted (VII. 193-232). A «porism »

 is a proposition in which it is required to show that some elements of an assigned geo-
 metrical configuration are given. Such "elements" can be ratios, domains contained

 by straight lines, lines insofar as geometric loci. The configuration is assigned in the
 broad sense that some of its elements are given, whereas others are subjected to con-

 straints expressed in terms of the given elements. In short, a porism is a geometrical

 configuration with degrees of freedom, of which one must identify some invariants. As

 in a theorem of the Data, a proposition of the Porisms shows that some object is given.

 Therefore, the propositions of the Data are a subclass of those of the Porisms (namely,

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 138 F. Acerbi

 the ones in which all constraints are rigid), and we must expect that the structure of a

 proof of a porism and of a proposition of the Data be similar.

 The first who understood this fact among Western scholars was Newton (Whiteside

 1967-81 VII, p. 262), who correctly identified the Porisms as the key to understand

 ancient analysis. In the Data as well as in the Porisms, ambiguities might arise from

 the fact that an object can be «given» either because it is assigned or because it must

 be proven given. For instance, let us take again the enunciation of the porism read in
 Sect. 2:

 If straight lines from two given points be inflected on a line given in position, and

 one cuts off <a segment> from a straight line given in position up to a given point

 on it, the other too will cut off from another <line given in position a segment>

 having a given ratio <to the first>.

 It is not clear whether the second segment, which is part of a straight line and has an

 extreme in a point that must undisputably be proven to be given, has to have with the

 first segment an assigned ratio, or it is enough to show that, once the straight line and

 the point are proven given, the ratio is uniquely determined for all segments. Clearly,

 the former interpretation, in which more restrictive conditions are imposed, is more

 general than the latter, and in fact implies it. Simson first proposed (1723) a recon-

 struction of the porism reported by Pappus in line with the second interpretation, but

 then (1776, a work published post mortem) he realized that the first one could work

 as well; the straight lines corresponding to different ratios are all parallel.

 In a locus theorem the assigned objects are all given. In a porism some objects are

 allowed to undergo changes, within a class identified by well-defined constraints. In

 the case of our porism, two straight lines may move, even if they must intersect on a

 line given in position and each of them must pivot around an assigned point. There-

 fore, the idea that «a porism is what is lacking of a supposition in order to be a local
 theorem» (this characterization is reported with disapproval by Pappus, Coll. VII. 14,

 because it was formulated «on the basis of an incidental property» ) very likely refers

 to the "incomplete" assignments relating to some of the objects present in the config-

 uration of a porism: they are only constrained, not given. We must conclude that also
 the locus theorems are a subspecies of porisms, as Pappus already recognized: «the
 form of this class of porisms is the loci, and these abound in the analytical corpus»
 (ibid.).

 The story does not end here. The language of the givens is applied also in prop-
 ositions or contexts that do not require to show that some object or configuration

 is given. This works on two levels. The first can be found, in its most celebrated
 form, in the proof format of analysis and synthesis. The second is linked with the
 first but has a wider structural import: the idiom provides an unified framework able

 to formalize deductions operating on both relations and constructions. We shall dis-
 cuss the first function presently; the following sections will deal specifically with the
 second.

 Let us read, in translation only, a problem solved by analysis and synthesis:
 Apollonius, Con. 11.50 (AGE I, 286.26-288.23). The only notion of the theory of
 conic sections needed to follow this proof is the so-called "property of the subtan-

 gent" to a parabola, that can be formulated in this way. From a point C of a parabola

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 39

 of vertex A drop the perpendicular to the axis and draw the tangent to the parabola;

 both of them fall on the axis of the parabola, say in points B and Z), respectively. The

 segment BD of the axis between the two points of intersection is called subtangent.

 The "property of the subtangent" asserts that BD is bisected by the vertex A of the

 parabola (Con. 1.35): DA =AB. The system of bold, italics and underlining with which
 I have presented the text gives prominence to the correspondences between steps of

 the analysis and of the synthesis.

 To draw a <straight line> tangent to a given section of a cone, which will make

 on the axis, on the same side as the section, an angle equal to a given acute angle.

 Let it be first as a section of a cone a parabola, whose axis is AB: then it is

 required to draw a <straight line> tangent to the section, which will make on the
 axis AB, on the same side as the section, an angle equal to a given acute angle.

 Let it have come to be, and let it be TA: therefore, angle BAP is given. Let a
 <straight line > BV be drawn perpendicular: then the angle at B is also given.
 Therefore the ratio of AB to BF is given. And the ratio ofBA to BA is given:
 therefore the ratio of AB to BF is also given. And the angle at B is given: ther-

 efore BAF is also given. And it is on a <straight line> BA <given> in position
 and at a given point A: therefore FA is in position. And also the section is in
 position: therefore F is given. And f X is tangent: therefore F A is in position.

 Then the problem will be synthesized thus. Let it be first as a section of a cone a
 parabola, whose axis is AB and the given acute angle EZH, and let a point E be
 taken on EZ, and let a <straight lino EH be drawn perpendicular, and let ZH

 be bisected by (9, and let 0E be joined, andlet equa] [to angle :H0E be construc-
 ted ^.^.^S1.?.^ BAF, and let a <straight lino BF be drawn perpendicular,
 and let equal to BA be placed a <straight line> A A, and let F A be joined.
 Therefore F A is tangent to the section.

 I say now that FAB is equal to EZH.

 For, since it is as ZH to HQ, so AB to BA, and it is also as 0H to HE, so AB

 to BF, therefore, ex aequali, as ZH to HE, so AB to BF. And the angles at H,
 B are right: therefore angle Z is equal to angle A.

 The last statement of the "chain of givens" with which the analysis ends claims that the

 predicate «given in position» applies to the same object that at the very beginning was

 supposed (imperative ye yo veteo) to feature in the final configuration of the problem;

 we might say that this object is "potentially constructible", and to have established its
 "existence and uniqueness". However, the analysis has a disturbing feature: it opens
 and closes by asserting two different properties of the same object. As a consequence,

 the synthesis cannot simply consist in an inversion of the analysis. Furthermore, the
 connection between a chain of givens and a sequence of constructions solving the
 problem is a priori ineffable. What is certain is that the Data does not tell us how to
 doit.

 Data def.l is crucial in making the analytical engine start to work: the angle f]
 vrrò BAF is given exactly because, in the final configuration supposed as realized, it
 is equal to another angle (a given one, but this fact is totally irrelevant), not because

 the final configuration is «given», which is exactly what the analysis must prove. It is

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 140 F. Acerbi

 crucial, then, that pairs of "identical" objects are displayed during the proof: this is the

 reason way the enunciation requires that the tangent «make on the axis an angle equal
 to a given acute angle» and not «make on the axis a given acute angle». The subse-

 quent inferences, constituting the chain of givens, will be transformed and rearranged

 to make up the synthesis. The most notable features are the following:

 (1) The verbal form that initializes the analysis, yeyoveTCO «let it have come to be»,

 is an invariant stylistic trait with a strong mathematical meaning. It is a perfect

 tense with state value that does not assume that the problem is solved, but only

 that the final configuration has come to be realized. The problem is in fact solved

 by performing the construction, not by "displaying" the final configuration. (It is

 important to stress that to assume the realization of the final configuration does

 not characterize the proofs by analysis and synthesis, as is commonly held: no

 locus theorem could begin in this way.)

 (2) Some of the constructions of the synthesis correspond in the analysis to steps

 that are included in deductive chains formulated in the language of the givens.
 The direction of the deductive progression and the ordering of the sequence
 of constructions is the same. (Broken underlining and sentences in italics.)

 (3) The truly deductive steps of the synthesis can be found also in the analysis, in

 (approximately) inverted order and again expressed in the idiom of the givens.
 (Unbroken underlining.)

 (4) The fictitious object featuring in Data def. 1-4 in order to "saturate" a relation

 is actualized in the synthesis as a «given» of the problem or as an immediate
 evolution of it (for instance, triangle tò EZ0H). In its turn, the latter will be

 duplicated in the proof as triangle tò TA AB, in order to «provide» the sought-

 for object. In a similar way, logical or geometrical objects featuring only once in

 the analysis can be found in duplicate in the synthesis. (In bold the construction

 of the perpendicular, f[ BF or i' EH/BF, in italics the doubling of the property of

 the subtangent, transformed in two constructions.)

 (5) Furthermore, what in the analysis is qualified as «given», features in the syn-

 thesis within equalities or identities of ratios: the analysis displays predicates,

 the synthesis relations. This fact shows that it is meaningless to claim that some
 chain of inferences in the analysis is the inverse of some one in the synthesis.
 At best, an isomorphism can be established. Yet, the correspondence remains
 misleading, as propositions in the Data and in the Elements cannot be related
 exactly, and, what is worse, those in the Data are usually proven by means of the

 corresponding ones in the Elements. For instance, there is an obvious symmetry
 between the steps applying Data 40 in the analysis and El. VI.4 in the synthesis
 or Data 41 in the analysis and EL VI.6 in the synthesis, but (i ) Data 40 is proven

 by means of EL VI.4 and Data 41 by means of El. VI.6; (iï) in order to show that
 the relevant ratios and angles are given one must, in the analysis, apply def. 3 to

 disentangle them from the notion of a figure «given in form», whereas the syn-

 thesis may refer directly to VI.4 and VI.6 (where the notion of similar triangles
 does not appear). It follows that a parallel can be set at best between VI.6 and
 VI.4. Yet they are not each inverse of the other, but only partial converses. There
 is more: the inference ex aequali licensed by EL V.22 corresponds to what? To

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 141

 Data 8, which is proved, with an explicit reference to ex aequali, by means of

 V.22 itself. This very inference, and not a sort of inverse of it, is used in Con.

 11.50, only formulated in language of the givens. In short, the deduction in Con.

 11.50 is a logical labyrinth: it arranges the "isomorphic" propositions of the Data
 and of the Elements in the same order, thanks to a clever permutation of the

 angles from which analysis and synthesis start and to the fact that VI.4 and VI.6

 are partial converses. To appreciate that a true inversion of deductive order is at
 work one has to check the position of the «ratio of AB to BF» within the two
 chains.

 (6) The final part of the analysis, not underlined in the text, gives rise in the synthesis

 to a sequence of constructions: these are the "geometric" passages of the chain of

 givens. For instance, Data 29 corresponds to El. 1.23 and both are applied to the

 same angle, but, on the other hand, what corresponds to Data 25 remains unstated

 (it is for instance a consequence of Con. 1.17). The steps related to the property

 of the subtangent, even if they are contained in the underlined portion, become
 two constructions: a bisection (within triangle to ZHE) and a doubling (within

 triangle tò ABF) of a straight line; the converse of the property is then applied in

 the form of Con. 1.33. The only auxiliary construction (dropping perpendicular

 f| BF) is also provided in double in the synthesis, once for each triangle. If it is

 not immediate to set an isomorphism between the chain of the givens and the

 synthetic proof, it is simply meaningless to claim that a sequence of construc-

 tions has the same or the opposite direction as a chain of givens, or simply that

 the former corresponds to the latter. Two constructions cannot be each a conse-

 quence of the other; they can at best come one after the other, the former giving

 rise to a geometric configuration suited to perform the second. In the chains of
 givens, on the contrary, what is at stake is always a deductive sequence. The
 only residual correspondence is that, with respect to the actual development of

 the proof, the chain of givens and the construction have the same direction: see

 for instance the ordering of the sequence "straight line f| FA (that is, angle f]
 vrrò BAF) - ► straight line fi FA" both at the end of the analysis and in the
 construction.

 All of this confirms the remarkable versatility of the predicate «given», which can

 be applied to the determination of any mathematical object, either by constructive or

 deductive means, for instance through chains of equalities. I shall further substantiate

 this view in the following sections.

 7 Calculations validated by "chains of givens"

 The chains of givens have a prominent algorithmic connotation: this feature can be
 naturally linked with the function of the analysis as a demonstrative format able to
 settle problems of existence and uniqueness (see next section). A whole tradition of

 Greek mathematicians (Hero, Ptolemy, Diophantus) read the analysis in an algorithmic
 perspective: in these authors, «given» has the meaning of «univocally determined»
 and hence «calculable» from the numerical assignments of a problem. Accordingly,
 a chain of givens came to be straightforwardly viewed as validating either (a) a

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 142 F. Acerbi

 "formula" devised to express some magnitude, whose value will be calculated in
 the synthesis by a procedure conforming to the formula itself - take for instance

 Metrica 1. 14 to be read below, of which the enunciation in Pappus, Coll. IV. 1 1 , read in

 Sect. 2 is a variation in pure geometrical style - or (b) a procedure extracting one of

 the magnitudes involved in a formula (Aim. 1. 10). Let us see the issue in more details.

 The aim of Hero' Metrica is to set demonstrative grounds to the procedures of

 calculation of areas (book I) and volumes (II) of some basic geometrical figures and

 to problems of division of plane domains (III): he offers rigorous geometrical proofs

 validating algorithms. Paradigmatic calculations are then performed, by using ad hoc

 numerical values. The geometrical proofs are sometimes in synthetic form, but they

 are most often in analytical form. That the sought-for geometrical magnitude can be

 determined is proven in strictly geometrical terms by means of an analysis, the magni-

 tude itself being the final product of a chain of givens. In the synthesis the calculation

 of the same magnitude is performed, either as a description of the procedure supported

 by numerical examples, or on the grounds of a paradigmatic "raw" calculation. Both

 of them are exactly parallel to the chain of givens.

 Validating a calculation by a chain of givens requires very few tools, which often

 help with extracting a magnitude from a "formula". These are some definitions and

 theorems of the Data, which correspond to operations on the numerical values assigned

 to the given magnitudes, as we see in the following table. In the right column, the signs

 a and b denote magnitudes having an explicitly expressed numerical value; the arrow

 separates the input from the output of the operation.

 Proposition of the data Operation

 def. 1, 2. Given in magnitude are said figures, lines, and angles for aya - b^-b

 which we can provide equals. A ratio is said to be given for

 which we can provide the same.

 1. The ratio of given magnitudes to one another is given. a,b -► a:b
 2. If a given magnitude have a given ratio to some other magnitude, a,a:b -> b

 the other is also given in magnitude.

 3. If any number of given magnitudes be added together, the a,b -> a + b

 magnitude composed of them will also be given.

 4. If a given magnitude be subtracted from a given magnitude, the a,b -+ a-b

 5. If a magnitude have a given ratio to some part of itself, it will a:b -> a:(a - b)

 remainder will be given.

 also have a given ratio to the remainder.

 together, the whole will also have a given ratio to each of them.

 52. If on a straight line given in magnitude a form given in form be a -► q{a)

 described, the <described> form is given in magnitude.

 55. If a figure be given in form and in magnitude, its sides will be q{a) -► a

 given in magnitude.

 57. If a given <domain> be applied to a given <straight lino in a ab,a^b

 given angle, the width of the application is also given.

 85. If two straight lines contain a given area in a given angle, and ab,a+b -► a,b

 their sum be given, each of them will be given.

 5 + 8. <Magnitudes> which have a given ratio to the same, will also a:b -> (a - b):b

 have a given ratio to one another.

 6. If two magnitudes having a given ratio to one another be added a:b -► (a + b):a, (a + b):b

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 143

 Notice that the separando manipulation of ratios requires combining two theorems

 of the Data, 5 and 8. Other theorems validate geometrical constructions having an

 immediate operative import in the metrological domain, most notably in the divisions
 of surfaces oí Metrica III.

 Proposition of the data Construction

 26. If the extremities of a straight line be given in position, the Join two points by a segment of a

 line is given in position and in magnitude. given length

 27. If the one extremity of a straight line given in position and Cut off a segment of a given

 in magnitude is given, the other will also be given. length

 In the Metrica these are taken as operations and not as constructions: this is con-

 firmed by the fact that they are formulated with the aorist imperative: see for instance
 Tocomcov òtTTÓX-ape tf|v AE Kai ê-niÇeuÇov tt|v AE at Metrica III.2 or, in the
 same proposition, the clause in suppositive mode with an aorist subjunctive &cze
 êècv OCTToXaßcufiev ifjv AA |xová6cov ia 8' kcci iT(xpáÀ,À,T|Xov àyày(ù'iev ttïv AE,
 ěoTCci to TTpoKeíjievov (HOO III, 144.29-30 and 144.12-14, respectively). That the

 first operation is sometimes formulated with a perfect imperative (ooreiA/n^öco, for

 instance in III.5-6) is probably due to the stylistic inertia of the model of geometrical
 constructions.

 Notice also that the calculation of the area of triangle of given sides a, b, c ->
 tr(a, b, c), whose synthetic validation we read in Metrica 1.8, has the combination of
 Data 39 and 52 as an immediate analytic counterpart: if the three sides a, b, c of a

 triangle are given in magnitude, the triangle is also given in magnitude.

 The crucial point of Hero's approach is that the calculation, very much as a geo-

 metrical synthesis, is considered accessible only after the analysis has shown that the

 sought-for object is univocally determined by the assignments of the proposition: in
 metrical contexts, «given» is synonymous with «given in magnitude» and has the
 numerical determination ofthat «magnitude» as a "synthetic" counterpart. This guar-

 antees that one can proceed to actually «providing» it, by means of either a calculation

 or a construction. This is the reason why the analytical format is identical in a met-

 rical and in a geometrical proposition. Let us read in parallel the validating chain of
 givens and the calculation-synthesis of Metrica 1.14 (HOO III, 36.23-40.10); one has

 to determine the area of a quadrilateral tò AB F A having the angle at to F right, no
 pairs of side parallel, and given sides r' AB of 13 units, f' Bf of 10, i' V A of 20, i'

 AA of 17. The procedure splits the quadrilateral in two triangles and adds their areas.

 The calculation of the area of the right-angled triangle tò Bf A is immediate; as for

 triangle tò ABA, one has to determine first the height fi AE by means of El. 11.13.

 To show that its area is given. And as a consequence of the analysis it will be

 synthesized thus.

 Since both of Br TA are given and the angle at T is The 10 by the 20: it results 200; and half of
 right, therefore triangle Bf A is given, these: it results 100.

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 and again, the <square> on BA will be given And again, the 10 by themselves: it results 100.

 And the 20 by themselves: it results 400. Add:
 it results 500.

 144 F. Acerbi

 - for it is of 500 units -;
 but also the one on AB is given: And the 13 by themselves: itresults 169;
 thus, the ones on AB B A are given; these with the 500: it results 669;
 and they are greater than the one on A A: therefore
 angle ABA is acute: therefore the <squares> on AB
 BA are greater than the one on A A by twice the
 <rectangle contained> by AB BE:
 therefore twice the one by A B BE is given: subtract the 17 by themselves: 380 as a remainder;
 so that once the one by AB BE is also given; half of these: it results 190;
 and it is a side of the <square> on B A by the one on
 BE:

 therefore the one on B A by the one on BE is also these by themselves: it results 36,100;
 given;
 and the one on BA is given: therefore the one on these applied to the 500: it results 72 1/5;
 BE is also given;
 but also the one on EA subtract these from 169: it results 96 1/2

 1/5 1/10 as a remainder;

 by the one on BA; these by the 500: it results 48,400;
 and its side is the <rectangle contained> by B A AE:
 therefore the one by B A AE is also given; A side of these: it results 220;
 and it is the double of triangle ABA:
 therefore triangle ABA is also given; half of these: it results 1 10. That much will

 be the area of ABA.

 but also Br A was: But, also, the <area> of B T A is of 100 units:

 so that the quadrilateral AB F A will be given as a therefore, the area of quadrilateral AB FA
 whole. will be of 2 10.

 An analogous approach can be found in Liber de canonio 4 (Clagett and Moody

 1960, pp. 72-74).

 We find the same format in a purely geometrical problem: in Metrica III.4 Hero

 deals with a problem of division of a figure. This is solved by a canonical analysis,
 after which we might expect to find a geometrical synthesis, but Hero directly calcu-

 lates the positions, with respect to the vertices of the figure, of the points at which the
 sides must be cut in order to have the required division performed. The analysis shows

 that such points are univocally determined by the assignments of the problem, and the

 calculation of their position can be effected without further ado.

 Variations on this theme can be found in Aim. 1. 10, where Ptolemy calculates the

 values of a table of chords with a step of 1/2 degree. In order to do that, he needs

 procedures for calculating the chords of complementary arcs, and the analogs of our
 bisection, addition, and subtraction formulas. His proof of how to calculate the chord

 of the arc difference of the arcs relative to two given chords starts from the assigned
 chords ai AB, Ar and from the diameter f] AA; the quadrilateral to ABr A, which
 is inscribed in a semicircle, is then completed. Here is the enunciation {POO I.I,
 37.19-38.3):

 This being set out as a preliminary, let it be a semicircle ABr A on a diameter
 A A, and from A let two lines AB Ar be drawn across, and let each of them be

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 145

 given in magnitude, such that the diameter is given as 120, and let BF be joined.

 I say that this too is given.

 Now, "Ptolemy's theorem", proven in another form in Data 93, tells us that for quad-
 rilaterals inscribed in a semicircle r(AB,FA) + r(AA,Br) = r(AI'BA) holds. But

 all magnitudes in the expression, the straight line f| BF excepted, are assigned by the

 problem, ti F A and i' BA as chords complementary to assigned chords. The chain of

 givens set forth by Ptolemy simply explains how to extract fj BF from the expression:
 what is at issue is to explicitate a variable contained in a closed formula, and this is
 what the enunciation claims. The corresponding calculation is not performed but it is

 clear that the goal is to validate a procedure aiming at providing a numerical value. The

 same approach of setting out only the general framework of the chain of givens, the

 calculation being performed when specific numerical data are at hand, can be found
 again in Ptolemy, Analemma 5 (POO II, 206.17-209.3), and Hero, Dioptra 14 (HOO
 111,234.19-238.2).

 Some ancient commentators on Ptolemy's Almagest were apparently uncomfort-

 able with calculations performed without any explanations of why exactly the adopted

 procedure was followed. For instance, ai Alm. V.5 Ptolemy calculates the direction of
 the mean apogee of the moon. He only partly describes the related diagram, proceed-

 ing directly to perform the calculation with the actual numerical data. Pappus writes

 in his commentary: «we shall analyze the 5° theorem of the Composition in this way»
 (iA, 35.21-2). The analysis Pappus provides is a chain of givens exactly parallel to
 Ptolemy's calculations, does not include a clarification of the related diagram, and
 lasts 36 lines in Rome's edition. Such an alleged "analysis" is nothing but a reformu-

 lation of Ptolemy's procedure without references to numerical values. When Pappus

 comes to show that intermediate quantities with some interest are given, he stops for

 a while and comments: «if the numbers are inserted one proves. . .» and calculates the

 numerical value of the quantity arrived at.

 We find a format analogous to Ptolemy's in Diophantus'Dc polygonis numeris:

 the only difference is that the explicit calculation is replaced by the description of
 a procedure. Diophantus wants to determine the polygonal number with an assigned
 multiplicity of angles once the side is known. The basis of Diophantus' procedure is

 the closed expression linking a polygonal number to its side and to the multiplicity of
 its angles (DOO I, 472.16-9):

 Every polygonal multiplied by eight times the <number> less by a dyad than
 the multiplicity of angles, and taking in addition the <square> on the <number>

 less by a tetrad than the multiplicity of angles, makes a square.

 We would write in the following way, with P a polygonal number, s its side, v the
 multiplicity of its angles (the latter an assigned parameter): &P(v - 2) + (v - 4)2 =
 (2 + (v - 2)(2s - I))2 or, as Diophantus says, SP(v - 2) + (v - 4)2 = square.

 Let us read how Diophantus formulates the validating chain of givens and the proce-

 dure determining a polygonal number once its side is known (DOO 1, 472.20-474.20);

 this amounts to extracting P from the above formula (legenda: H0 = s and therefore
 0M = s - 1, KB = v - 2, NK = 2, and the rest follows):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 146 F. Acerbi

 The Hypsiclean definition and the present one of polygonal <numbers> being
 thus simultaneously proved, it remains to show how, a side being given, the
 assigned polygonal is found.

 In fact, having given a side of some polygonal, H0, and having also the mul-
 tiplicity of its angles, we also have KB among the givens, so that we shall also

 have given the <rectangle contained> by H0 0M, the one and the other together,

 and KB, which is equal to N£: so that we shall also have given K§ - since NK is

 a dyad - : so that we shall also have given the <square> on K£, and subtracting

 from this the square on NB, which is given, we shall also have given the remain-

 der, which is a multiple of the sought for polygonal by eight times KB: so that

 also the sought for polygonal can be found. [. . .]

 We shall describe it in a more pedagogical way, also for those who aim at quickly

 understanding, by means of procedures, what is sought for.

 In fact, taking the side of the polygonal, always doubling it we shall subtract a

 unit, and multiplying the remainder by the <number> less by a dyad than the

 multiplicity of the angles we shall always add a dyad to the result, and taking

 the square on the result we shall subtract from it the <square> on the <number>

 less by a tetrad than the multiplicity of the angles, and dividing the remainder

 by eight times the <number> less by a dyad than the multiplicity of the angles

 we shall find the sought for polygonal.

 8 The deductive function of the "chains of givens"

 I shall sum up in this section the results of the previous discussion, combining them

 in a unitary interpretative framework. I shall argue that the chains of givens have two
 main functions:

 (1) To formulate issues of existence and uniqueness (for the latter see also Taisbak

 2003, p. 95).

 (2) To formulate as a deduction disparate demonstrative steps such as deductions,

 constructions, calculations, chains of preconditions (namely, the inferences of the

 synthesis viewed "backward").

 (1) Existence and uniqueness
 Let us see in detail the first function on the example of the locus theorems. Their
 enunciation, in a conditional form that attests for their being theorems and not prob-

 lems, employs the language of the givens to describe the constraints and to identify the
 line solving the locus. The proof is framed as an analysis and synthesis. The analysis,

 again expressed in the idiom of the givens, consists in identifying as given the line
 that a point subjected to the assigned constraints comes to a'|/€o6cu «touch»; the
 nature of the solution, it is to be stressed, is already made explicit in the enunciation.

 In other terms, if a point satisfies the constraints, then it belongs to a well-determined
 curve - this corresponds to establishing both the existence and the uniqueness of the
 locus, even if, in the enunciation of a locus theorem, what is sought is formulated as a

 predication: «a point A touches such-and-such line». Let us read the locus in Pappus,

 £i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 147

 Coll. IV.78 (the point is on a hyperbola because of a characteristic property that we
 read in Cöw. I.21):

 A straight line AB in position, and from a given point F let some <straight line>

 fall on FA, and let AE be at right <angles> with AB, and the ratio of F A to AE
 be <given>: that E is on a hyperbola.

 Let a <straight line> FZ be drawn through F parallel to the one at right <angles>:

 therefore Z is given. And parallel to AB a <straight line> EH, and let the ratio of

 FZ to any of Z0 ZK be the same as the one of F A to AE: therefore any of 0 K

 is given. Since then it is as the <square> on F A <to the one on AE, so> the one
 on FZ to the one on Z0, therefore the ratio of the one on ZA as a remainder,

 that is the one on EH, to the one on KH0 as a remainder is also given. And K

 0 are given: therefore E is on a hyperbola through 0 E.

 The scanty and late evidence on the issue of existence and uniqueness in the analytical

 domain puts emphasis on existence only, probably because uniqueness was taken for

 granted (for instance, a characteristic property univocally determines a conic section
 with assigned parameters). This view is corroborated by a passing remark by Pappus
 about some recent authors who, by applying Euclid's Porisms, neglected problems of

 constructibility, «proving only that what is sought exists without providing it [verb
 TTopiaccaGcu]» (Coll. VII. 14). Since the Porisms obviously contained only analyses,
 one must conclude that the authors mentioned by Pappus had it clear that this kind of

 propositions could be interpreted as existence proofs.

 To do the synthesis of a locus means to construct the sought-for line on the basis

 of the data of the theorem and to show that it satisfies the assigned constraints. Since

 the solution of a locus has to be a previously known line (straight line, circumference,

 conic section, . . .), many locus theorems are nothing but the inverse of known char-

 acterizations of such lines, namely, the theorems in which the constraint is proved to
 be a property of them: Proclus calls «locus theorems» exactly the cluster El. 1.35-8
 (/£, 394.11-396.9, and passing mentions at 405.4-6, 412.5-7 and 431.23).

 Locus theorems such as we find in Pappus usually have a synthesis. However, the

 format of these propositions underwent an evolution. In a first phase, the loci were only
 analyzed. This view is corroborated by the lemmas Pappus proved for the Euclidean
 Loci on a surface, that actually are the syntheses of some loci, and by some problems

 and loci that he very likely extracted from Aristaeus' Solid loci, where the syntheses
 are either lacking or are later appendages (Jones 1986, pp. 582-584, 591-595): this
 suggests that these works contained only analyses. Furthermore, the enunciation itself

 of a locus theorem requires one to show that a point touches a line «given in position»,

 and the attested analyses end exactly with a proof of this fact: the synthesis performs a

 construction that is simply not required by the enunciation. In a second phase, the anal-
 ysis was supplemented by a synthesis where the line solving the locus is constructed

 starting from the initial data. Apollonius is representative of this phase: Arabic sources

 confirm that he was used to synthetize the loci (Hogendijk 1986, pp. 206-218). A third

 phase is attested for only in late texts, such as for instance the Eutocean "transcription"

 of the Apollonian solution of a problem already mentioned in Aristotle's Meteorolog-
 ica (AGE II, 180.1 1-184.20; cf. Vitrac 2002). This texts adheres to a strictly synthetic
 format: therefore, it must provide a synthetic proof of the uniqueness of the solution

 & Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 148 F. Acerbi

 (that normally pertains to the analysis), showing that no point that does not belong to

 it satisfies the constraints. The synthetic mode also makes it necessary to change the

 manner of identification of the solution in the enunciation: one must prove that «it is

 possible to trace» the line.

 It is not surprising that the demonstrative format underwent an evolution, while

 the formulation of the enunciation was kept fixed: the latter is what makes a locus

 theorem immediately recognizable as such. One might wonder why the Greek geom-
 eters became dissatisfied with the analysis of the loci. Several phenomena may have
 contributed to the perception that it was necessary to add a synthesis to a locus
 theorem, and maybe Apollonius himself is responsible for this reform. Requiring

 the construction of the solution, that can be performed only in a synthesis, is among

 the "foundational" concerns that are typical of him (Acerbi 2010). On the other hand,

 one must be able to complete such syntheses. They normally apply crucial results of the
 theory of conic sections; a suitable supply of such tools was at the mathematicians'
 disposal only with Apollonius, as he himself pointed out in the prefatory letters to
 Con. I and IV (AGE 1, 4.5-17, and II, 4.5-7, 4.16-17). The generality of his approach,

 in particular the "discovery" of the opposite sections, made the number of tractable

 (solid) loci considerably larger than in earlier approaches; his complete treatment of
 the intersections between conies eased the analyses of the diorisms.

 (2) Transforming non-inferential propositional chains into deductive sequences
 Let us come to the second function. As I have pointed out in Sect. 6, the prop-

 erly deductive steps of a synthesis can be found in the analysis, in an approximately

 reversed order and expressed in the language of the givens. In this way, a sequence of

 preconditions is formulated as a "forward" deduction. This is a nontrivial solution to

 a nontrivial problem. To see this, it is enough to compare it with the highly contrived
 solution to the same problem adopted in the so-called theorematic analyses, namely,

 those preliminary to the synthetic solution of a theorem, not to the constructive solu-

 tion of a problem. In a theorematic analysis the chain of givens is absent: since it is

 not required to construct an object, there is no place to set up the chain corresponding

 to the construction. This fact probably suggested also that the chain of givens corre-

 sponding to the deductive passages could be replaced by the structure we are going to

 read on the example of the theorematic analysis in Coll. IV. 17:

 Let it be a semicircle ABr, and let ABA be inflected, and let AB be equal to

 B A, and let a <straight line> AE be drawn at right <angles> with BA, and let
 BE be joined, and let a <straight lino EZ be drawn at right <angles> with it,
 and the center be H, and let it be as AH to HA, so A0 to 0Z, and let 0E be

 joined: that angle BEA is equal to angle AE0.
 Form H let a <straight line> HK be drawn at right <angles> with BE: therefore

 BK is equal to KE. And B AE is right: therefore the three BK, KA, KE are equal
 to each other. And HK is parallel to EZ, and since angle KEA equal to angle
 AE0 was sought for, and AK is equal to KE, therefore that (orí apa) angle
 KEA is equal to KAE, therefore that KAE is equal to AE0, therefore that AK
 is parallel to E0.
 Let also a <straight line> KA be drawn parallel to AE, and let TA be produced
 as far as A, and let BA be joined. Thus, since KA is parallel to AE, and KH to

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Gi vens" 1 49

 EZ, and KA parallel to E0 was sought for, therefore that - insofar as triangle

 KAH is equiangular to triangle E AZ, and AKH to E0Z- it is as AH to HK, AZ
 to ZE, and as KH to HA, EZ to Z0: therefore that also as AH to HA, so AZ to

 Z0 (for ex aequali): therefore that also as A A to AH, so A0 to 0Z (for separ-
 ando). And it was also supposed as A 0 to 0Z, so AH to HA: therefore that as
 A A to AH, so A0 to 0Z, that is AH to HA: therefore that A A is equal to AH:

 therefore that also A A is equal to AH. But also AB is equal to B A: therefore that
 also AB is equal to BH. But BH is equal to both of A A AH: therefore that also
 BA is equal to A A. And it is: for since KA is parallel to AE, and AK is equal
 to KE, also angle BKA is equal to AKA. Thus, since BK is equal to KA and
 angle BKA is equal to angle AKA, therefore also BA is equal to A A.

 In an analysis of this kind two registers overlap: (1) the "forward" inference, directly
 operating on the object language and whose progression is marked by the connec-
 tor apa «therefore» and by transformations such as the passage in separando-, (2)
 the logical arrow implicit in the on «that» (understood «it is to be shown» or the
 like), acting as a second-order language and providing a direction to the sequence
 of "backward" inferences, that is, to the chain of preconditions. This overlap of sty-
 listical levels is the projection of a fundamental ambiguity: a theorematic analysis,
 because of the absence of the chain of givens, quite frequently has a strong algo-
 rithmic connotation - series of equivalences, manipulations of proportions - and its
 steps can normally be inverted: therefore, it is a question of personal taste whether
 to formulate it as a sequence of consequents or of antecedents. The ancient mathe-
 maticians (theorematic analyses can already be found in Apollonius, Con. III.24-26,

 propositions that are surely pre-Eutocean) left the ambiguity unresolved, resorting to
 the bizarre format of stating conclusions in a declarative form (cm apa «therefore
 that»): the stylistic inertia of the synthetic (and hence "forward") format is unable to

 conceal the "mathematical" perception that one is proceeding backward with respect

 to the "natural" logical ordering.

 There is more to the issue. The solution of Greek mathematicians to the problem

 of giving the cogency of some inferences an adequate linguistic representation was

 dictated by the perception that lexical and stylistic conventions, when rigidly pursued,

 have an actual mathematical import. The rigidity of formulation in a natural language
 replaces the formalism. This tendency can be viewed as a struggle toward minimiz-
 ing the "intuitive" component at work in a mathematical proof. As a matter of fact,
 "intuitions" are required:

 (a) At every conclusion, be it the conclusion of an inference or the conclusion we

 draw from the whole argument of the proof of a proposition (that is, its enun-
 ciation). The answer to the second problem, which is the one of mathematical
 generality, was constituted by the indefinite structure I have studied elsewhere

 (Acerbi 201 la). The first problem is partly answered by the rigidity of the for-
 mulaic system. Some particular deductions, most notably the ones involving
 relations, can be said to conclude in virtue of their form: in a sense, the conclu-

 sion shows itself in a suitable notation (Acerbi 2011b, Sect. 1.5.1).

 (b) In the auxiliary constructions. How is one to understand which auxiliary con-

 structions must be performed? There is no answer, of course. However, one may

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 150 F. Acerbi

 introduce tools that are able to minimize the intuitive component. First of all, the

 constructions are formulated in a rigid matricial structure, that does not interact

 with the deductions but that in some sense reproduces their formulation. In a

 strong linguistic sense, then, El. I.post.l has as a correlate only one operation of

 joining a straight line; it is a two-entry relation of sorts, the free variables being

 simply the denotative letters of the extremes. Second, and most importantly, the

 chains of givens transform the constructive sequences into deductive sequences.
 To repeat, in an analysis constructions and deductions are placed at the same
 level.

 (c) At every deductively self-contained step. Who gives us a rule to understand which

 passage is to follow a given one? No one, of course, but one can do it in such
 a way as to reduce the number of possible choices. Paradigmatic examples are
 the analyses elaborated by Hero as alternative proofs of El II.2-10 (Tummers

 1994, pp. 73.25-86.5). In the first place, they purposely, and admittedly, lack the
 auxiliary constructions: as a consequence, their analytic part bears no signs of

 the language of the givens. Second, they are framed as pure reductions that oper-

 ate on two levels. At a first level one takes two expressions constructed starting

 from the objects featuring in a geometric configuration; one must show that the

 expressions are equal. The mathematical "facts" one deals with are some config-

 urations of geometrical objects, not the relations between them. In the Heronian

 procedure, one of the configurations is assumed as the starting point, the other

 as the end point; the former is reduced to the latter by means of theorems in
 the same sequence II.2-10 (II. 1 features as a "principle"). At a second level,
 however, the declared goal of the whole analysis is exactly to set up a complete

 list of the theorems in the sequence II.2-10 to which the one at issue is reduced:

 this is again an analysis. The proof is conceived as a process of explication of the

 passages that are implicit in it, both as a deployment of the deductive structure

 in its complete form and as a decomposition of the geometric configuration in its

 ultimate components. To clarify the issue, it is worth reading in the first analysis
 of Hero, El II.8 aliter (Tummers 1994, pp. 81.20-82.10)- the proof is really
 made up of two analyses, even if the second one is called compositio:

 dbg a

 I

 £l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Ponam lineám ab quam super punctum g dividam qualitercumque contingat
 divisio, et adiungam ei lineám bd equalem linee bg. Cum ergo resolveri-
 mus quadratum linee ad resolvetur in probationem figure quarte huius partis.
 Quod ideo erit quoniam quadratum factum ex linea ad est equale duplo
 superficiei quam continent due linee ab, bd, cum duobus quadratis factis ex
 duabus lineis ab, bd. Et quia bd posita est equalis sectioni bg, ergo
 duplum superficiei que continetur a duabus lineis ab, bg, cum duobus qua-
 dratis factis ex duabus lineis ab, bg est equale quadrato facto ex linea ad.

 Secundum probationem vero figure septimě huius partis erunt duo quadrata
 facta ex duabus lineis ab, bg equalia duplo superficiei que continetur a duabus

 lineis ab, bg, cum quadrato ag. Cum ergo illud coniungetur, erit quadruplum

 The language of the "Givens" 1 5 1

 superficiei que continetur a duabus lineis ab, bg, cum quadrato ag equale

 duplo superficiei que continetur a duabus lineis ab, bg, cum duobus quadratis
 factis ex lineis ab, bd. Sed iam ostendimus quod ista sunt equalia quadrato
 facto ex linea ad: ergo quadruplum superficiei que continetur a duabus lineis
 ab, bg, cum quadrato ag est equale quadrato ad. Ergo iam resolutum est hoc

 in figuram quartam prius, post in figuram septimám. Et illud est, quod demo-
 nstrare voluimus.

 I shall place a line ab that I shall divide at point g with a chance division, and

 I shall add to it line bd equal to line bg. Therefore, once we shall analyze the

 square of line ad, it shall be analyzed in the proof of the fourth figure of this
 part. This is because the square made from line ad is equal to the double of

 the superficies that contain the two lines ab, bd, together with the two squares
 made from the two lines ab, bd. And since bd is placed equal to segment bg,

 therefore the double of the superficies that is contained by the two lines ab, bg,

 together with the two squares made from the two lines ab, bg is equal to the

 square made from line ad. And by the proof of the seventh figure of this part,

 the two squares made from the two lines ab, bg will be equal to the double of

 the superficies that is contained by the two lines ab, bg, together with square

 ag. Therefore, when this is conjoined, the quadruple of the superficies that
 is contained by the two lines ab, bg, together with square ag, is equal to the

 double of the superficies that is contained by the two lines ab, bg, together
 with the two squares made from the lines ab, bd. But we have proved that
 these are equal to the square made from line ad: therefore, the quadruple of

 the superficies that is contained by the two lines ab, bg, together with square

 ag, is equal to square ad. Therefore, this is analyzed in the fourth figure first,

 then in the seventh figure. And this is what we wanted to prove.

 Hero's achievement finds an ideal domain of application in the linear lemmas

 of El. II, but an interesting parallel can also be made with a particular logical
 doctrine. This is the analysis of those formally valid arguments that in the
 Stoic tradition got the name of «non-simple undemonstrated <syllogisms>»
 (Sextus Empiricus, M. VIII.228). Simple undemonstrated are such inferences

 as it is «immediately clear that they conclude validly, namely, that for them
 the conclusion is validly deduced from the premises» (ibid.). Chrysippus
 established five basic kinds, among which forms of modus ponens, modus
 tollens, etc. can be recognized. The arguments made up of chains of sim-
 ple undemonstrated were said non-simple undemonstrated. The latter too are

 valid arguments, but this can be appreciated only after they are reduced to
 their simple components. The Stoics called «analysis» this procedure, which
 was performed by means of rules to manipulate deductions, called themata.

 «Theorems» were also elaborated, summing up several themata in a single
 prescription; the Stoics called their version «dialectical theorem»: «when
 we have the premisses which imply some conclusion, we have also the con-

 clusion which lies potentially in them, even if this is not expressly stated»
 (M. VIII.229). A fundamental feature of the Stoic analysis of a syllogism is

 that the reduction ends exactly when the simple undemonstrated compounding

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 152 F. Acerbi

 the syllogism are made explicit. It is not a proof but only a reduction method;

 it works by inserting intermediate elementary inferences and by deploying

 the complete formulation of an argument; once this is done, the validity of the

 argument is immediately grasped, insofar it is a well-formed sequence of valid

 arguments. The "result" of the reduction, namely, the non-simple undemon-

 strated to be reduced, is taken for granted from the very outset: the method

 is analytic. The deductive progression is "backward", but it does not look for

 preconditions: the operation is metalogical, and does not have a formal struc-

 ture. Well, both in the Heronian rewriting of El. II.2-10 and in Stoic analysis,

 the irreducible inferential structures are known and finite in number (just a

 few, in fact): they are the preceding theorems in the sequence EL II.2-10 and

 the five simple undemonstrated, respectively. This makes the choice of the
 "subsequent passage" easy.

 (d) In order to "see" the proof. The analysis came to be considered as a heuris-

 tic tool. This is only a myth, but the illusion was allegedly supported by the

 idea that there exists only a finite supply of deductive structures. The issue is

 discussed in a companion paper, and see also Acerbi, submitted.

 Summing up, the language of the givens is applied to the determination of any mathe-

 matical object, either by constructive or by abstract approaches (for instance by means

 of chains of equalities). The same language is an attempt at unifying, under the logical

 form of a predicate whose rules of inference are established in the Data, the following

 argumentative patterns:

 (i ) Deductions, in primis manipulations of relations reduced by saturation to sub-

 species of the predicate «given».

 (11) Constructions, for which a deductive ordering replaces a non-deductive

 sequence of prescriptions. A chain of givens to which a construction corre-

 sponds without any accompanying (synthetic) proof can be found in Hero, De
 speculis 16 (HOO II, 352.3-356.10 = [22] Jones 2001, pp. 163-164).

 (iii) Calculations, as we have seen in the previous section.

 Add to this that the same language formulates (=formalizes) several kinds of enunci-
 ations, contributing in a decisive way to creating stable domains of research: this is a

 metalinguistic function that induces a partition of the mathematical propositions that
 is transverse to the canonical one between theorems and problems. Such concerns are

 strictly related to ontological issues, in this case the demarcation between existence
 and constructibility. One must also recognize that the unifying character of this lan-

 guage is also its main weakness, insofar as it conflates under the same lexical range

 a galaxy of demonstrative and enunciative practices that the ancient tradition tried to
 disentangle, as Marinus attests.

 Acknowledgments This study has been supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche under grant
 ANR-09-BLAN-0300-01.

 £ì Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The language of the "Givens" 1 53

 Sources and their sigla

 The abbreviations of the titles of the writings of mathematical authors are self-explanatory, as for instance
 El. = Elements, Con. = Conica, Coll. = Collectio; in most cases they coincide with the abbreviations found

 in the the Liddell-Scott- Jones lexicon. Propositions are referred to by book and number, as for instance «El.

 III. 15». Pappus' Collectio is cited by book and chapter. Other sources are cited according to the following
 sigla:

 AGE: Apollonii Pergaei quae graece exstant, cum commentariis antiquis. 2 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner

 AOO: Archimedis opera omnia, cum commentariis Eutocii. 3 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1910-1915.
 DOO: Diophanti Alexandrini opera omnia cum graeciis commentariis. 2 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner

 1891-1893.

 1R93-1895.

 EE: Euclidis Elementa. 5 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1969-1977.
 EOO: Euclidis opera omnia. 10 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1883-1916.
 HOO: Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia. 5 vol. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner 1899-1914.
 iA: Commentaires de Pappus et de Théon d'Alexandrie sur V Almageste. 3 vol. Roma, Biblioteca

 Apostolica Vaticana 1931-1943.

 iE: Prodi Diadochi in primům Euclidis Elementorum librum commentarii. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner

 POO: Claudii Ptolemaei opera quae exstant omnia. 3 vol. in five parts. Stuttgart und Leipzig, B.G.

 1873.

 Teubner 1898-1998.

 References

 in Context 23: 151-186.

 Acerbi, F. 2010. Two approaches to foundations in Greek mathematics: Apollonius and Geminus. Science

 Acerbi, F. 201 la. Perche una dimostrazione geometrica greca e generale. In Atti del workshop «La scienza

 antica e la sua tradizione» , eds. F. Franco Repellini and E. Nenci. Milano: LED.

 Acerbi, F. 201 lb. La sintassi logica della matematica greca. Pisa: Edizioni della Normale.
 Acerbi, F. submitted. Pappus, Anstote et le tottoç avaA'x)U€VOÇ.
 Clagett, M. and E. A. Moody, eds. 1 960. The medieval science of weights (scientia de ponderibus). Madison:

 Federspiel, M. 1995. Sur F opposition «dehni/indehni» dans la langue des mathématiques grecques. Les

 The University of Wisconsin Press.

 Études Classiques 63: 249-293.

 Federspiel, M. 2000. Notes linguistiques et critiques sur le Livre II des Coniques d'Apollonius de Pergè

 (Deuxième partie). Revue des Études Grecques 113: 359-391.

 Federspiel, M. 2008. Le problèmes des livres grecs des Coniques d'Apollonius de Perge. Des propositions

 mathématiques en quête d'auteur. Les Études Classiques 76: 321-360.

 Hogendijk, J.P. 1986. Arabie traces of lost works of Apollonius. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 35:

 187-253.

 Jones, A. ed. 1986. Pappus of Alexandria, book 7 of the collection, 2 vol. New York: Springer- Verlag.
 Jones, A. 2001. Pseudo-Ptolemy De Speculis. SCIAMVS 2: 145-186.
 Michaux, M. 1947. Le Commentaire de Marinus aux Data ď Euclid. Étude critique. Université de Louvain,
 Recueil de travaux d'Histoire et Philosophie, 3ème série, fase. 25. Louvain: Bibliothèque de l'université.

 Neugebauer, O. 1975. A history of ancient mathematical astronomy, 3 vol. Berlin: Springer- Verlag.
 Simson, R. 1723. Pappi Alexandrini propositiones duae generales, quibus plura ex Euclidis Porismatis

 complexus est, restitutae. Philosophical Transactions 377: 330-340.

 Simson, R. 1776. Opera quaedam reliqua. Glasguae: In Aedibus Academias.
 Taisbak, Ch.M. 2003. AEAOMENA. Euclid's Data or the importance of being given. Copenhagen: Museum

 Tusculanum Press.

 Tummers, P.M.J.E. ed. 1994. Anaritius' commentary on Euclid. The Latin translation I-IV Artistarium

 Supplementa IX. Niimegen: Ingenium Publishers.

 Vitrac, B. 2002. Note textuelle sur un (problème de) lieu géométrique dans les Météorologiques ď Aristote

 (III.5, 375bl6-376b22). Archive for History of Exact Sciences 56: 239-283.

 Whiteside, D.T. éd. 1967-1981. The mathematical papers of Isaac Newton, 8 vol. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:25:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

