 

 

 

 

The development of Euclidean axiomatics: The systems of principles and the foundations

of mathematics in editions of the "Elements" in the Early Modern Age
Author(s): Vincenzo De Risi
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 70, No. 6 (November 2016), pp. 591-676
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913471
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:55 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24913471?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2016) 70:591-676 /BV
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-015-0173-9 Vfl/ CrossMalk

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 The systems of principles and the foundations of mathematics in
 editions of the Elements in the Early Modern Age

 Vincenzo De Risi1

 Received: 4 August 2015 / Published online: 24 February 2016

 © The Author(s) 2016.1

 fhis article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

 Abstract The paper lists several editions of Euclid's Elements in the Early Modern

 Age, giving for each of them the axioms and postulates employed to ground elementary
 mathematics.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 593

 1.1 The Euclidean tradition 593

 1.2 Axioms and postulates 602
 2 The principles 618
 2.1 The principles of Euclid 618
 2.2 Further principles in the Greek tradition 619
 2.3 Additional common notions and the foundations of the theory of

 magnitudes 619

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 Ξ Vincenzo De Risi

 vderisi@mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de

 1 MPIWG, Boltzmannstraße 22,14195 Berlin, Germany

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 2.4 Principles on mereological composition and multiples of magnitudes . 620
 2.5 The theory of ratios and proportions 622
 2.6 The Axiom of Archimedes and the theory of indivisibles 626
 2.7 Principles of arithmetic and number theory 626
 2.8 General principles of space, situation, and givenness 628
 2.9 Principles of intersection, incidence and connection 629
 2.10 Principles of continuity 631
 2.11 Principles of congruence, motion, and transportation 632

 592

 V. De Risi

 2.12 Principles of the equality and the comparison of measure 633
 2.13 The parallel postulate 635
 Hilbert's Axioms of geometry 636
 3 The editions of the Elements 638

 3.1 Greek manuscripts of the Elements used by Heiberg 638
 3.2 Medieval translations in Latin manuscripts 638
 3.3 Printed editions 642

 References 674

 In the following pages I give a list of the systems of principles adopted in the main

 editions of Euclid's Elements in the Early Modern Age, as well as some information

 about the axioms in Antiquity and in the Middle Ages. The aim of such a list is to

 provide the reader with a quick survey of the development of mathematical axiomatics,

 stressing the most important turning points in the foundations of geometry.

 As is well known, the Elements of Euclid represented for centuries the very model

 of scientific and deductive reasoning, and their diffusion and influence in Europe were

 only matched by the Bible and by a few other writings of the Fathers of the Church.

 They were translated, edited and commented upon hundreds of times, and these edi

 tions and commentaries shaped the scientific tools, the methodological standards and

 the mathematical language of many centuries. Euclid's theorems were used to build

 further and more daring mathematical theories, or applied in the physical sciences,

 while the deductive structure of the proofs was studied by mathematicians, logicians

 and epistemologists as the ideal of reason itself. In this connection, a special histor
 ical role was played by the principles employed as grounds and foundations of the

 entire construction. Euclid had begun the Elements with a few unproven assumptions

 which had to be granted in order to establish his grand mathematical system. Since

 Antiquity, however, Euclid's system of principles has been repeatedly discussed and

 challenged: A few gaps in the proofs were found and the missing arguments pro
 vided with additional axioms; other Euclidean principles were in turn proven from

 more elementary statements and thus removed from the list of axioms; still others

 were worded in simpler ways, or changed to accommodate philosophical qualms or

 to satisfy architectonic considerations; and a few more were added in order to extend

 the geometrical results beyond the boundaries fixed by Euclid. These changes in the

 system of principles grounding elementary mathematics were among the most impor

 tant outcomes of the foundational studies carried out during the Early Modern Age.

 From the Middle Ages up to the beginning of the nineteenth century, hundreds of

 different editions of the Elements provided their own principles for the same cor

 pus of mathematical theorems; while the statements of the Euclidean propositions
 remained more or less the same, and the proofs themselves were seldom changed,

 we witness, in this period, an remarkable explosion of new principles aimed at rigo

 rizing, systematizing and improving Euclid's work. The enormous creativity of these

 foundational attempts is attested by the invention of some 350 different axioms for

 elementary mathematics, with some works employing as many as fifty of them to

 ground the theorems of the Elements (Euclid himself probably only had ten princi

 ples). Many of these new axioms have great mathematical significance and introduced

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 593

 into the foundations of mathematics several important ideas that were to be given a full

 development only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. They concern continu

 ity issues in the Euclidean plane, properties of incidence in two or three dimensions,

 Archimedean and non-Archimedean quantities, mereological relations, congruency

 and rigid motion, the Parallel Postulate and the Euclidean metric, or the first attempts

 at an axiomatization of arithmetic and algebra. In this connection, it is very important

 to stress that the best-known works on the foundations of mathematics produced in

 the modern age, such as Dedekind's, Frege's and Peano's works on the principles of

 numbers, or Pasch's, Pieri's and Hilbert's famous axiomatizations of geometry, by no

 means represent the sudden discovery of the need for rigorous foundations, but are

 rather the late and highly perfected outcomes of a long tradition that had been devel

 oping almost continuously from the time of Euclid onward. Even if it may be difficult

 to precisely ascertain a direct influence exerted by these early modern programs on,

 say, Hilbert's Grundlagen der Geometrie, there can be no doubt that these important

 mathematical works of the previous centuries did indirectly affect modern, formal

 research on axiomatics. I will not pursue here, however, the search for the sources of

 nineteenth-century foundational studies, as this would require an altogether different

 approach. In any case, while the development of the foundations of mathematics in the

 last two centuries has already been studied in some depth, the history of axiomatics in

 the Renaissance and the Early Modern Age is still largely neglected, and I hope that

 the present essay can represent a beginning on, and an invitation to, this rich field of

 research, as well as a useful tool for further investigations.

 I take this opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitude to Fabio Acerbi and Bernard

 Vitrac for their accurate reading of a draft of this paper that largely contributed to

 improve the present version. I greatly benefited from further suggestions offered by

 Niccolö Guicciardini, Jens H0yrup, Alexander Jones, John Mumma and Victor Pam

 buccian. I thank Sonja Brentjes for her invaluable help with the Arabic sources and

 for having helped me with the pseudo- Tusi text, and Philip Beeley, who informed

 me about Wallis's unpublished notes on Euclid and provided me with a copy of them.

 My special gratitude goes to the Library of the Max Planck Institute for the History of

 Science, for having provided me with several difficult-to-find editions of the Elements,

 and to Massimo Mugnai for his gift of a copy of Grandi's version of Euclid. Any further

 suggestion will be very welcome and will improve future editions of this essay.

 1 Introduction

 1.1 The Euclidean tradition

 In the present essay I consider the axiomatic systems of about a hundred editions of

 the Elements, ranging from Byzantine manuscripts down to early nineteenth-century

 printed volumes. In drawing up this list, I did not strive for completeness but rather

 for perspicuity, and I have selected a few important works among the enormous mass

 of manuscripts and books dedicated to the recension, translation and interpretation of

 Euclid. More exhaustive inventories of the editions of the Elements may be found in
 the bibliographical catalogues drawn up by Riccardi (1974) and Steck (1981); these

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 594

 V. De Risi

 catalogues are, however, themselves quite incomplete (in fact, a few of the books

 that I consider here are not even quoted in these accounts). I have mainly taken into

 consideration the early modern editions, although I have mentioned a few medieval

 manuscripts which are especially important for the history and the reception of the

 Elements. I also concentrated on Western mathematics, even though a few important

 developments in the Euclidean tradition first appeared in the medieval Islamic world;

 these works are only mentioned for the echoes that they have produced in the Latin tra

 dition. Although a complete recension of the Arabic editions of Euclid is still missing,

 it should be noted, in any case, that it does not seem that they offered a great diversity of

 axiomatic systems (see for instance Brentjes 1997). Among the early modern editions,

 I have normally only listed the printed and published works. In this respect, however,

 I have made a few exceptions, including in my list Maurolico's, Torricelli's, Wallis's,

 Pascal's, Roberval's and Newton's handwritten work on the principles of geometry,

 which seemed to me too important to be ignored. Several other similar essays (such
 as Leibniz's unpublished papers on the analysis situs) were not suitable to be eas

 ily included in the list and in any case did not exert any historical influence on the

 respective authors' own contemporaries.

 As a general rule, I have tried to include all those editions which proposed new

 axioms and principles, as well as those editions produced by mathematicians important

 in their own right (even if these editions did not represent any advancement in the

 axiomatic field), and the editions that possessed some special historical significance (by

 reason of their broad diffusion, for instance, or because they were the first editions in a

 particular modern language). I have only quoted the first edition of each work, unless

 the editions that followed introduced important changes in the system of principles
 (as is the case, for instance, of the second edition of Clavius's commentary, or of
 Arnauld's Nouveaux Elimens).

 A serious limitation of the field examined here is the fact that I have only con

 sidered editions of the Elements themselves, leaving aside all other material on the

 foundations of geometry. It should, however, be borne in mind that several important

 changes in the axiomatic systems were proposed in monographic essays dealing with

 special problems of the Euclidean text, as is the case, for instance, with several Arabic
 treatises, Wallis's or Saccheri's studies on the Parallel Postulate, or Galileo's new the

 ory of proportions. A few more principles of mathematics were discussed in general
 mathematical works (such as certain treatises on algebra, or an essay on fluxions)

 which did not comment at all on Euclid. That development of the axiomatics, then,

 which is to be found in the editions of the Elements only gives a part of the whole story:

 and yet, this is (by far) the largest part, as the main discussions on the foundations of

 geometry in the Early Modern Age did indeed take place in the Euclidean commen
 taries. Some of these commentaries, moreover, introduced innovations and alterations

 with respect to the Greek text of the Elements to such an extent as to become almost
 new treatises on the foundations of geometry. There is, therefore, a certain degrees
 of arbitrariness in the decision to include certain works in the list of the Euclidean

 commentaries, even though they departed very far from the original structure of the

 Elements, while excluding certain others as moving really too far away from the orig

 inal to be still considered discussions of Euclid's work itself. This is especially true as

 regards eighteenth-century manuals on elementary mathematics, which often offered

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 595

 a complete reworking of the content of the Elements and no longer had the form of
 a commentary at all. I have reproduced here the systems of axioms contained in a

 few of these manuals, choosing the most important representatives of the age (such

 as Simpson's or Kästner's books); the reader should, however, be aware that dozens
 of such volumes were produced in Europe at this time—and in eighteenth-century

 Germany in particular.

 It may perhaps be useful to provide, at this point, a short synoptic sketch of the

 general development of the systems of axioms employed in the various editions of the

 Elements from Antiquity up to the modern era.

 1.1.1 Antiquity and the Middle Ages

 Euclid's Elements (in thirteen Books) were probably written in the third century BC,

 drawing together materials from a more ancient mathematical tradition, and surely
 underwent several changes and modifications already during the Hellenistic Age.

 Several centuries later, the mathematician Theon of Alexandria (fourth century AD)

 prepared an edition of the Elements which has had a great importance in the following

 tradition of the text. The oldest extant copies of the Elements are, however, Byzantine

 manuscripts dating back to the beginning of the ninth century; later Greek manuscripts

 were in circulation among scholars during the Renaissance and in fact provided the

 Greek text for the first editions of Euclid in the modern world. One further important

 manuscript was discovered only at the beginning of the nineteenth century by Francois

 Peyrard, and it apparently contained a version of the Elements older than any other,

 and possibly predating Theon's editing of Euclid. At least, it seems that its author had

 access to both Theonine and non-Theonine manuscripts (it should be remarked that

 this statement, endorsed by many scholars, has been challenged by some others; see

 Knorr 1996). It is still considered the best guess which we possess regarding the orig

 inal form of Euclid's work, and has been employed by the Danish philologist Johan

 Ludvig Heiberg to prepare the only critical edition of the Elements (1883-1916) that

 we currently have. For a history of the Greek text of the Elements, see for instance
 Rommevaux et al. (2001).

 All these Greek manuscripts (both those pertaining to the "Theonine" tradition, and

 Peyrard's text) show many definitions prefacing several books of the Elements, and a set

 of fourteen of fifteen other principles (depending on the manuscripts) at the beginning

 of Book One. The latter principles were considered to be the only statements on which

 the mathematical construction of Euclid was to be based, and are divided into a first

 list of postulates (αίτή ματα) and a second list of common notions (κοιναι έννοιαι)

 or, as they were later to come to be called, axioms. The rationale behind this division of

 the principles into 'postulates' on the one hand and 'common notions' on the other was

 a subject of debate and controversy already in ancient times, and several philosophers

 and mathematicians advanced their own opinions on the epistemological status of

 these two distinct kinds of assumptions. We will not discuss this difficult topic here,

 but will note that all the editions of the Elements in the Early Modern Age, with no

 exception, were to preserve this distinction (even if they interpreted it in different
 ways).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 596

 V. De Risi

 Some principles among the fourteen or fifteen contained in the oldest manuscripts,

 however, came to be considered spurious already in Late Antiquity, and Proclus (fifth

 century, the author of a crucially important commentary on the First Book of the

 Elements) informs us that a number of them were in fact later interpolations. Mod

 ern philology inclines to accept Proclus's opinion and attempts to prove (even if on
 different grounds) that some of the principles must have been added in the ancient

 transmission of the text. A largely (but not unanimously) endorsed opinion among
 scholars is that Euclid originally had only ten principles (five postulates and five com
 mon notions), while the other axioms are Hellenistic additions. Some further doubts

 are usually raised about two common notions (CN4 and CN5) that some scholars

 would like to regard as interpolations as well; if this latter view holds true, then Euclid

 only had eight principles. We know, in any case, that several ancient mathematicians

 discussed the Euclidean system of principles, and began to add, change or remove a
 number of axioms and postulates; this seems to have been the case, for instance, of

 Apollonius, Geminus, Ptolemy and Pappus. In particular, Heron of Alexandria (proba

 bly first century AD) wrote a commentary on the Elements in which he addressed a few

 gaps in the Euclidean proofs and tried to fill them introducing new assumptions (which

 he may, however, have regarded as provable). While Heron's commentary is now lost,

 it was still known in the Islamic Middle Ages (see for instance Brentjes 1998, or the

 introductory essay to Acerbi and Vitrac 2014). A few fragments of it, moreover, circu

 lated in the commentary to the Elements written by Proclus, whose text enjoyed only a
 very limited circulation in the Middle Ages, but was rediscovered in the Renaissance.

 Similarly, Simplicius's commentary to the Elements (sixth century) was extensively
 read in the Arabic-speaking world, but was later lost. A few of the axioms added in

 the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, in fact, derive from these Greek commentaries,

 and from Heron in particular, as the philosophers Proclus and Simplicius did not dare

 to add their own principles to the "most perfect" work of Euclid.

 During the early Middle Ages knowledge of Euclid disappeared from the West

 (except for a few fragments preserved in a very elementary mathematical work
 attributed to Boethius), but flourished in the Islamic world. The Elements were trans

 lated into Arabic twice in the early ninth century by Al-Hajjäj, and again a few years

 later by Ishäq ibn Hunain (a better version than Al-Hajjäj's, revised by the great math

 ematician Thäbit ibn Qurra). These editions were translated from Greek manuscripts

 that were not very dissimilar to those which we still possess, and thus presented the

 extended system of principles (fourteen or fifteen of them) which were already com

 mon in Greek Late Antiquity. In the tenth century, the mathematician An-Nayrizi wrote

 an important commentary on Euclid, drawing on Simplicius's and Heron's (and those

 by others) new additional assumptions. Even though this was not an edition of the Ele

 ments themselves, but rather a commentary thereon, it was clear that Euclid's system

 of principles could, and probably should, be enlarged to fill the gaps present in several

 proofs. An-Nayrizi's commentary on Euclid survived as regards Books I-VI and X,

 with a very short fragment on Books VII and VIII and a longer fragment on Book IX.

 The Elements of Euclid reappeared in the West in the first half of the twelfth

 century, when Adelard of Bath translated into Latin an Arabic manuscript containing

 (a modified version of) Al-Hajjäj's translation. Adelard's edition was followed by
 several other translations made from similar Arabic sources (and thus with similar

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 597

 principles), and by the different translation of the Ishäq-Thäbit's version made by

 Gerardo da Cremona. Gerardo, however, also translated An-Nayrizi's commentary, and

 this paved the way for a reworking of the Euclidean axiomatics. Already in the edition

 of John of Tynemouth a few new principles were added at the beginning of Book VII

 of the Elements, which were partly drawn from An-Nayrizi. In the thirteenth century,

 Campano da Novara edited a final version of the Euclid of medieval tradition, collating

 together several previous translations and even an independent work (the Arithmetica

 by Jordanus de Nemore) to fashion a highly successful edition of the Elements. It

 contained sixteen geometrical principles in Book I and fourteen arithmetical principles

 in Book VII. Campano's version was widely used in the following centuries, and it

 was the first edition of the Elements to be printed, in 1482.

 1.1.2 The Renaissance

 Campano's edition and its axiomatic system were used several times in the follow

 ing century. Luca Pacioli produced an improved version of it, and Niccolö Tartaglia

 translated it into Italian in 1543 (altering a few axioms thereby). Tartaglia's edition

 inaugurated the translations of Euclid into modern languages and was followed by

 Xylander's translation into German (1562), Forcadel's into French (1564), Billings
 ley's into English (1570), Zamorano's into Spanish (1576) and Dou's into Dutch

 (1606). In the meantime, Greek manuscripts had begun to arrive in Europe, and Bar

 tolomeo Zamberti had translated the Elements into Latin directly from the Greek

 (1505), thus opening a new era in the philological reception of the text. In 1533 Simon

 Grynaeus published the editio princeps of the Greek text. The latter editions produced

 on the basis of the Greek text once again proposed the ancient system of principles

 which featured no arithmetical axioms nor any of the further corrections made by Cam

 pano. Grynaeus's edition, however, was based on a Greek manuscript that (probably
 following Proclus's hint) changed the division between postulates and axioms, and

 only admitted three postulates (PI, P2, P3, i.e., the clearly constructive ones), listing

 the others (P4, P5, P6) among the axioms. Grynaeus, in fact, even appended an edition

 of Proclus's commentary to Euclid's text: so that the system of principles contained in

 the editio princeps of the Elements was in fact a Neoplatonic philosophical construc

 tion. In any case, Grynaeus's edition of the Greek text remained the only one available

 for a very long time, and most of the "philological" editions of Euclid in Latin or in

 modern languages which were prepared in the following two centuries simply fol
 lowed Grynaeus's altered system of axioms and postulates (e.g., Caiani, Camerarius,

 Scheybl, Gracilis, Xylander, Dasypodius, Forcadel, Candale, Dou, Henrion, Keill).

 A debate on the superiority of Zamberti's and Grynaeus's Greek sources over Cam

 pano's Arabic ones then ensued; comparative editions were prepared; and even if, in

 the end, the Greek tradition prevailed in the hearts of the humanists and Campano's

 version was abandoned by the end of the sixteenth century, this latter's richer system

 of principles continued, nonetheless, to charm several geometers who prized mathe

 matical perspicuity (and soundness) above philological exactitude.

 A clearly recognizable line of French mathematicians dared to modify Euclid's sys

 tem of principles to comply with mathematical correctness. Jacques Lefevre d'fitaples

 published a new, enlarged system of arithmetical principles (drawing on Campano);

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 598

 V. De Risi

 Oronce Fine began to add a few new geometrical axioms; and Jacques Pelletier showed

 no hesitation in criticizing Euclid for his use of rigid motion in geometrical proofs, thus

 changing the system of principles in such a way to be able to dispose of these kind of

 demonstrations. A few years later, the mathematician Pedro de Μοηζόη, who had trans

 lated Fine into Spanish, collected the fruits of this innovative tradition and published

 an edition of Euclid that comprised forty-three principles (both geometrical and arith

 metical). Among the studies on the foundations of geometry in the sixteenth century,

 we should also mention the edition of Euclid produced by Herlinus and Dayspodius in

 1566, which rewrote all the proofs of the Elements, molding them into syllogistic form;

 this important advancement in the logical understanding of geometrical reasoning and

 the deductive structure of the Elements, however, simply accepted Grynaeus's system

 of principles, and added nothing to the science of axiomatics in the strictest sense. The

 culmination of the sixteenth-century debates on the Elements was attained in the 1570s,

 when Commandino and Clavius printed their important editions of the Elements.

 Federico Commandino published in 1572 his Latin (and Italian) version of Euclid,

 which was based on different Greek manuscripts and was in many respects more correct

 than Grynaeus's editio princeps (even though Commandino produced no edition of the

 Greek text itself). Even if Commandino clearly had important philological aims, he

 was also an outstanding mathematician and endorsed several changes in the axiomatic

 system which had been found necessary by the preceding tradition, adding a few
 further modifications himself; he added for the first time certain axioms in Book V

 and in Book X of the Elements. The very remarkable outcome is an edition of Euclid

 which can certainly be trusted for its philological accuracy but which nonetheless

 appeared much richer in foundational discussion (with a total of thirty-nine axioms
 and postulates), and many subsequent editions, both in Latin and in other, modern

 languages, in the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries, were simply to
 be based on Commandino's text.

 In 1574 the Jesuit mathematician Christoph Clavius published another crucially

 important edition of Euclid in Latin. Clavius's edition was by far the longest and

 most complete edition of the Elements ever produced, and was accompanied by a very

 long commentary that collected almost everything that had been published about the

 Euclidean text in the previous centuries. For this reason it quickly became the reference

 work for any further discussion on the foundations of geometry in the following two

 hundred years, and easily the most important edition of Euclid that was ever published.

 Clavius believed that the original Greek text was important and had to be preserved

 but that mathematical perspicuity was a higher aim; his compromise went further than

 Commandino's in correcting Euclid. Clavius himself envisaged a few new axioms

 that were useful, in his view, in order to rigorize the proofs of the Elements·, given

 the enormous success of this edition (and the fact that it immediately became the

 model for all the further Jesuit editions of Euclid), these new Clavian axioms were

 successively endorsed by almost the whole community of mathematicians. Another

 important aspect of Clavius's work on elementary geometry is that, in the 1580s,
 he came into contact with an Arabic edition of the Elements attributed to Nasir ad

 Din at-Tüsi (thirteenth century), and here he discovered the great difficulties that

 the Arab mathematicians had faced in attempting to prove the Parallel Postulate. In

 the 1589 edition of his commentary Clavius added Nasir ad-Din's alleged proof of

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 599

 the Parallel Postulate, together with a few reflections of his own, and this episode

 marked the beginning of the rich epoch of the attempts to prove the Parallel Postulate

 in Europe—an epoch that culminated in the eighteenth century, with the subsequent

 discovery of non-Euclidean geometry. Clavius's complete system of principles, which
 was to remain a milestone in the following developments, contained four postulates

 and twenty axioms in Book I (elementary plane geometry), one axiom in Book V (the

 theory of proportions), three postulates and twelve axioms in Book VII (arithmetic),

 and one postulate and three axioms in Book X (irrational magnitudes).

 1.1.3 The seventeenth century

 The seventeenth century was the most creative age in the invention and development

 of new principles for geometry and arithmetic, and in many respects the highest point

 of research into the foundations of mathematics in the Early Modern Age. Following

 an age in which the main goal seemed to be that of the restitution of an accurate text

 of the ancient mathematical work after the corruptions of the Middle Ages, the new

 century decidedly aimed at the reform and improvement of the Elements beyond what

 Euclid himself had been able to do. To this effect, several completely new systems of

 axioms were devised in order to ground elementary mathematics. This innovative line

 of attack to the ancient text was especially popular in France and Italy.

 French mathematicians often endorsed an epistemology of Ramist origins (that was

 later contaminated by similar stances emerging out of the new Cartesian tradition)

 which was intent on designating as an "axiom" any clear and evident mathematical

 proposition, and in any case any proposition the proof of which could be considered

 more complicated, and thus less evident, than the statement itself. Such an epistemol

 ogy, which was stated in its most classical form in the Logique de Port-Royal (1662),

 led to a flourishing of "evident" principles in this century's editions of Euclid which

 was without precedent in previous ages. Several mathematicians simply wrote down

 dozens of axioms and postulates at the beginning of the Elements without even trou

 bling themselves about whether they were actually needed for the proofs or whether

 they could be deduced one from the other. Into these highly pleonastic systems of

 principles, which were not inspired by any consideration of economy of means, a

 few good mathematicians also, indeed, inserted several important axiomatic princi

 ples which had been overlooked in the past and which were to play a central role in

 future axiomatizations. We may mention in this connection Herigone's edition of the

 Elements (1634), which contains forty-nine axioms and postulates, the greater part

 of them being extensions of the Euclidean common notions (i.e., principles on mere

 ology and equality), and also the edition by Claude Richard (1645), with forty-six

 principles mostly dealing with geometry and introducing a few "topological" axioms

 to guarantee the continuity of the figures and the existence of their intersection points

 (the so-called Line-Circle or Circle-Circle continuity axioms). Richard was a Jesuit,
 and, like him, other French Jesuit masters continued Clavius's work on the founda

 tions of mathematics, with the additional aim of producing pedagogically efficient

 handbooks of geometry; among their most remarkable outcomes, we may mention

 Tacquet's radical reform of the Elements and their principles, as well as the work by

 Dechales and Fabri. On the other side of the political-religious divide of the day, the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 600

 V. De Risi

 Jansenist theologian Antoine Arnauld wrote an important new reworking of elemen

 tary mathematics (1667, 1683), which also included many new axioms (forty-two in

 total) and was followed by several editions loosely inspired by it (by Lamy, Malezieu,

 Sauveur, and others). The most important breakthrough was probably achieved, how

 ever, by Pascal and Roberval, who wrote two very important essays on the foundations

 of geometry, both of which clearly show their mathematical genius. Neither of them,

 however, was published. Roberval's work survived in its entirety, while we only have
 the introduction (and the axiomatic basis) of Pascal's essay on elementary mathe

 matics. The latter text was copied by Leibniz in Paris in 1675, and largely inspired
 Leibniz's own work on the foundations of geometry (the analysis situs) which also

 offers a thoroughgoing discussion on axiomatics, but remained unpublished (and thus

 historically ineffectual) among Leibniz's papers in Hannover (on Leibniz's analysis
 situs, see De Risi 2007, 2015b).

 Italian studies on Euclidean axiomatics were mostly carried on by the school of

 Galileo and concentrated especially on the reform of the theory of proportions, since

 Galileo himself had attempted such a construction (in the unpublished Fifth Day of the

 Discorsi) and the topic was central to his project of the mathematization of mechanics.

 It is to Torricelli (1647), Borelli (165 8), Viviani (1674), Giordano (1680) and Marchetti

 (1709) that we mainly owe the progress made in this field. As compared to the French

 tradition, these Italian axiomatizations show less creativity in producing new axioms,

 but a greater attention to their systematic function and the economy of principles.

 From a purely logical point of view, some of these books may be considered to be the

 culmination of the logical reflection of the Elements, and Borelli's Euclides restitutus,

 in particular, marks a high point in researches on the foundations of mathematics.

 1.1.4 The eighteenth century

 In the eighteenth century, the foundational discussion on mathematics shifted for the

 most part outside the scope of the Elements. Most efforts were now dedicated to the

 many issues raised by the new Calculus, and reflection on the foundations of mathe

 matics was often aimed rather at justifying the employment of infinite or infinitesimal

 quantities; these discussions, however, are seldom to be found in an edition of Euclid.

 Even elementary mathematics is from time to time grounded on different principles,

 and algebra (for instance) offered the possibility of a dissimilar foundational approach,

 grounded in symbolic manipulations rather than simple geometrical constructions.
 The Elements were no longer regarded as the proper place for advancing a scientific

 discussion, but rather just as the most classical handbook for a basic schooling in

 mathematics. The outcome of this modified approach was, on the one hand, a growing

 attention to pedagogical improvements in the teaching of elementary geometry, and

 thus a proliferation of simplified editions for students, and on the other hand a reno
 vated search for a more reliable and philologically accurate edition of the Elements.

 The former attitude was especially widespread in France and Germany, where a

 large number of Euclidean textbooks were produced, often largely departing from

 the original text of the Elements. These systematizations of elementary mathematics
 do not offer much, however, as regards the foundational domain, and their axiomati

 zations are often oversimplifications of older editions. Whereas the epistemology of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 601

 the "clearness and evidence" of mathematical principles had resulted in France, in

 the previous century, in an overproduction of axioms, the same epistemology in the

 eighteenth century often yielded axiomless editions of the Elements, which merely

 made mention of the fact that several evident assumptions were implicitly employed

 in the development of the proofs (this is the case, for instance, of the celebrated book

 on elementary geometry written by Clairaut in 1741); a few other editions listed a

 small number of axioms, claiming that these were just examples of an infinite array of

 principles that cannot but remain implicit (see Deidier, 1739; or Legendre, 1794). In

 Germany the surviving Scholastic idea that all the axioms should ultimately be proven

 from the definitions also engendered several axiomless textbooks which enjoyed a

 wide diffusion (the most important representatives of these being Christian Wolff's,

 Andreas Segner's and Wenceslaus Karsten's German and Latin treatments of elemen

 tary mathematics). Nevertheless, there can be noted a few interesting developments

 in the area of axiomatization in this period, such as Samuel König's and Abraham
 Kästner's axiomatizations from 1758.

 The philological attitude toward the Elements, on the other hand, was especially

 common in Britain, where David Gregory produced an emended edition of the Greek

 text (1703) which may be considered the first improvement on this latter since Gry

 naeus. Robert Simson, likewise, published a highly successful edition of the Elements

 (1756) which aimed at restoring the Euclidean text to the state in which it existed before

 the interventions of Theon of Alexandria; this was in fact later to be accomplished

 by Peyrard through his discovery of an actual pre-Theonine manuscript (or, at least, a

 manuscript in which non-Theonine elements are to be found); Simson's attempt was

 based merely on some lucky guesses. If these philological editions offer nothing in the

 way of an actual development of axiomatics, the commentaries by Thomas Simpson

 (1747) and, to a lesser extent, John Playfair (1795), nonetheless added several impor

 tant principles, and attempted a new foundation of elementary mathematics. It may be

 mentioned that the axiomless attitude toward elementary geometry is well attested in

 Britain as well, with John Leslie's celebrated Elements of Geometry from 1809, and a

 famous Geometry without axioms, published by Perronet Thompson as late as 1833.

 We end our survey with Peyrard's edition of Euclid, published in 1814. This book,

 in which the Greek text was established from several manuscripts, marked the most

 relevant advancement in textual analysis so far and opened the rich era of nineteenth

 century Euclidean philology which eventually found its culmination in Heiberg's 1883

 edition of Euclid (largely based on the manuscript found by Peyrard). The discussion

 of the system of principles in the nineteenth century mostly developed in the form of

 monographic essays or independent treatises (such as those by Pasch, Frege, Peano or

 Hilbert) which completely abandoned the literary form of commentary on the text of

 Euclid. In the same years in which Peyrard was searching for Greek manuscripts, and

 in the following decades, when his recension of the text begun to acquire authority

 and to be translated into several languages, Poncelet and Staudt were developing

 new foundations for geometry starting from the projective properties of space, and

 Lobachevsky and Bolyai were publishing their treatises on hyperbolic geometry. The

 gradual development of projective geometry and the non-Euclidean systems, as well as

 the subsequent birth of abstract algebra and set theory, shifted most of the foundational

 attention to these new fields. It became clear that the Elements of Euclid could no longer

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 602

 V. De Risi

 stand as the systematic ground of modern mathematics, since the ancient text could

 not bear the weight of these new axiomatizations. A completely different approach to

 the foundations of geometry was then in need.

 1.2 Axioms and postulates

 I cannot attempt to present here a whole history of the epistemology of mathematics;

 nor to discuss of the meaning of the notions of axiom and postulate from Antiquity

 down to modern times; nor to give a list of the many and diverse goals that mathemati

 cians may have aimed at in reshaping the system of the Euclidean principles (for a few

 contemporary suggestions, see for instance Schlimm 2013). It should at least be noted,

 however, that many mathematicians in the Early Modern Age believed that axioms

 and postulates were in fact provable from definitions. They were not so much consid

 ered to be statements which admitted of no proof as statements which required none

 (since they were sufficiently evident already in themselves). In fact, however, a few of

 the most important editions of Euclid did explicitly prove the axioms and postulates;

 the commentary by Clavius, for instance, gave demonstrations for all mathematical

 principles except definitions. It then became a point of controversy whether or not it

 was useful to prove the axioms at all; many French authors during the seventeenth

 century, for instance, claimed that Clavius's exercise had plainly been futile. A further

 disagreement concerned the criterion which was to be applied in distinguishing a prin

 ciple from a theorem (as both of these latter are provable); the most common (and quite

 generic) answer given here was that, whereas an axiom or a postulate is immediately

 proven from the definitions, a theorem is only mediately proven from these latter (and

 from other theorems, and from other axioms); the notion of "immediacy" evoked here,

 however, remained quite vague. As the number of principles grew their demonstration

 was often omitted, and in many cases it is not easy to understand how such principles

 could have been proven or explained away. It has already been noted that many authors

 also claimed that the proper number of axioms should be regarded as infinite, and that

 the explicitly stated principles should be considered as merely examples and instances

 of the innumerable statements which immediately follow from the definitions them

 selves (or from the "essences" of the geometrical entities defined). I have found the

 first trace of this claim in a few medieval manuscripts of the Elements in the tradition

 of Robert of Chester (even though previous, more subtle traces of this attitude may

 be found in Ibn al-Haytham and the Arabic tradition), from whom the idea passed to

 Campano, and thus on into the mainstream epistemology of geometry. In any case, it

 should be clear that there is a sense in which definitions alone were considered the

 proper principles of mathematics, while axioms and postulates were often regarded as
 derivative statements.

 All this notwithstanding, I have, in the following pages, only listed axioms and

 postulates, leaving aside the definitions. The omission, however, is not as serious as

 it may at first appear. It should be remarked that the system of definitions is much

 more stable than the system of axioms and postulates, and the definitions found in

 the early modern editions of the Elements are quite close to the list found in the

 Greek manuscripts. When the moderns add or modify a few definitions, moreover,

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 603

 this seldom has any effect on the further mathematical development of the treatise.

 Some definitions were only changed in order to dispel certain purely epistemological

 qualms (for instance, some authors define a circle as the trace left by the endpoint

 of a rotating segment rather than as a line equidistant to the center, with the aim of

 giving an explicit construction and thus a "real definition" of the geometrical entity

 in question); other definitions were added in order better to explain a few passages in

 Euclid, or so as to be able to add a few theorems. In most cases, the original Euclidean

 definition is simply placed side by side with the new definition, which is then regarded

 as equivalent to this latter, without any proof being given for this assumption. In short,

 then, the system of definitions was usually only modified in respect of foundational

 preoccupations which did not affect the further mathematical treatment. The axioms

 and postulates which are derived (or which should be derived) from these definitions

 are the statements which are properly employed in the proofs and which therefore
 affect the deductive structure of the Elements.

 Nevertheless, it should be noted that a number of new definitions had real conse

 quences for the axiomatics: This is especially true for the definition of a straight line

 (which troubled several mathematicians over a period of many centuries), for the defi

 nition of parallel lines (as several such definitions were conceived in order to prove the

 Parallel Postulate) and for the whole definitional system of Book V of the Elements

 on the theory of proportions. It is still impossible, however, to account for them in a

 synoptic survey like this one, and the reader is simply warned that definitions may

 play a supplementary role in the system of principles that does not always appear in an

 entirely evident manner in the list of axioms and postulates. In order, then, to follow

 the developments consisting in the important attempts to prove the Parallel Postulate

 or to reform the Eudoxian theory of proportions, further references may be required.

 I have also omitted a small number of principles which are to be found in a few

 encyclopedic works on mathematics which also contain a section on the Elements

 inasmuch as these principles are irrelevant from a foundational point of view. Some
 of them are simply logical or metaphysical statements, and have no mathematical

 meaning. For instance, it is not uncommon in some Scholastic works to find stated, as

 an axiom, the Principle of Contradiction, or the Aristotelian claim that mathematics

 is a discipline abstracted from sensible magnitudes, or the claim that it is possible

 to consider the surface of a thing while abstracting from its body. Some other prin

 ciples are properly mathematical, but have no foundational meaning. For instance,

 a few handbooks list, among the arithmetical axioms, certain principles explaining

 the working of the positional notation of numbers. These kinds of principle may be

 important for the history of notations and mathematical culture, but their relevance

 is one that lies far wide of the aim of the present essay. An example of both kinds

 of principles is to be found in the Arithmetica perfecta by Georg Henisch (1609, not

 included in the following list of mathematical editions), which contains sixteen axioms

 and seven postulates for arithmetic, none of which has anything to do with the theory

 of numbers in the modern sense; the first axiom states that numbers are potentially but

 not actually infinite, the third that a number cannot perform any action, the seventh

 that the natural order of numbers is from the left to the right, the ninth that zero means

 nothing in itself but adds much value to another number if it is placed at the end of

 it, while the second postulate states that it is possible to distinguish a whole number

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 604

 V. De Risi

 from its decimal part by placing a comma in the right place. Interesting as they are, I

 have excluded these kinds of principle from my list. It should always be remembered,

 in any case, that a mathematical treatise of the Renaissance or of the Early Modern

 Age (even an edition of Euclid) may include an assortment of topics which look very

 odd from a contemporary perspective.

 In listing the various principles, I have divided them into thirteen different classes,

 in accordance with their different mathematical meanings. It should be noted that this

 division was only carried out in order to facilitate the comparison between principles

 and has no roots in the real historical development: The actual classification and

 grouping of principles in the various Euclidean editions is given under each entry, and

 this classification and grouping is normally only concerned with a division in books

 and between postulates and axioms. My own arrangement is loosely based on Hilbert's

 work on the foundations of geometry (which offers a classification of principles that

 is still useful and fully perspicuous), but I was obliged to incorporate a few changes

 to Hilbert's list in order to accommodate the incredible variety of ancient axioms. In

 particular, it will be noted that Hilbert's "axioms of order" are absent from our list:

 This is an important feature of ancient and early modern mathematics which never

 thematized relations of order as such. These began to be studied in projective geometry

 and had to wait until a still later period to be incorporated into an axiomatic system.
 Hilbert himself attributed the introduction of this kind of axioms to Pasch (1882),

 and this event should be regarded as an important breakthrough in the history of the

 foundations of geometry; Pasch's axiom is nonetheless hinted at in a few early modern

 axiomatizations (see below). To facilitate a comparison with the modern discussion

 on axiomatics, I include Hilbert's system of axioms in the Grundlagen der Geometrie

 (1899, with a few revisions in the following editions) after the other lists of principles.

 For Hilbert's own historical sources, see Hallett and Majer (2004), and Volkert (2015)

 (which also offers a short history of geometrical axiomatics).

 A few remarks are in order to explain some of the principles and their classification.

 1.2.1 Ancient principles (Groups 1 and 2)

 The Euclidean list of five Postulates and five Common Notions follows Heiberg's

 edition and finds its main foundation and justification in a number of comments made

 by ancient scholars, who had in their hands editions of the Elements with lengthier

 systems of principles but claimed that some of them had been added in the centuries

 following Euclid. The additional principles are here listed as P6* and CN6*-CN9*.

 Axiom CN8*, in particular, is attributed by Proclus (In Euclidis 197) to Pappus (along

 with Ml and M2, see below). Besides the principles which can be found in the Greek

 manuscripts of the Elements, we also mention a few other axioms and postulates

 which are explicitly stated in ancient commentaries and which clearly influenced the

 following editions, as well as a few important variants of these. Among these axioms

 and postulates, the extra assumptions EX1, EX2 and EX3 are attributed by Proclus

 (In Euclidis 198) to Pappus as well, and traces of them are evident in several further

 axioms, as well as in the definitions of a straight line and a plane; they are, however,

 nowhere formulated as axioms in a system of principles (even though Albert the Great

 mentioned them as possible additional axioms in his commentary to Euclid, see Tum

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 605

 mers 2014). Other ancient assumptions which did find their way into medieval or early

 modern axiomatizations will be listed under the respectively appropriate category.

 A few postulates changed their formulation in different editions of the Elements. In

 particular, Postulate 2 on the extendibility of a straight line states, in its original form,

 that the straight line may be produced continuously (κατά τό συνεχές). Already in

 the translation of Adelard of Bath (from the Arabic), however, the postulate is altered

 so as to make it into a statement about the extendibility of a straight line to an arbitrary

 length ("assignatam lineam rectam quantolibet spacio directe protrahere"), dropping

 the aspect of continuity and stressing rather the length of the extension. In Gerardo

 da Cremona we also find a version stating the indefinite extendibility of the line, the

 original meaning of which may have been the same as that conveyed by Adelard's
 translation. Both versions of the axiom were to be much used in the Renaissance and

 the Early Modern Age. The modified statement was employed by Campano, and it is

 common in the tradition stemming from him (in Tartaglia, for instance, or in some

 Jesuit textbooks), while the Greek formulation is to be found in Zamberti, Grynaeus,

 Commandino, Clavius and other authors more attentive to philological qualms. This

 notwithstanding, the two traditions mixed very soon, and it is not uncommon to find the

 statement about indefinite extension also in editions translated from the Greek; early

 instances of this attitude are the Elements edited by Xy lander, Forcadel and Grienberger

 (who was normally copying his principles from Clavius), but many more may be found

 in the seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries. I have not signaled these oscillations, as

 the various spelling of the principle were clearly considered as equivalent, and in

 a few volumes their equivalence is in fact explicitly stated. It should be remarked

 that the version of P2 stating the indefinite extendibility of the line was sometimes

 transformed into a claim regarding the infinite extendibility of it (instances are Herlin

 & Dasypodius, Richard, Arnauld and others). Even though the latter spelling may have

 played a role in establishing the modern non-constructivist theory (i.e., that straight

 lines are just infinite), the early modern authors that employed the word "infinite" in

 this connection always added that it was a potential infinite (or a "syncategorematic

 infinite," following Richard's Scholastic wording), and therefore it could be equated
 with the standard notion of an "indefinite" extension.

 The most important geometrical principle added in Antiquity, however, was the one

 stating that two straight lines do not enclose a space (P6*). This axiom is often stated

 in this form, even though it is also found from time to time (and more frequently in

 the Early Modern Age) as the simpler statement that two straight lines have at most

 one point in common (117; the first instance of it seems to be in Arnauld, 1663), or a

 variation of the latter (e.g., 131,132). While principles P6* and 117 are not equivalent

 in general (in elliptic geometry 117 obtains and P6* does not), the counterexamples

 were too abstract to be made specific note of by early modern mathematicians, who

 regarded the two axioms as interchangeable.

 1.2.2 The theory of magnitudes (Groups 3 and 4)

 I include under this heading several principles which are obvious extensions of the

 Euclidean Common Notions, and which deal with mereology, mereological addition

 and subtraction, equality, and relations of order among magnitudes. These principles

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 606

 V. De Risi

 were often looked upon as the main axioms of the mathesis universalis, that is to say, of

 a mathematical theory which aspired to encompass both geometry and arithmetic (or,

 in other words, a theory of both continuous and discrete quantities). Many of them were

 later to be applied in the theory of proportions, which has also been conceived by some

 authors as a form of universal mathematics. A number of them are especially connected

 with the arithmetical axioms and may in fact be conflated with them; the reason is

 that numbers themselves were often conceived of as collections of unities (this is the

 Euclidean definition in Elements VII, def. 2), and therefore the rules of composition
 and division of numbers were stated as mereological operations (cf. Elements VII,

 def. 3-4). The axioms which I have listed under the category of the theory of numbers

 (Group 7) should therefore be integrated with the principles regarding sum, subtraction

 and multiplication of magnitudes which are also presented here.

 Many of the principles listed here concern the transitivity of some relation or oper

 ation (taking as a model CN1), and usually aim at establishing an equivalence relation

 of some kind. Other principles are directly about the substitutivity of equivalent mag

 nitudes in several contexts (see especially A18, A19). Still other principles are aimed

 at providing an ordering structure for magnitudes (although these should not be con

 fused with the missing geometrical axioms of order), and, to this effect, there were

 also conceived and stated certain axioms on trichotomy (see A3, A21, A24).

 A corruption of the medieval text appears to be the insertion of the Common Notion

 A1, which seems to be a useless reduplication of CN1. This first appeared in Adelard's

 version, which, in turn, lacks axiom CN8*; it is very likely that a trivial translation

 slip from the Greek into the Arabic, to be found in the Al-Hajjaj tradition, changed the

 original CN8* into Al (such a mistake is probably absent from the Ishäq ibn Hunain
 translation, and therefore also from Gerardo da Cremona's Latin version, which was

 drawn from this Arabic source). The mistake, however, spread in the whole tradition

 following Adelard (Robert of Chester, John of Tynemouth, Campano da Novara).

 The spelling of CN1 and Al is in fact slightly different, but it is hard to figure out a

 proper difference in meaning: in Adelard's prose, CN 1 reads "Si fuerint alique due res

 alicui rei equales, unaqueque earum erit equalis alteri," while Al reads "Si fuerint

 due res alicui uni equales, unaqueque earum equalis erit alterr·, Campano changed
 the formulation, and his CN1 is "Que uni & idem sunt equalia, & sibiinvicem sunt

 equalia," while his A1 is "Si fuerint due res uni equales ipse sibiinvicem erunt equales."

 Luca Pacioli, in 1509, tried to preserve the received text and explained the difference

 between the two axioms in terms of their being an abstract and a concrete version of

 the same principle. In 1543, Niccolö Tartaglia simply eliminated Al from the list of

 axioms, reintroducing CN8* (following, in this one instance, Bartolomeo Zamberti's

 translation from the Greek, which had not suffered from the Arabic textual corruption).

 On the other hand, Pierre Herigone's principle A15, stating that things equal to equal

 things are also equal to one another, may be regarded as a axiom different from CN 1, as

 it expresses a more complex relation than simple transitivity (i.e., if α = b and c — d
 and b = d, then a = c). The same holds for Herigone's M20 and M21 compared with
 CN8*, and M23 with CN9*.

 Axioms Ml and M2, added by Gerardo da Cremona, are taken from An-Nayrizi's

 commentary; Proclus (In Euclidis 197) attributes them to Pappus. Principle A4 is

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 607

 almost classical and will be repeated very often in the Euclidean tradition, but it is first

 stated as an axiom in Bradwardine's geometry.

 It may be remarked that many of the principles under this heading were introduced

 during the Renaissance (by Lefevre, Commandino, and Clavius), and that they were
 in fact among the first newly conceived axioms for the Elements. Herigone also con

 tributed much to this category, in an attempt to completely formalize the relations of

 equivalence. In many respects these principles may be considered to constitute the

 prehistory of the attempts later made toward an axiomatization of algebraic relations.

 1.2.3 The theory of proportions and the Axiom of Archimedes (Groups 5 and 6)

 The theory of proportions, to be found in Book V of the Elements, is probably that

 part of elementary mathematics which has undergone, in the history of the Euclidean

 corpus, the greatest amount of modification. It was entirely based on a complex system

 of definitions, possibly conceived by Eudoxus, which suffered serious textual corrup

 tions during the Middle Ages, and which affected all the medieval Latin translations

 depending on Adelard (including Campano): see Murdoch (1963) and Molland (1983)

 for a first survey. On the other hand, an entire new theory was developed in the Arabic

 world (from a few hints in classical sources), the so-called anthyphairetic theory of

 ratios, which however (as far as I know) was never axiomatized and reduced to prin

 ciples (see, for instance, Itard 1961). The original meaning of the theory expounded

 in Book V of the Elements was recovered during the Renaissance, and the restitution

 of Euclid on this topic was in fact the aim of many philological editions. Once the text

 was established, several criticism were raised against it, as its meaning remained for a

 long time quite obscure. Later on, it was widely accepted and began to be regarded as

 the highest point of the mathematical construction of the Elements. In fact, the theory

 of proportion was adopted as the main mathematical tool to express the laws of Nature

 at the dawn of the scientific revolution. This, in turn, produced several attempts to

 reform the Eudoxian theory so as to adapt it to the needs of the new science, and in

 the first half of the seventeenth century many new principles were envisaged in order

 to fashion theories of ratios which were grounded on very different foundations. The

 theory gradually waned in the second half of the century, when algebra and analysis

 took its place as the tools with which Nature might be mathematized.

 Given that the theory was originally founded on a system of definitions, many of the

 further efforts were also aimed at a reformation of the Euclidean definitions, and the list

 of axioms presented under this heading do not faithfully represent the actual debates

 on the matter. The first mathematician to substitute axioms for definitions in the theory

 of proportions was Francesco Maurolico (in 1567), whose work remained unpublished

 but probably exerted a certain influence on further studies thanks to its manuscript cir

 culation. We know, for instance, that Clavius studied Maurolico's notes (even though

 this is not apparent in Clavius's own work on the theory of proportions), while we

 find traces of Maurolico's axiomatization in Giovan Battista Benedetti (1585), who in

 turn had a strong influence on Galileo and his school. Borelli himself gained access
 to Maurolico's manuscripts before writing his Euclides restitutus (1658). It will be

 noted, in any case, that most of the axioms in the theory of proportions come from

 editions produced in the second half of the seventeenth century (i.e., after Galileo's

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 608

 V. De Risi

 death), when the theory itself had but very little foundational significance as it had been

 already superseded by more advanced developments in analysis and algebra. These

 axiomatizations may nonetheless stand as testimony to the fact that the axiomatic

 approach (here contrasted with the definitional approach) to the foundations of mathe

 matics was, by the end of the seventeenth century, on the point of triumphing. It should

 also be noted that many among the first propositions of Book V of the Elements were

 employed as axioms; the general idea was that they were immediate consequences
 of the difficult, or debatable, Eudoxian definitions and (in this case) could perhaps

 be substituted for them as more perspicuous principles. Thus, even if we may regard

 some of the new foundations of the theory of proportions as very remarkable logical

 accomplishments, it is difficult to find any single axiom of the theory which might

 be considered as a substantial progress as regards formalization. We should, however,

 mention the axiom of the existence of the fourth proportional (Rl, R17, R25), which

 was implicitly employed by Euclid in proving Elements V, 18, and engendered a wide

 debate on the very notion of mathematical existence and existential assumptions (for

 instance, Clavius claimed that a fourth proportional to three given magnitudes has to

 exist, since its existence does not entail any contradiction—thus equating mathemati

 cal existence and logical consistency). The missing principle had been already noticed

 in the Middle Ages, and Khayyäm, for instance, had attempted to prove it (see Rashed
 and Vahabzadeh 1999, pp. 350-351).

 Strictly connected with the theory of magnitudes and the theory of ratios is the

 so-called Axiom of Archimedes, and the notion of Archimedean quantities, which

 was first formulated by Euclid (or by Eudoxus) as a foundational definition in the

 theory of ratios (Elements V, def. 4), and later also stated, in a different version, as an

 assumption (λαμβανόμενον) of Archimedes's De sphaera et cylindro. This principle
 was introduced among the axioms of the Elements by Commandino (axiom AA1)

 and was re-stated in several other editions. Its immediate application in a geometrical

 context was the debate on the angle of contact that had classical sources (Proclus,

 Simplicius) but especially flamed in the Renaissance and the Early Modern Age,
 when Clavius, Wallis and many others discussed whether a curvilinear angle (which

 has no finite ratio with a rectilinear one) might still be considered an angle (and an

 array of related questions). A few decades after Commandino's axiomatization, in any

 case, the theory of indivisibles was developed in Italy (by Cavalieri, Torricelli and

 others), and these non-Archimedean quantities gave rise to a further, wider debate

 on their admissibility in mathematics; still later, similar concerns were raised about
 the infinitesimals of the new Calculus. The debate itself, then, on the Archimedean

 Axiom is mainly to be found outside of the domain of elementary mathematics, and

 many eighteenth-century treatises on analysis deal with the topic. Nevertheless, it
 continued to contribute to enlarging the number of the axioms in the Elements in

 various forms. Indeed, among the editions of the Elements, the only (very partial)

 axiomatization of a theory of non-Archimedean quantities is to be found in the edition

 of the Elements produced by Bernard Lamy (1685), and perhaps in the unpublished

 papers by Roberval, whose axioms 118-121 (that I have arranged in Group 9 following
 their most immediate meaning) might also be read as a foundation of a theory of

 non-Archimedean magnitudes.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 609

 1.2.4 The principles of arithmetic (Group 7)

 As is well known, Euclid included no principles at all (except definitions) in the
 arithmetical books of the Elements. The reasons for his treating arithmetic differ

 ently from geometry in this way are hard to envisage precisely. My guess is that the

 epistemology of Euclid's age neither required nor allowed the use of subject-specific

 axioms in any form. The notion of this age was that a perfect science ought to be

 grounded in definitions and general logical laws alone (that may include laws on

 quantity, i.e., "common notions") without recurring to any further specific principle.

 Postulates were allowed in the geometrical books to answer a few sophistical objec

 tions and were intended to warrant those auxiliary constructions which were needed

 in the proofs, but since the arithmetical proofs were considered to have no need of

 any preparatory κατασκευή, and to be susceptible of being carried out in a purely
 demonstrative way (that is, through a simple άπόδειξις), no postulates were added

 in Book VII (note, however, that a few propositions of this book require, indeed, that
 the mathematician is allowed to take or construct certain numbers; from these few

 instances, the notion of an arithmetical postulate will later arise). In sum, the very

 possibility of arithmetic-specific axioms was inconceivable to Euclid (or was, at least,

 considered by him to be simply wrong), and their first appearance became a possi

 bility only in the late Hellenistic age, if only in the form of assumptions that should

 (and could) be proven through a further analysis of the matter. In any case, it must

 be stressed once again that the ancient conception of a system of axioms was very

 different from our own, and that the need for principles in a given domain was not seen,

 in Antiquity, as a logical necessity (to rule and define such domain), but rather as a

 shortcoming characteristic of an imperfect science which needed to make assumptions

 in order to justify its development; from this point of view, it seems clear that no Greek

 could ever have had the sense that anything was missing from the arithmetical books

 of the Elements simply by reason of the fact that they contained neither axioms nor
 postulates.

 Be it as it may, however, the conspicuous absence of arithmetical principles in the

 Elements had paramount consequences for the later history of mathematics and episte

 mology. Whereas the axiomatization of geometry was, in fact, discussed for centuries

 and hundreds of new principles were invented and tested for it, the foundations of arith

 metic remained an issue which was almost entirely neglected until the great formal

 constructions of the nineteenth century (by Dedekind, Frege and Peano, for instance),

 with geometry remaining during all this preceding period the grounding discipline for

 the whole of mathematics. We may recall that Kant himself, in the Critique of Pure

 Reason, still attempted (at the very end of the eighteenth century) a philosophical

 justification of the fact that geometry has axioms, while arithmetic has no proper prin

 ciples of its own (KrV, A163-165/B204-206). These common epistemological views,

 which in many respects were just the outcomes of a mathematical tradition (possibly

 consolidated by the loss of the arithmetical axiomatizations of Late Antiquity), were

 a further cause of the long delay in the discovery and outline of a transparent structure

 for the theory of numbers.

 It should not be thought, however, that attempts at moving toward an axiomatization

 of arithmetic were completely absent from the Early Modern Age or in the tradition of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 610

 V. De Risi

 Euclid's Elements. In fact, the first printed volume of the Elements (1482) was based

 on the medieval edition of Campano da Novara (thirteenth century), who had, in his

 time, depended on several other Arabic sources. Campano's crucially important edi

 tion prefaced Book VII of the Elements with four postulates and ten common notions

 bearing on arithmetic, thus constituting a first attempt at an axiomatization of the

 theory of numbers. When, a few years later, a sounder text of Euclid's Elements was

 translated into Latin by Bartolomeo Zamberti—which translation, of course, being

 based this time on a Greek original, presented no principles in Book VII—the new

 humanistic environment of the Renaissance was quick to reckon the interpolated arith

 metical axioms as examples of the barbarisms of a dark age; the greater part, therefore,

 of the subsequent editions of Euclid (up to the age of Kant) simply stuck to philology

 and ignored these principles. This notwithstanding, Campano's edition, which was

 so important in the mathematical studies of sixteenth century, proved able to assert

 itself in foundational research. The important editions of Euclid by Commandino and

 Clavius followed the Greek text (rather than Campano's Arabized Latin) but found it

 useful, for foundational purposes, to interpolate Campano's arithmetical axioms into

 Book VII. Even if their choice was not followed by several other important editions

 (which eschewed any textual addition), a minority tradition regarding the Elements
 continued to include arithmetical axioms, and these were sometimes discussed, mod

 ified, extended or reduced depending upon the particular foundational opinions of

 the mathematical editor. In this way, a persistent practice of axiomatic discussion

 on the theory of numbers was established and, although this discussion remained

 far less developed than that regarding the foundations of geometry, an unbroken line

 may be observed to run from Campano down to those important contributions of

 the nineteenth century which, in many respects, grounded contemporary foundational
 research.

 We may well ask, however, what were Campano's own sources. It is easy enough to

 establish that Campano, who was more a compiler than a translator, took his fourteen

 principles of Book VII from two different sources: the Arithmetica of Jordanus de

 Nemore (a treatise which is not immediately connected with the Euclidean tradition)
 and the translation of the Elements, from the Arabic, of John of Tynemouth (both

 thirteenth century).

 Jordanus's life, education and culture (even his nationality) are unknown, and so are

 his sources (on him, see H0yrup 1988). He was, however, undoubtedly a very good

 mathematician and may have invented his system solely with a view to providing

 principles for arithmetic. Two of his principles are already to be found in Proclus

 (whose work Jordanus probably could not have known, since Proclus's commentary

 to Euclid is believed to have been rediscovered in the West only at the end the fifteenth

 century, and to have not been know in its entirety to the Arabic world); these, however,

 are just interpolations from the text of Euclid (see below), and Jordanus may have

 re-interpolated them as Proclus (or someone else) did before him. A few others of

 Jordanus's principles have undoubtedly a Greek flavor, but some others are decidedly
 formulated in medieval terms (one of them, for instance, refers to the medieval notion

 of denominatio). In any case, it is very unlikely that Jordanus could have had access

 to any Greek text, and we are obliged to hold that, if he had sources at all, they were

 probably Arabic. But whatever Jordanus's sources were (if any), it seems likely that

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 611

 he had modified and refashioned them so as to better fit his own use of them and his

 own conceptual instruments; we cannot say for certain whether he himself conceived

 the idea of introducing axioms into the domain of arithmetic, or whether found it

 in an older text. It should lastly be noted that Jordanus fashioned a few arithmetical

 definitions as well that Campano added in his Elements.

 Tynemouth's sources, on the other hand, are relatively clear: The arithmetical

 axioms given by him all come from the Arabic commentary on the Elements (which was

 not itself an edition of Euclid) authored by the Persian mathematician and astronomer

 An-Nayrizi (tenth century), who had had, in turn, some access to Heron of Alexan

 dria's lost commentary on Euclid. We do not know whether Heron had provided

 a proper set of axioms for arithmetic: From An-Nayrizi's wording, it seems rather

 that he simply took note of a few assumptions which seemed necessary in order to

 complete this or that proof of Euclid's, and he may even have proven these further
 assumptions (see Vitrac 1990-2001, vol. 2, pp. 292-296); from Proclus (In Euclidis

 196), we know that Heron had in fact reduced the number of the Euclidean common

 notions to three, and it would be strange if Proclus did not mention in this connection

 Heron's addition of several arithmetical axioms, if indeed this had really occurred. It

 is possible, but unlikely, that an Arabic edition of the Elements had already inserted

 these assumption into the Euclidean text labeling them as axioms of Book VII. In any
 case, An-Nayrizi's commentary had already been translated into Latin by Gerardo

 da Cremona in the twelfth century, and Tynemouth may have been able to interpo

 late these Heronian assumptions, as proper arithmetical axioms, into his edition of the

 Elements—something that had not been done by either An-Nayrizi, or Gerardo. In this

 way, Tynemouth inaugurated the modern practice of regarding the Euclidean theory
 of numbers as an axiomatic domain.

 The question of a possible Greek axiomatization of arithmetic is, in any case, rele

 vant indeed. No Greek arithmetical work (such as Diophantus's, for instance) has come

 down to us which explicitly mentions any principle besides the definitions. Even if,

 of course, the greater part of the ancient mathematical texts are lost, this may at first

 appear to be a confirmation that Euclid's practice in Book VII was followed by the

 entire Greek tradition. There has come down to us, however, a (highly problematic)

 contrary instance in Proclus. The Neoplatonic philosopher, in his commentary on

 Book One of Euclid's Elements, discussed several opinions regarding the basis of the

 distinction between axioms and postulates. One of them consisted simply in the con

 tention that axioms (or "common notions") are principles shared by all mathematical

 sciences, and thus by both geometry and arithmetic in particular (that is to say, they

 form the principles of what will be later called the mathesis universalis). Another way

 of spelling out the difference between axioms and postulates, however, is that axioms

 express states of affairs (e.g., "all right angles are equal"), while postulates license

 constructions ("to draw a straight line between two points"). If the latter distinction

 is accepted, Proclus said, we may still conceive that there are general principles of

 a mathesis universalis, and these will be, in their turn, distinguished into general

 axioms and general postulates, and we will also have specific geometrical postulates

 and axioms, and specific arithmetical postulates and axioms. Proclus (In Euclidis 184)

 gave as examples of these arithmetical principles such propositions as "Every number
 is measured by the number one" (axiom), and "A number can be divided into least

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 612

 V. De Risi

 parts" (postulate). This is possibly the only mention of arithmetical principles that is

 to be found in the whole Greek mathematical corpus.

 It is not easy to understand the actual historical relevance of Proclus's remark,
 or whether it should be considered as a piece of evidence for the existence of a

 well-developed (but now lost) system of axioms for arithmetic already in ancient
 times. On a first reading, this seems not to be the case: Proclus's argument here is

 clearly dictated by a concern for symmetry (if geometry has postulates and axioms,
 then arithmetic must have its own as well) and may just represent the philosoph

 ical hobby-horse of a metaphysician trying to introduce some order into certain

 disordered mathematical writings which did not fit well with his elegant episte

 mological design. If this is the case, we should not expect to find that any Greek

 mathematician ever developed an axiomatic approach to arithmetic. And yet the

 examples that Proclus gives are grounded in real mathematical needs: His axiom is

 an assumption (explicitly) taken for granted by Euclid in Elements VIII, 6, while
 his postulate is assumed in the proof of Elements VII, 31. They thus appear to

 enjoy the same status as those other principles which, already in ancient times, were

 extrapolated from Euclid's demonstrations, where they appeared as unwarranted, and

 transformed into axioms (for example, the axiom that "two straight lines do not

 enclose a space", which Proclus himself considered spurious, seems to have been
 taken from a similar statement appearing in the proof of Elements I, 4). It would be

 odd if Proclus, when inventing two principles exemplifying the existence of arith

 metical axioms and postulates, had happened to hit upon exactly these propositions;

 it seems more likely that he was taking them from an existing edition of the Ele

 ments, or a commentary thereon, where they had already been inserted as principles
 of the arithmetical books. It is hard to guess at Proclus's own source (if any) in

 this respect: It might have been Heron himself, but several other sources, Hellenis
 tic, Roman, or belonging to Late Antiquity, are also possible. Odd as it may seem

 that we find no further trace of arithmetical principles in any of the extant math

 ematical works of Antiquity, we do at least find, for the reasons given, a hint in
 Proclus that an axiomatization of arithmetic (be it in a systematic or unsystematic

 form) had been attempted already in ancient Greece. We know that Proclus had

 planned, and perhaps realized, a commentary on the other books of the Elements,

 and it is possible that much more information about these arithmetical principles

 was offered in these projected or lost commentaries, but we cannot say more (we

 have no extant commentary dating from antiquity on Elements VII, 31 and VIII,

 6). But it should be clear, in any case, that in Proclus's times (and possibly already

 in the age of Heron) mathematical epistemology had already changed, with respect
 to Euclid, to such an extent as at least to allow the possibility of an arithmetical
 axiomatization.

 As for those principles themselves which were envisaged in the centuries after
 Euclid, their relevance is very obvious, and even if they do not attain to (nor aim

 to attain to) the simplicity and effectiveness of Peano's axioms, they nonetheless

 formalize a vast array of those properties involved in basic operations on numbers,

 often with a very high degree of logical abstraction. It has already been noted that

 they should be read together with most of the general principles on the mereology of

 magnitudes (Groups 1-4).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 613

 1.2.5 Principles on space and situation (Group 8)

 I have placed under this heading a few very general principles which are more philo
 sophical than mathematical but which nonetheless enjoy an important geometrical

 significance. Many of them come from Francesco Patrizi's Delia nuova geometria
 (1587) and Pascal's Introduction ä la giometrie (1655). The importance of these two

 works consists in their claim that geometry should be regarded as the science of

 space (SI, S7), a contention which represented a rather new epistemological position
 in the sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries. Since the days of Eudoxus and Aristo

 tle, throughout antiquity and for a long time afterward, the science of geometry had

 tended to identify its proper and specific object rather as the notion of magnitude, or

 continuous quantity. As a consequence, spatial notions tended not to be represented

 in classical mathematical works and are not employed in the Elements. This situation

 persisted on into the Middle Ages, and indeed even on into the Renaissance and the

 Early Modern Age; the axioms of Groups 2-6 bear witness in fact, to the preeminence

 of the notion of magnitude over any other general concept. The new view that it was

 the proper and essential task of geometry to investigate space and spatial relations is a

 view which is first to be found in Patrizi's work (a book on elementary geometry which

 is otherwise unremarkable from the mathematical point of view); several decades later

 it resurfaces in Pascal's unpublished introduction to geometry, which had been, in its

 turn, inspired by the introduction of a few spatial terms into the mathematical treatises

 on perspective. Pascal's work influenced Leibniz's attempt to establish a new geom

 etry of space, which the latter named analysis situs·, finally, this Leibnizian project

 was among the motivating factors behind a proper development of spatial notions

 in late-eighteenth- and nineteenth-century geometry. For a survey of this important

 transformation of geometry, see the collection of essays published in De Risi (2015a);

 on Patrizi's new geometry, see in particular (De Risi 2014).

 It should be noted that projective geometry and non-Euclidean geometry are

 simply inconceivable without the notion of a geometrical space, and several prin
 ciples grounding modern geometry in the nineteenth century cannot but refer to
 spatial or positional concepts (including the above-mentioned axioms of order).
 The editions of the Elements which we consider below do not show evidence of

 these later outcomes, which fell outside of the domain of commentaries on Euclid,

 and were largely devised at periods situated some years beyond the chronolog
 ical boundary we have set. Nevertheless, it is important to observe how spatial
 notions were indeed employed in a number of works on the foundations of geom

 etry well before the nineteenth century. In particular, we may note that the notion

 of situation (Latin: situs), meaning the basic spatial relation obtaining between two

 objects, is the main tool used by Pascal to build up his own axiomatics (Patrizi also

 employed it in his definitions of geometrical entities). This notion was derived from

 the Euclidean treatise on Data, that is, from one of the very few essays belonging

 to ancient mathematics which (very briefly) discusses a spatial concept (i.e., posi

 tion, θέσις). The latter work had been translated into Arabic during the Middle
 Ages, and into Latin (from the Arabic sources) by Gerardo da Cremona; another

 Latin translation, made directly from the Greek, circulated in the Middle Ages,
 and was later superseded by Zamberti's translation; the first important editions,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 614

 V. De Risi

 though, came only with Hardy (1625) and Gregory (in his Euclidean edition from
 1703).

 We may also note that, in this Group of axioms, a number of principles also state the

 tridimensionality of space, an axiom which had been never explicitly assumed before
 the late Renaissance.

 1.2.6 Principles of incidence and continuity (Groups 9 and 10)

 Dimensional considerations are nonetheless central in the axioms of incidence, since

 these latter deal with the intersections of various geometrical figures. The axioms in

 this category are among the most interesting of our survey, and have survived in more

 intact forms into modern axiomatizations (such as Hilbert's). Their importance lies in

 their characterizing very basic geometrical entities, such as a straight line and a plane,

 the geometrical behavior of which had hardly been adequately captured by ancient or

 early modern definitions; in fact, in the absence of exact definitions of these notions,

 the axioms here in question formed the true principles employed in the proofs. While

 the origin of a number of these axioms is to be found in the Greek commentaries, many

 more were added by Clavius (who achieved important advances in this connection),

 and by Borelli, who introduced several axioms which were later to be employed by

 many other editions.

 We may note that Clavius's axioms 15 ("Two straight lines do not have a common

 segment") is from time to time also spelled as "Two straight lines which coincide in a

 segment, will coincide in their entirety (if extended far enough)" which is, however,

 an equivalent formulation of the former.

 It should also be noted that, contrary to Hilbert's neater axiomatization, the present

 category has no clear boundaries, and a few principles classed here might well also
 have been classed among the principles of congruence: see, for instance 110,124, or

 the series of axioms by Lamy regarding perpendicular lines; postulate 14, which is a

 simple extension of P2 to a higher dimension, is not, properly speaking, a principle of

 incidence either; nevertheless, it may legitimately be placed here since it expresses the

 indefinite (or infinite) extension of planes (it may also be regarded as a specification

 of EX1). The lack of sharp boundaries is especially evident with respect to the group

 formed by the principles of continuity, some of which can be distinguished only

 with difficulty from those of incidence; my basic criterion of distinction here was to

 include all principles which dealt with intersections with bounded figures among those

 of continuity (the only exception being CI 1).

 Rather than assuming a single all-encompassing continuity principle (as did, for

 example, Hilbert) early modern axiomatizations attempted to solve the problem of

 spatial connection by means of a vast array of properly geometrical principles. Several

 of them were developed in the course of discussing the proof of Elements 1,1, in which

 a number of mathematicians believed they could identify a demonstrative gap, since

 Euclid did not prove that two drawn circumferences actually meet in two points. Borelli

 is, once again, a good example of this kind of discussion, which fills some pages of
 his Euclides restitutus\ the first mathematician to conceive an axiom to fill this gap,

 however, had been Richard in 1645. Other principles were conceived for broader

 purposes, and in fact they may be considered topological axioms in the proper sense.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 615

 A French line in the evolution of the continuity axioms started with Fine and was further

 developed by Richard, Pascal and Roberval. Many axioms deal with the intersections

 between the boundary of a closed figure and a line which has its extremities inside and

 outside of the latter figure; some of them may be regarded as early modern forms of

 the so-called Line-Circle continuity principle, which states that an (infinite) line with

 a point in a circle cuts the circle in two points. This principle is, in fact, equivalent

 to the Circle-Circle continuity axiom which is tacitly employed in Elements I, 1 in

 order to establish the assumption that the two circles actually meet (cf. CI3). The

 latter principles are both much weaker than Hilbert's full continuity axiom, but are

 still demonstrably strong enough to ground all theorems of elementary geometry, as

 far as continuity claims are concerned. A perspicuous and historically sensible proof

 that Hilbert's axioms of incidence, order and congruence, together with the Parallel

 Postulate and Line-Circle continuity, are a viable basis for the performance of all

 the demonstrations of Euclid's Elements is given in Hartshorne (2000). I have placed

 among the principles of continuity also Roberval's axiom CI8, which is a fairly good

 statement of that famous Axiom of Pasch (1882) which was employed by Hilbert

 to complete his axioms of order. Even if it is stated by Roberval himself to be a

 proposition about continuity and intersections (and already hinted at by Richard in
 his C9, a version of the axiom more similar to the so-called "Crossbar Principle"),

 this may well be the only instance of a deep principle of order making its appearance

 before the nineteenth century. It should also be noted that Pasch's Axiom is itself

 equivalent to the plane separation axiom, stating that an (infinite) straight line cuts a

 plane into two disjoint parts; the axiom was in fact stated in this form by Kästner: see

 his 138 (which I have listed among the principles of incidence). Note that Kästner also

 provides a very neat statement of the Line-Circle continuity axiom C20, thus forming

 a quite remarkable system of principles in this respect.

 1.2.7 Principles of congruence and equality (Groups 11 and 12)

 These axioms are concerned with the equality of measure of different figures and thus

 with the notion of congruence.

 The axioms of Group 11 are especially concerned with the rigid motion of figures

 and provide a (very partial) view on those innumerable debates regarding the use and

 abuse of movement in geometry which had already begun in the Arabic Middle Ages

 but which found their official inception in the West with Pelletier's criticism (1557)

 of Euclid's proof of Elements I, 4 by superposition. The group also includes a few

 postulates which directly allow the reproducibility of a given figure in another place,

 and may therefore be closely related to the axioms on situation (Group 8), as the

 latter may also concern the different spatial positions of congruent figures (cf. T5).

 I have listed principle T15 in this group as well, which states that one may perform

 constructions keeping the opening of the compass—something that was not allowed

 by Euclid, but does not increase the deductive power of the Elements, as it amounts

 to assume Elements I, 2-3 as an axiom (cf. T13, T22, T26). It may be noted in this

 connection that I have omitted from the list of Euclidean editions a few geometrical
 works dealing with issues on constructability and geometrical instruments, such as

 Giovan Battista Benedetti's Resolutio omnium Euclidis problematum (Venezia, 1553),

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 616

 V. De Risi

 Georg Mohr's Euclides danicus (Amsterdam, 1672, in both Danish and Dutch; with the

 addition of the essay Euclides curiosus, Amsterdam, 1673), or Lorenzo Mascheroni's

 La geometria del compasso (Pavia, 1797). All these treatises show how to perform

 classical Euclidean constructions by means of a compass alone (without straightedge),

 or with a compass with fixed opening. Despite their clear foundational significance,
 however, none of them lists any axiom, and their approach to the subject is more

 practical than axiomatic.

 The axioms in Group 12 do not employ constructions or displacements but rather

 establish abstract criteria for the equality of measure. Clearly, the divide between the

 two groups is rather artificial, and, looked at from an abstract point of view, they be

 considered to state very similar propositions; nonetheless, their foundational strategies

 were clearly different in the Early Modern Age, and I have therefore distinguished
 between them.

 1.2.8 The parallel postulate (Group 13)

 The last group of principles lists a few alternatives to the Parallel Postulate which were

 conceived to replace the infamous Euclidean principle (P5). It should be noted that the

 list is far from complete, as many attempts to demonstrate the Euclidean Postulate were

 undertaken by making use of different definitions of parallel lines, the most famous

 of which is that two straight lines are parallel if they are equidistant (a statement itself

 equivalent to the Postulate, if one assumes the existence of these equidistant lines).

 Moreover, several other attempts to prove P5 are contained in monographic essays,
 such as Wallis's De postulato quinto (1663), Saccheri's Euclides vindicatus (1733)
 or Lambert's Theorie der Parallellinien (1766). Such works are not included in our

 list of editions of the Elements, and often offered still more and different statements

 equivalent to P5. The present list is thus quite insufficient even to sketch a short

 history of the attempts to prove the Parallel Postulate. A few considerations on the
 axioms are nonetheless in order. Axiom PP1 may be regarded as a principle stating

 the existence of equidistant straight lines, and it shows a good understanding (by Fine)
 of the fact that the definition alone would be insufficient to this effect unless one

 could prove (or assume) that equidistant straight lines are possible (something that is

 equivalent to the acceptance of P5). Axiom PP2 is a restatement of Elements I, 30 on

 the transitivity of parallelism, a property of parallels also depending on P5 and only

 true in Euclidean geometry. It was first stated by Proclus (In Euclidis 371) and later

 employed many times in the history of the attempts to prove the Postulate. Axiom

 PP3 excludes asymptotic parallel lines in hyperbolic geometry (which do not share

 a common perpendicular), thus establishing Euclidean geometry. Axiom PP4, which

 originates in the Arabic treatises on this topic, establishes the Euclidean character

 of a (so-called) Saccheri quadrilateral (these quadrilaterals in hyperbolic or elliptical

 geometry have the base shorter or longer than the opposite side). Axiom PP5 is taken

 from Clavius's proof of the Parallel Postulate, which assumed this statement to show

 that equidistant straight lines may be constructed, and thus Euclidean geometry be

 true, arguing that the present proposition about the flow of a point was a self-evident

 proposition. This argument was employed already in the Middle Ages by Arabic

 writing authors (and Ibn al-Haytham in particular) and exerted a lasting influence on

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 617

 the attempts to prove P5; explicitly assuming it as an equivalent statement represented

 a significant step forward toward a full understanding of the subject. Axiom PP6 is a

 simple restatement of the Parallel Postulate itself, based on the fact that it is possible

 to prove that, if two straight lines cut by a third line form angles lesser than two rights,

 the lines will locally approach one another; it is thus possible to state P5 in the form

 of the proposition that, in the latter situation, the lines will also meet. The confusion

 between the local approach of the two lines (in a neighborhood of the intersection

 with the transversal) with their global approach was a serious hindrance to the proper
 understanding of the behavior of hyperbolic lines. Axiom PP7 is a restatement of

 PP4 on Saccheri's quadrilaterals in a different form. Axioms PP8, PP10 and PP11

 are further variations on the theme of equidistance. Mercator's Axiom PP9 had some

 historical relevance, as it may be regarded as the first instance of the so-called direction

 theory of parallelism stating that parallel lines share the same direction (here: they

 do not "incline" toward one another) and therefore the property of parallelism has

 to be transitive (a theory often employed at the end of the eighteenth century and

 the beginning of the nineteenth to establish Euclidean geometry). Axiom PP12 is a

 property which had been implicitly employed by the German mathematician Andreas

 Segner to prove the Parallel Postulate (as it is false in hyperbolic geometry), and which

 had been explicitly stated as a principle by his disciple Johann Friedrich Lorenz. It may

 easily be regarded as an alternative statement of PP2 or PP9 on transitivity. "Playfair's

 Axiom" PP13 was also well known many centuries before Playfair's edition of Euclid,
 but it had been never stated as such in substitution of P5 in a version of the Elements.

 Given the immediate perspicuousness of the statement, it enjoyed an enormous success

 in the following axiomatizations.

 I have also included in this category two ancillary principles, PP14 and PP15, which

 are not equivalent to the Parallel Postulate. The latter is a restatement of Ptolemy's

 proof of Elements 1,28 (a converse statement of the Parallel Postulate, which is prov
 able without it) based on symmetry, which Richard found to be so general in its

 application as to deserve to be included among the axioms. The important axiom

 PP14 is the so-called Principle of Aristotle (since it was vaguely stated in De Caelo

 A 5, 271b30-32), which Proclus employed in his commentary on the Elements (In

 Euclidis 371) to prove the Parallel Postulate, and which was later included by Com

 mandino (1572) in the axiomatic system of the Elements with the purpose of replacing

 the latter postulate by a simpler statement. Proclus's and Commandino's proofs were,
 however, flawed, and in fact it is impossible to prove P5 from PP14 alone. Clav
 ius later (1589) attempted to prove PP14 but gave an insufficient demonstration of

 it, and only Saccheri (1733) provided a complete and direct proof of the validity of

 PP14 in absolute geometry. This notwithstanding, Aristotle's Principle may play an

 important role in the foundations of geometry, as it may be proven that, if one accepts

 some very basic statements about geometrical continuity (the Circle-Circle continuity

 axiom, for instance), the acceptance of Aristotle's Principle is in fact enough to grant

 the full Axiom of Archimedes (AA1) for geometrical magnitudes; see Greenberg
 (1988, 2010), and Pambuccian (1994). Lastly, it may be remarked that the Axiom
 of Archimedes is also directly involved in the equivalence of the above-mentioned
 principles, which aim to substitute for P5; for instance, PP4 and PP7 on Saccheri's

 quadrilaterals are only equivalent to P5 if AA1 (or PP14 and Circle-Circle continuity)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 are also assumed; the latter fact was, however, only discovered by Dehn at the beginning

 of the twentieth century and was never referred to in early modern treatments of this

 V. De Risi

 618

 topic.

 In translating the principles into English, I generally followed the particular formulation which was given

 to them in their first historical occurrence. This may result in some slight deviation in terminology in related

 principles introduced by different authors (for instance, someone may say that a magnitude measures another

 magnitude, while someone else may say, in a related principle, that a magnitude divides another magnitude,

 or is a part o/this latter; the meaning is, however, the same). I have not differentiated between principles

 which only differ from one another as regards the terminology employed but which agree with one another

 as regards their mathematical meaning. Thus, for instance, I have sometimes conflated "magnitude" and

 "quantity" when these two terms were used by different authors to express the same mathematical notion.

 These terminological differences may have, in some cases, important epistemological consequences and

 are very useful for understanding the general philosophical outlook of a mathematician, or the geometrical

 tradition to which he belongs. For these further and deeper studies, therefore, the original works should

 always be consulted.

 The principles are listed in the various editions in the same order in which they occur, separated by a

 comma. A dash means that a single principle in the work is in fact composed of two different principles

 in my list (e.g., Adelard of Bath has a First Postulate stating that a straight line can be drawn between

 two points (PI) and can be further extended (P2); this postulate is thus mentioned as P1-P2). Sometimes,

 a number of principles are added in later sections of an edition of Euclid (for instance, since the Parallel

 Postulate is only used to prove Elements 1,29, many editions do not list it at the beginning, but rather in the

 middle of the First Book, i.e., after Elements 1,28), and these are separated from the others by a semicolon.

 The symbol (...) after the list of principles means that the author explicitly states that the principles are

 infinite in number, and that he is only giving a few instances of them. The intended meaning of a few more

 obscure principles is given in the short commentary to the edition in which they occur for the first time. I

 have signaled in square brackets those principles which are somehow problematic within the context of the

 work in which they appear; a fuller explanation is given in the commentary.

 2 The principles

 2.1 The principles of Euclid

 Let the following be postulated:

 PI: To draw a straight line from any point to any point.

 P2: To produce a straight line continuously in a straight line.

 P3: To describe a circle with any center and distance.

 P4: That all right angles are equal to one another.

 P5: That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles

 on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced

 indefinitely, meet on that side on which are the angles less than the two right

 angles.

 CN1: Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.

 CN2: If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal.

 CN3: If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.

 CN4: Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.

 CN5: The whole is greater than the part.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 619

 2.2 Further principles in the Greek tradition

 P6*: Two straight lines do not enclose a space.

 CN6*: If equals be added to unequal things, the wholes are unequal.

 CN7*: If equals be subtracted from unequal things, the remainders are unequal.
 CN8*: The doubles of the same thing are equal.

 CN9*: The halves of the same thing are equal.

 EX1: Magnitudes are susceptible of the unlimited both by way of addition and by

 way of successive diminution, but in both cases potentially only.

 EX2: All parts of a plane, and all parts of a straight line, coincide with one another.
 EX3: A point divides a line, a line a surface, and a surface a solid.

 2.3 Additional common notions and the foundations of the theory of magnitudes

 A1: If two things are equal to another thing, they are equal to one another. (Adelard

 of Bath, twelfth century) [cf. CN1]

 A2: Any part is lesser than its whole. (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century) [cf.

 A3: If two equal quantities are compared to a third of the same genus, they will both

 be equally greater than the third, or equally lesser, or both equal to the third.

 (Campano da Novara, thirteenth century)

 A4: The whole is equal to all the parts taken together. (Bradwardine, fourteenth

 CN5]

 century)

 A5: Things which are different from the same thing are also different from one

 another. (Bradwardine, fourteenth century)

 A6: The container is greater than the contained. (Maurolico, 1567) [cf. CN5]

 A7: Given any magnitude, it is possible to take a magnitude greater or lesser than

 it. (Clavius, 1574)

 A8: First is what precedes everything else in its order. (Patrizi, 1587)
 A9: Whole is what has parts. (Patrizi, 1587)
 A10: Every whole is divided into parts. (Patrizi, 1587)

 All: Every quantum can be divided, i.e., is divisible. (Patrizi, 1587)

 A12: Every divisible thing can be divided into lesser things. (Patrizi, 1587)

 A13: If a thing is greater, or lesser, than another thing, it is also greater, or lesser,

 than a thing equal to the latter. (Clavius, 1589)

 A14: If a thing is greater, or lesser, than another thing, something equal to the former

 is also greater, or lesser, than the latter. (Clavius, 1589)

 A15: Things which are equal to equal things are also equal to one another. (Herigone,

 1634) [cf. CN1]

 A16: If a magnitude is greater than another magnitude, and the latter is greater than

 a third magnitude, the first magnitude is also greater than the third. (Herigone,
 1634)

 A17: If a magnitude is lesser than another magnitude, and the latter is lesser than

 a third magnitude, the first magnitude is also lesser than the third. (Herigone,
 1634)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 620

 V. De Risi

 A18: The substitution of equals does not change the equality. (Herigone, 1634)
 A19: The interpretation does not change the equality. (Herigone, 1634)

 A20: The measure is not greater than the measured thing. (Herigone, 1634)
 A21: Every magnitude is such as it is said to be, if it cannot be said otherwise.

 A22: Parts which are identical with other parts are also identical among themselves.

 (Herigone, 1634)

 (Herigone, 1634) [cf. CN1]

 A23: If the same quantity, or equal quantities, are divided into a smaller or a larger

 number of equal parts, any one of the parts taken in larger number will be

 lesser than any one of the parts taken in smaller number. (Richard, 1645)

 A24: A magnitude which is not greater or lesser than another magnitude is equal to

 it. (Schott, 1661) [cf. the intended meaning of A21],

 A25: A part of a greater magnitude is equal to a given lesser magnitude. (Roberval,

 A26: Every magnitude is equal to itself. (Prestet, 1675) [cf. also A21]

 A27: A proposition, taken in one of its meanings, cannot be both true and false.

 1675)

 (Prestet, 1689)

 A28: If the legitimate and natural consequence of a proposition is false, the propo

 sition itself is false, and its contradictory proposition is true. (Prestet, 1689)

 A29: A quantity is equal to another quantity when it is neither greater nor less than

 A30: A quantity is greater than another quantity when it is neither equal nor less

 that quantity. (Hill, 1726)

 than that quantity. (Hill, 1726)

 than that quantity. (Hill, 1726)

 A31: A quantity is less than another quantity when it is neither equal nor greater

 A32: If a magnitude is smaller than another magnitude, it is possible to take in the

 latter one or more parts equal to the former. (König, 1758) [cf. A25, unpublished

 at the time]

 2.4 Principles on mereological composition and multiples of magnitudes

 Ml: If unequal things are added to equals, the wholes will exceed one another as

 the added unequal things. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona, twelfth

 century) [cf. Pappus in PROCLUS, In Euclidis 197]

 M2: If equals are added to unequal things, the wholes will exceed one another as

 the initial unequal things. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona, twelfth

 century) [cf. Pappus in Proclus, In Euclidis 197]

 M3: The equimultiples of the same thing, or of equal things, are equal to one another.

 (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century) [cf. CN8*]

 M4: Things the equimultiples of which are equal are also equal to one another.

 (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century) [cf. CN9*]

 M5: If two equals are the halves of two things, the two things are equal. (Lefevre

 M6: If unequal things be added to equals, the wholes are unequal. (Lefevre

 d'Etaples, 1496)

 d'&aples, 1496)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 621

 M7: If unequal things be subtracted from equals, the remainders are unequal

 (Lefevre d'Etaples, 1496)

 M8: If two greater things are added to one another, and two lesser things are added

 to one another, the sum of the greater things will be greater than the sum of the

 lesser things. (Lefevre d'Etaples, 1496)

 M9: Any magnitude that measures another magnitude also measures any magnitude

 that is measured by it. (Commandino, 1572) [cf. N3]

 MIO: If a magnitude measures both another magnitude and a magnitude that is sub

 tracted from it, it will also measure the remainder. (Commandino, 1572) [cf.
 Nl]

 Mil: Any magnitude that measures two or more magnitudes also measures the mag

 nitude composed by them. (Commandino, 1572) [cf. N2]

 M12: If unequal things are subtracted from equals, the differences will exceed one

 another as the subtracted unequal things. (Clavius, 1574)

 Μ13: If equals are subtracted from unequal things, the differences will exceed one

 another as the initial unequal things. (Clavius, 1574)

 Μ14: If a whole is the double of another whole, and the subtracted part is the double

 of the corresponding subtracted part, the remainder will also be the double of

 the other remainder. (Clavius, 1574)

 Μ15: If unequal things are added to unequal things, the greater to the greater and the

 lesser to the lesser, the wholes will be unequal, and in fact the former greater
 than the latter. (Clavius, 1589)

 M16: If unequal things are subtractedfrom unequal things, the lesser from the greater

 and the greater from the lesser, the remainders will be unequal, and in fact the

 former greater than the latter. (Clavius, 1589)

 M17: If two equals are the doubles of two things, the two things are equal. (Clavius,

 1589) [cf. M4, M5]

 M18: If a half is subtracted from a whole, the remainder will be a half; if more

 than a half is subtracted, the remainder will be less than a half; if one third is

 subtracted, the remainder will be the two thirds, etc. (Herigone, 1634)

 M19: The double of the greater is greater than the double of the lesser. (Herigone,

 1634)

 M20: If a thing is the double of a thing equal to another thing, it is also the double of

 the latter thing. (Herigone, 1634)

 M21: If a thing equal to another thing is the double of a magnitude, the latter thing

 will also be the double ofthat magnitude. (Herigone, 1634)

 M22: The half of the greater is greater than the half of the lesser. (Herigone, 1634)

 M23: If a thing is the half of a thing equal to another thing, it is also the half of the

 latter thing. (Herigone, 1634)

 M24: If a thing equal to another thing is the half of a magnitude, the latter thing will

 also be the half of that magnitude. (Herigone, 1634)

 M25: If the parts of a whole are equal to one another, the whole will be a multiple of

 each part as many times as there are parts. (Herigone, 1634)

 M26: If each part of a whole is the double of each part on another whole, the former

 whole will be the double of the latter. (Herigone, 1634) [cf. Μ14]

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 622

 V. De Risi

 M27: Equimultiples of equimultiples are equimultiples to one another. (Herigone,

 M28: A multiple of a multiple of a magnitude is also a multiple ofthat magnitude.

 1634) [Elements V, 3]

 (Richard, 1645)

 M29: If a magnitude measures two other magnitudes, it also measures their sum and

 their difference. (Borelli, 1658) [cf. N2 and Nl]

 M30: If a magnitude is contained a certain number of times in another magnitude, a

 magnitude equal to the former will be contained the same number of times in

 a magnitude equal to the latter. (Borelli, 1658) [cf. N30 and N31]

 M31: Equimultiples of two magnitudes to which other equimultiples of the same mag

 nitudes are added or subtracted, are still equimultiples of the two magnitudes.
 (Arnauld, 1667) [Elements V, 5 and 6]

 M32: If a magnitude is subtracted from itself, the result is nothing. (Prestet, 1675)

 M33: Many nothings are equal to nothing. (Prestet, 1675)

 M34: A multiple of a greater magnitude is greater than the same multiple of a lesser.

 (Simson, 1754)

 M35: That magnitude whose multiple is greater than the same multiple of another is

 greater than that other magnitude. (Simson, 1754)

 M36: To take any multiple of a given magnitude. (König, 1758)

 M37: The sum of the equimultiples of the parts of a magnitude are equal to the

 equimultiple ofthat magnitude. (Simpson, 1760) [cf. Elements V, 1]

 2.5 The theory of ratios and proportions

 Rl: As a certain quantity is to any other quantity of the same genus, so will any

 third quantity be to a certain fourth quantity of the same genus. (Campano da

 Novara, thirteenth century) [existence of the fourth proportional]
 R2: Ratios resulting from equal ratios are equal. (Lefevre d'Etaples, 1496)
 R3: Equal magnitudes have the same ratio to the same magnitude. (Maurolico,

 1567) [cf. Elements V, 7]

 R4: If two magnitudes have the same ratio to a third magnitude, they are equal to

 one another. (Maurolico, 1567) [cf. Elements V, 9]

 R5: A magnitude has the same ratio to two equal magnitudes. (Maurolico, 1567)

 R6: If a magnitude has the same ratio to two magnitudes, the latter are equal to one

 another. (Maurolico, 1567) [cf. Elements V, 9]

 R7: If two magnitudes are equal to two other magnitudes, their ratios are equal.

 [cf. Elements V, 7]

 (Maurolico, 1567)

 R8: Λ magnitude greater than another magnitude has a greater ratio to a third

 magnitude; and vice versa. (Maurolico, 1567) [Elements V, 8]

 R9: Of magnitudes which have a ratio to the same, that which has a greater ratio

 is greater; and that to which the same has a greater ratio is less. (Maurolico,
 1567) [Elements V, 10]

 RIO: Two ratios which are equal to a third ratio are equal to one another. (Maurolico,

 1567) [Elements V, 11]

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics 623

 R11: If equal ratios are composed with equal ratios, the composed ratios will also

 be equal. (Maurolico, 1567) [cf. Elements V, 22]

 R12: If equal ratios are taken away from equal ratios, the remaining ratios will be

 equal. (Maurolico, 1567)

 R13: Equimultiples of two magnitudes are to one another as the magnitudes them

 selves are to one another. (Maurolico, 1567) [Elements V, 15]

 R14: If unequal ratios are added to equal ratios, the composed ratios will be unequal.

 R15: If unequal ratios are subtracted from equal ratios, the remaining ratios will be

 R16: Equal ratios are both equal, lesser, or greater than another ratio. (Maurolico,

 (Maurolico, 1567)

 unequal. (Maurolico, 1567)

 1567)

 R17: The ratio that holds between two magnitudes will also hold between a given

 magnitude and some other magnitude. Moreover, the same ratio will also hold

 between some magnitude and the given magnitude. (Clavius, 1574) [a different
 version of Rl]

 R18: The ratio of a magnitude to another magnitude is composed by the ratios of

 the parts of the first magnitude to the second magnitude. (Benedetti, 1585) [cf.
 Elements V, 12]

 R19: If a first magnitude have to a second the same ratio as a third to a fourth, and

 the third have to the fourth a greater ratio than a fifth to a sixth, the first will

 also have to the second a greater ratio than the fifth to the sixth. (Benedetti,
 1585) [Elements V, 13]

 R20: The multiple of a magnitude is to this magnitude as the equal multiple of another

 magnitude is to the latter magnitude. (Benedetti, 1585)

 R21: The aggregate of all magnitudes in a continued proportion is a multiple of each

 R22: Any ratio, divided in any way, is composed by the parts in which it is divided.

 of the ratios. (Benedetti, 1585)

 (Benedetti, 1585)

 R23: If two magnitudes have a different ratio to a third, the greater among them will

 have a greater ratio. (Torricelli, 1647)

 R24: A ratio is greater than another ratio if the first magnitude of the first ratio is

 greater than it had to be to have the same ratio to the second as the third to the

 fourth. (Torricelli, 1647) [from Galileo]

 R25: Given three magnitudes A, Β and C, a fourth one, Z, can be given, that has with

 C the same ratio as A to B. (Tacquet, 1654) [a different version of R1 and R17]

 R26: Two ratios in proportion may have (at least) three terms: if one of them is taken

 twice as an antecedent, or as a consequent, or one time as an antecedent and

 the other time as a consequent. (Borelli, 1658)

 R27: If four quantities are such that the first is greater than the second, but the third

 is not greater than the fourth, the ratio of the first to the second will be greater

 than the ratio of the third to the fourth. (Borelli, 1658)

 R28: Ratios which have a common consequent, are to each other as are the

 R29: Different multiples of a magnitude are to one another as the equal multiples of

 antecedents. (Arnauld, 1667)

 any other magnitude. (Arnauld, 1667)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 624

 V. De Risi

 R30: Equimultiples of two magnitudes are to one another as different equimultiples

 of the same magnitudes. (Arnauld, 1667)

 R31: If two ratios are equal, the inverse ratios are also equal. (Arnauld, 1667)
 R32: Two continuous magnitudes F and G have the same ratio as the ratio F to Η to

 the ratio G to H, with a common consequent H. (Gottignies, 1669)

 R33: The double is to the double as the half is to the half, and so for the other multiples

 and submultiples; and vice versa. (Fabri, 1669) [cf. R13]

 R34: If a magnitude has some ratio to another magnitude, the latter also has some

 ratio to the former. (Fabri, 1669)

 R35: If a magnitude is substituted in a ratio with an equal magnitude, the ratio does

 not change; and vice versa. (Fabri, 1669) [Elements V, 7]

 R36: If a magnitude is substituted in a ratio with an equal magnitude, but the other

 magnitude is changed to a different magnitude, the ratio also changes. (Fabri,
 1669)

 R37: If a third ratio is greater or lesser than one of two equal ratios, it is also greater

 or lesser than the other equal ratio. (Viviani, 1674)

 R38: If four magnitudes are in proportion, an equimultiple of the first magnitude is

 to the second as the same equimultiple of the third magnitude is to the fourth.

 (Viviani, 1674) [cf. Elements V, 4]

 R39: If four magnitudes are in proportion, the first magnitude is to an equimultiple

 of the second as the third magnitude is to the same equimultiple of the fourth.
 (Viviani, 1674) [cf. Elements V, 4]

 R40: If a ratio is lesser than another ratio, which is itself lesser than a third, the first

 will also be much lesser than the third. (Viviani, 1674)

 R41: A magnitude has a greater ratio to a certain magnitude than to a magnitude

 greater than it. (Mercator, 1678) [Elements V, 8]

 R42: If magnitudes be proportional separando, they will also be proportional com

 ponendo. (Mercator, 1678) [Elements V, 18]

 R43: If four magnitudes are in proportion, any equimultiples of the first and the third

 are both greater, or both equal, or both lesser than any equimultiples of the

 second and the fourth. (Rohault, 1682) [cf. Elements V, def. 5]

 R44: If four magnitudes are such that any equimultiples of the first and the third are

 both greater, or both equal, or both lesser than any equimultiples of the second

 and the fourth, they are proportional. (Rohault, 1682) [Elements V, def. 5]

 R45: If four magnitudes are such that for some equimultiples of the first and the third

 and some equimultiples of the second and the fourth it may happen that the

 equimultiple of the first is greater than the equimultiple of the second but the

 equimultiple of the third is equal or lesser than the equimultiple of the fourth,

 the four magnitudes are not proportional, and the first ratio is greater than the

 second. (Rohault, 1682) [Elements V, def. 7]

 R46: All ratios of a magnitude to a magnitude equal to it are equal to one another.

 (Arnauld, 1683)

 R47: The ratio of a magnitude to another magnitude is equal to the sum of the ratio of

 a magnitude smaller than the first to the second and the ratio of their difference
 to the second. (Arnauld, 1683)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 625

 R48: The ratio of a magnitude to the part of another magnitude is greater than the

 ratio of the first magnitude to the whole second magnitude. (Arnauld, 1683)

 R49: Ratios which have a common antecedent, are to one another as is the inverse

 ratio of the consequents. (Arnauld, 1683)

 R50: Given four magnitudes in two ratios, three equalities are possible: the equality

 of the antecedents, the equality of the consequents, and the equality of the ratios.

 If any two of these equalities are given, the third is also given. (Arnauld, 1683)

 R51: Given four ratios in two proportions, the first ratio of the first proportion is to

 the second ratio of the first proportion as the second ratio of the first proportion

 is to the second ratio of the second proportion. (Arnauld, 1683)

 R52: A proportion does not change if the ratios are exchanged among them. (Arnauld,

 1683)

 R53: Lines and surfaces the ratio of which is equal to a ratio between numbers are

 commensurable; otherwise they are incommensurable. (Lamy, 1685)

 R54: If a whole is to another whole as a part of the former is to a part of the latter,

 the remaining part of the former has the same ratio to the remaining part of the
 latter. (Newton, 1706)

 R55: Given four magnitudes, if the first is the same equimultiple, or the same part, or

 the same parts of the second, as the third is to the fourth, the ratio between the

 first and the second will be equal to the ratio between the third and the fourth.
 (Marchetti, 1709) [Elements VII, def. 20]

 R56: If equal ratios are added to unequal ratios, the composed ratios will be unequal.

 R57: If equal ratios are subtracted from unequal ratios, the remaining ratios will be

 (Marchetti, 1709)

 unequal. (Marchetti, 1709)

 R58: Ratios that are double, triple, &c., a half, a third, &c. of equal ratios (or of the

 same ratio) are equal. (Marchetti, 1709)

 R59: Given four magnitudes in proportion, the first and the third magnitudes will

 both be greater, or will both be lesser, or will both be equal, to the second and

 the fourth. (Marchetti, 1709)

 R60: Quantities having the same ratio to another quantity are equal to one another.

 (Simpson, 1747) [together with R62, a reformulation of R4]

 R61: Equal quantities have the same ratio with the same quantity. (Simpson, 1747)

 [together with R63, a reformulation of R35]

 R62: Quantities to which another quantity has the same ratio are equal to one another.

 (Simpson, 1747) [together with R60, a reformulation of R4]

 R63: The same quantity has the same ratio with equal quantities. (Simpson, 1760)

 [together with R61, a reformulation of R35]

 R64: If two magnitudes are divided into equal parts, the first is to the second as the

 number of equal parts of the first is to the number of equal parts of the second.
 (Simpson, 1760).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 626

 V. De Risi

 2.6 The Axiom of Archimedes and the theory of indivisibles

 AA1: Any magnitude may be multiplied as many times as to exceed any given homo

 geneous magnitude. (Commandino, 1572)

 AA2: Every solid is formed by an infinite number of parallel planes which have an

 insensible thickness. (Lamy, 1685)

 AA3: If two solids have the same height and the planes that compose them have the

 same thickness, the two solids are formed by the same number of planes. (Lamy,
 1685)

 AA4: If a straight line arbitrarily small, and a straight or curved line arbitrarily long

 (but finite), are given, it is possible to take the first line a number of times such

 that it will exceed the second line. (Roberval, 1675)

 AA5: If two or more quantities differ by a quantity less than any assignable quantity,

 these quantities will be perfectly equal to one another. (Deidier, 1739)

 AA6: It is possible to take a straight line so small that its square is less than any

 assigned surface. (Simpson, 1760)

 2.7 Principles of arithmetic and number theory

 Nl: A number that divides a whole and the part which is subtracted from it also

 divides the difference. (John of Tynemouth, twelfth century)

 N2: Any number that divides two numbers also divides their sum. (John of

 Tynemouth, twelfth century)

 N3: Any number that divides something also divides everything that is divided by

 it. (John of Tynemouth, twelfth century)

 N4: To take any quantity of numbers equal to any given number. (Jordanus de

 N5: To take a number however greater than any given number. (Jordanus de Nemore,

 N6: The series of numbers can be extended to infinity. (Jordanus de Nemore, thir

 Nemore, thirteenth century)

 thirteenth century)

 teenth century)

 N7: That part is lesser which has a greater denomination; and that part is greater

 which has a lesser denomination. (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century)

 N8: The unity is a part of any number, and denominated by it. (Jordanus de Nemore,

 thirteenth century)

 N9: Every number is a multiple of the unity as many times as the unity is part of it.

 (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century)

 N10: Every number multiplied by the unity results in itself The unity multiplied by

 any number results in this number. (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century)

 Nil: The difference of the extremes is composed of the differences of the same

 extremes to the mean term. (Jordanus de Nemore, thirteenth century)

 N12: To take any quantity of numbers equal to, or multiples of, any given number.

 (Campano da Novara, thirteenth century) [cf. N4]

 Ν13: No number can be diminished to infinity. (Campano da Novara, thirteenth cen

 tury)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics 627

 N14: If a number is greater than another, and their difference is added to the lesser,

 or subtracted from the greater, the resulting numbers will be equal. (Lefövre
 d'Etaples, 1496)

 N15: Two numbers that have the same ratio to the same number are equal. (Lefevre

 d'Etaples, 1496) [cf. Elements V, 9]

 Ν16: A number may be subtracted from another number as many times as the former

 divides the latter. (Lefevre d'Etaples, 1496)

 N17: The greater number does not divide the lesser. (Lefevre d'Etaples, 1496)

 N18: If a given number is multiplied by another number and then is divided by it,

 the result is again the given number. If a given number is divided by another

 number and then is multiplied by it, the result is again the given number. (Lefevre
 d'Etaples, 1496)

 N19: If a number measures a part [i.e., a submultiple], it also measures the whole.

 N20: The sum of a given number with a number that is greater than another one is

 greater than its sum with the lesser number. (Pedro de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N21: Numbers which are made by the same quantity of unities are equal. (Pedro de

 (Candale, 1566)

 Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N22: Two number are equal if their parts with equal denomination are in equal

 N23: If two number are multiplied, the product is to the first as the second is to the

 quantity. (Pedro de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 unity. (Pedro de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N24: If a number divides another number, the divided number is to the divisor as the

 quotient is to the unity. (Pedro de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N25: If two numbers are added together which are greater than two other numbers,

 the sum of the greater ones is greater than the sum of the lesser ones. (Pedro
 de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N26: The ratio of a number with another number is the same as the ratio of the parts

 of the two numbers with the same denomination. (Pedro de Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N27: If a unity is added to an odd number, the result is an even number. (Pedro de

 N28: If a unity is added to an even number, the result is an odd number. (Pedro de

 Μοηζόη, 1569)

 Μοηζόη, 1569)

 N29: If several ratios among numbers are all equal to the same ratio, they will also
 be equal to one another. (Billingsley, 1570) [cf. Elements V, 11; and RIO]

 N30: Those numbers which are the same part (or the same parts) of the same number

 (or of equal numbers) are equal to one another. (Commandino, 1572)

 N31: Those numbers, which have the same (or equal) number of the same part (or

 parts) are equal to one another. (Commandino, 1572)

 N32: The unity divides any number. (Commandino, 1572)

 N33: Every number divides itself. (Commandino, 1572)

 N34: If two numbers are multiplied, the one measures the product by the other and

 the latter by the former. (Commandino, 1572)

 N35: If a number measures another number by a third one, the third also measures

 the latter by the former. (Commandino, 1572)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 628

 V. De Risi

 N36: If a number measures another number by a third one, the product of the first by

 the third, or of the third by the first, results in the second. (Commandino, 1572)
 [cf. N18]

 N37: It is possible to make additions, subtractions, multiplications, divisions, extrac

 tions of roots, and squares and cubes of numbers. (Herigone, 1634)

 N38: Every property of a number is also a property of a number equal to it. (Herigone,

 1634)

 N39: It is the same to multiply a whole with a whole, or a whole with each of the

 parts, or each of the parts with a whole. (Arnauld, 1667) [cf. Elements V, 1]

 N40: No magnitude has a divisor greater than itself. (Prestet, 1675)

 N41: The greatest common divisor of two parts composing a whole is also the greatest

 common divisor of one part and the whole. (Prestet, 1675)

 N42: The greatest common divisor of a whole and one of its two parts is also the

 greatest common divisor of the whole and the other part. (Prestet, 1675)

 N43: If a magnitude with the sign + is joined to the same magnitude with the sign -,

 the result is equal to nothing. (Lamy, 1685)

 N44: Two numbers are always commensurable the one another. (Lamy, 1685)

 N45: If a number is subtracted from another number, the result is a number. (Lamy,

 N46: It is the same thing to multiply 12 times 8, or 8 times 12. (Malezieu, 1705) [cf.

 1685)

 Elements VII, 16]

 equal. (Malezieu, 1705)

 (Mal6zieu, 1705)

 1726)

 1726)

 unequal. (Deidier, 1739)

 unequal. (Deidier, 1739)

 N47: It is the same thing to multiply 12 times 8, or 12 times many parts which, taken

 together, are equal to 8. (Mal6zieu, 1705) [cf. N39]

 N48: If equal quantities are multiplied by equal quantities, their products will be

 N49: If equal quantities are divided by equal quantities, their quotients will be equal.

 N50: Given a number, to add a unity to it. (Newton, 1706)

 N51: Given a number, to subtract a unity from it. (Newton, 1706)

 N52: If the roots of any two quantities are equal, their squares are also equal. (Hill,

 N53: If the squares of any two quantities are equal, their roots are also equal. (Hill,

 N54: If unequal quantities are multiplied by equal quantities, their products will be

 N55: If unequal quantities are divided by equal quantities, their quotients will be

 2.8 General principles of space, situation, and givenness

 SI: Mathematical sciences are not abstracted from natural things; nor are they in

 the imagination, nor are they in the intellect; but rather, space is their subject.
 (Patrizi, 1587)

 S2: Geometry takes into consideration the point, the line, the surface, and the body,

 in this natural order. (Patrizi, 1587)

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 629

 S3: Space is extension, and extension is space. (Patrizi, 1587)
 S4: Every space is a minimum, a maximum, or in the middle of these. (Patrizi, 1587)
 S5: Every space is long; or long and wide; or long and wide and deep. (Patrizi,

 S6: Given a thing, to take in it a point or a straight line. (Ricci, 1651)
 S7: The object of pure geometry is space, which is considered as extended in three

 dimensions. (Pascal, 1655) [cf. SI and S5]

 S8: Space is infinite in each dimension. (Pascal, 1655)
 S9: Space is immovable as a whole and its parts are also immovable. (Pascal, 1655)

 S10: Points may only differ in situation. (Pascal, 1655)

 Sil: Lines may differ in situation, magnitude and direction. (Pascal, 1655)

 S12: Surfaces may differ in situation, length, breadth, content, anddirection. (Pascal,

 1587)

 1655)

 S13: Equal straight lines only differ in situation. (Pascal, 1655)

 S14: Equal circles only differ in situation. (Pascal, 1655)

 S15: Equal arcs of the same circle only differ in situation. (Pascal, 1655)

 S16: Cords of equal arcs of equal circles only differ in situation. (Pascal, 1655)

 S17: If an end of a straight line is given in position, and the straight line is given in

 magnitude, the other end of the straight line will fall on the circumference of

 the circle with that given center and radius. (Arnauld, 1667)

 S18: To assume a figure, whose properties are looked for in a theorem, even though

 it is not constructed. (Fabri, 1669)

 S19: There exists a solid body. (Roberval, 1675)

 S20: A straight line is given in position and magnitude when its endpoints are given.

 (Kästner, 1758) [Euclid, Data 26; cf. also 130].

 2.9 Principles of intersection, incidence and connection

 II: A surface cuts a surface in a line. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona,

 twelfth century) [cf. EX3]

 12: If two surfaces which cut one another are planes, they cut one another in a

 straight line. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona, twelfth century)

 13: A line cuts a line in a point. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona, twelfth

 century) [cf. EX3]

 twelfth century)

 14: To indefinitely extend any plane. (An-Nayrizi, transl. by Gerardo da Cremona,

 15: Two straight lines do not have a common segment. (Clavius, 1574) [from

 PROCLUS, In Euclidis 214; cf. 13]

 16: Two straight lines converging into a point will necessarily intersect one another

 at that point when produced. (Clavius, 1589)

 17: If a point lies on two straight lines, it will be at their intersection or meeting.

 18: If two points are on the same plane, the straight line joining them will be on the

 (Herigone, 1634)

 same plane. (Herigone, 1634)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 630

 V. De Risi

 19: Two concurrent and intersecting straight lines have no common part. (Grien

 berger, 1636) [another version of 16]

 110: From any point of a circular arc that is not one of its two ends, two straight lines

 may be drawn to the ends of the arc, forming a triangle with the chord between
 the ends. (Richard, 1645)

 111: Given two points, to draw a circle having one of the points as its center and

 passing through the other point. (Ricci, 1651)

 112: Through any line, to draw a plane. (Borelli, 1658)

 113: Two planes do not have a common [plane]segment. (Borelli, 1658)
 114: Two planes do not enclose a solid figure. (Borelli, 1658)

 115: The common section of two planes is a line, and if a line lies on two planes it is

 their common section. (Borelli, 1658) [cf. 12]

 116: Two intersecting straight lines lie on the same plane. (Borelli, 1658) [Elements

 XI, 2]

 1667) [cf. P6*]

 117: Two intersecting straight lines may have at most one point in common. (Arnauld,

 118: A bounded solid body can be divided into two parts in any direction. Talcing

 together all the divisions, it will be divided into an innumerable number of
 parts. (Roberval, 1675)

 119: The division of a body may be physical, thus disconnecting the parts of the body,

 or mathematical, thus preserving its continuity. (Roberval, 1675)

 120: Besides the surfaces that bound a solid body, innumerable other surfaces may

 be conceived of which bound its parts. (Roberval, 1675)

 121: A bounded surface can be divided into an innumerable number of lines, and a

 bounded line into an innumerable number of points. (Roberval, 1675)

 122: The existence of a bounded solid body implies the existence of surfaces, the

 existence of bounded surfaces that of lines, the existence of bounded lines that
 of points. (Roberval, 1675)

 123: However big a bounded solid body is posited, a bigger one may be conceived of

 that contains the former as a proper part. The included body may be conceived

 of as separated from the bigger one by some space. (Roberval, 1675)

 124: A solid body revolved around two fixed points has an entire line fixed. (Roberval,

 125: If a line is perpendicular to another line, its extension is also perpendicular to

 126: If a line is perpendicular to another line, the latter is also perpendicular to the

 127: If a straight line perpendicular to a plane moves uniformly in a straight line on

 the plane, its flow will produce a plane perpendicular to the first plane. (Lamy,
 1685)

 128: If a straight line is perpendicular to a plane, a plane passing through the straight

 line is also perpendicular to the first plane. (Lamy, 1685)

 129: The extremities of a line are points. (Lamy, 1685) [Elements I, def. 3]

 130: A straight line is determined by two points only. (Lamy, 1685)

 131: Only one straight line may be drawn between two points. (Lamy, 1685) [cf. 117]

 1675) [cf. T2]

 it. (Lamy, 1685)

 former. (Lamy, 1685)

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 631

 132: Two straight lines that have two points in common coincide. (Lamy, 1685) [cf.

 133: A straight line cannot be partly on one plane and partly on another plane. (Lamy,

 117]

 1685) [Elements XI, 1]

 134: Every triangle lies on a plane. (Lamy, 1685) [Elements XI, 2]

 135: If a part of a plane is congruent to a part of another plane, the two planes are

 congruent to one another. (Marchetti, 1709) [cf. 113]

 136: A straight line [i.e., a segment] may only be bisected in one point. (Rondelli,

 1719)

 137: To draw a straight line perpendicular to any given straight line in any given

 point. (Simpson, 1747) [Elements I, 11 and 12].

 138: An infinite straight line divides the infinite plane in two parts. (Kästner, 1758).

 139: It is possible to extend a plane through two intersecting lines. (Simpson, 1760)

 2.10 Principles of continuity

 CI: If a straight or curved line is drawn from a point which is within a figure to

 another point in the same plane which is outside the figure, it will intersect the

 sides or boundary of the figure. (Fine, 1532)

 C2: If a straight line drawn from any angle of a rectilinear figure meets the opposite

 side or angle of the figure, it also intersects this latter side or angle. (Fine,
 1532)

 C3: If a circumference with a given center and a radius of a given length is produced,

 and the radius is extended beyond the center to infinity, it will intersect the
 circumference. (Richard, 1645)

 C4: Only two points on a circumference are on one straight line. That is: if a straight

 line intersects a circle entering in its area and leaving it, it will intersect the

 circle at two points only, the one when it enters it and the other when it leaves
 it. (Richard, 1645)

 C5: If a circumference is described which has an end of a given segment as its center

 and passes through the other end of the segment, it will also pass through the

 ends of all segments equal to the given one that are produced from the given
 center. (Richard, 1645)

 C6: If a circumference is described which has its center on the side or boundary of

 a given figure, and whose radius falls inside the figure (not on its boundary), it

 will intersect the figure at least once. (Richard, 1645)

 C7: If a circumference is described which has its center outside a given figure, and

 whose radius falls inside the figure (not on its boundary), it will intersect the

 figure at least once. (Richard, 1645)

 C8: If a straight line drawn inside a figure is produced to infinity (if needed) in both

 directions, it will intersect the boundary of the figure. (Richard, 1645)

 C9: If a straight line divides a rectilinear angle and is produced to infinity, it will

 intersect a given straight line which is applied [with its ends] to the straight

 lines forming the angle. And a straight line drawn from a rectilinear angle to a

 point inside its base will divide the angle. And a straight line drawn from a point

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 632

 V. De Risi

 of the base of a triangle to the opposite angle will divide the angle. (Richard,
 1645)

 CIO: If a point is taken inside a space which is everywhere bounded by lines, and

 an infinite straight line passes through the point, it will cut the boundary of the

 space at at least two points. (Pascal, 1655)

 Cll: If two points are taken on the different sides of a straight line, a straight line

 going from one point to the other will intersect the first line at exactly one point.
 (Pascal, 1655)

 C12: An infinite straight line passing through a point inside a circle intersects the

 circumference at exactly two points. (Pascal, 1655)

 C13: A circumference passing through a point inside a circle and a point outside

 it intersects the circumference of the circle at exactly two points. (Pascal,
 1655)

 C14: If two circumferences both have some points inside one another, they will inter

 sect one another at exactly two points. (Pascal, 1655)

 C15: If a circumference has a point on one side of an infinite straight line and the

 center on the other side, it intersects the straight line at exactly two points.
 (Pascal, 1655)

 C16: If the same straight line is inside two figures, the two figures will have a common

 part and will intersect one another. (Borelli, 1658)

 C17: If two equal circles have their centers on the ends of a segment taken as their

 radius, they meet. (Schott, 1661)

 C18: If a point F is taken in the base BD of a triangle BCD and a straight line FG is

 drawn inside the triangle and extended enough, it will intersect one of the other

 sides BC or CD at a point G, or both of them at their common point C (and C

 is then the same point as G). (Roberval, 1675)

 C19: If an infinite straight line passes inside a plane or a solid figure, it will intersect

 the boundaries of this figure. (Roberval, 1675)

 C20: If a segment has one end inside a circle and one end outside it, it intersects the

 circumference at one point. (Kästner, 1758)

 2.11 Principles of congruence, motion, and transportation

 Tl: Quantities and their properties may be superposed by an intellectual act.

 (Richard, 1645)

 (Richard, 1645)

 T2: Quantities may be conceived to move completely or around something fixed.

 T3: Quantities the divisible boundaries of which are congruent are themselves con

 gruent and equal to one another. Equal straight lines are congruent with one

 another. Equal rectilinear angles are congruent with one another. Equal circles

 are congruent with one another. [Equal] arcs of equal circles are congruent

 with one another. Equilateral and equiangular rectilinear figures are congruent

 with one another, and equal. (Richard, 1645)

 T4: If the ends of two straight lines are congruent with one another, the straight

 lines are themselves congruent and equal. (Richard, 1645)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 633

 T5: The mere change of position of a triangle or any other plane and rectilinear

 figure does not change anything in its sides or angles. (Richard, 1645)

 T6: Given a thing, to reproduce it. (Ricci, 1651)
 T7: Given two things, to superpose them. (Ricci, 1651)

 T8: If the boundaries of two plane figures are congruent, the two figures are them

 T9: If two plane figures are congruent, their boundaries are congruent as well.

 selves congruent. (Ricci, 1651)

 (Ricci, 1651)

 T10: Equal straight lines are congruent with one another. (Tacquet, 1654) [cf. T3]

 Til: Equal circles are congruent with one another. (Tacquet, 1654) [cf. T3]

 T12: Equal angles are congruent with one another. (Barrow, 1655) [cf. T3, and E4]

 T13: To draw a straight line equal to a given straight line. (Arnauld, 1667) [Elements

 1,2]

 T14: Things with equal motions traverse equal spaces in equal times. (Fabri, 1669)

 T15: To move the compass keeping its opening. (Fabri, 1669)

 T16: To bend a straight line through the movement of the sides. (Fabri, 1669)
 T17: If a rectilinear angle is congruent with another rectilinear angle and it is

 reflected without changing its magnitude or width, it will be still congruent
 with the second angle. (Roberval, 1675)

 T18: To put two straight lines directly one to the other. (Scarburgh, 1705)

 T19: Any extended entity you please may move with any given law whatever. (Newton,

 1693-1706)

 T20: A moving body may halt in any given position whatever. (Newton, 1693-1706)

 T21: Extended entities may describe the paths marked out through the courses of

 moving things or by the position of stationary ones. (Newton, 1693-1706)

 T22: To draw through two given points a line congruent to a given line at a distance

 no less than that of the points, an ordained point of which shall coincide with
 one or other given point. (Newton, 1693-1706)

 T23: To draw any line on which there shall always fall a point which is given accord

 ing to a precise rule by drawing from points through points lines congruent to
 given ones. (Newton, 1693-1706)

 T24: To extend from any given point a straight line equal to a given straight line.

 (Marchetti, 1709) [Elements I, 2; cf. T13]

 T25: To cut from any given straight line a portion equal to a shorter given straight

 line. (Marchetti, 1709) [Elements 1,3]

 T26: To reproduce any straight line or rectilinear angle. (Simpson, 1747) [Elements

 1,2-3 and Elements 1,23].

 T27: The magnitudes that are congruent with one another are similar and equal,

 and the magnitudes that are similar and equal are congruent with one another.
 (König, 1758)

 2.12 Principles of the equality and the comparison of measure

 El: The shortest line between two points is the straight line. (Bradwardine, four

 teenth century) [ARCHIM. De sphaera et cylindro I, Ass. 1]

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 634

 V. De Risi

 E2: If two more sides are drawn on the base of a triangle, they will be greater or

 lesser than the previous sides. (Vogelin, 1528) [Elements I, 7]

 E3: If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides respectively, and have the

 angles contained by the equal sides equal, they will also have the base equal

 to the base, the triangle will be equal to the triangle, and the remaining angles

 will be equal to the remaining angles respectively. (Pelletier, 1557) [Elements
 1,4]

 E4: If one of several equal angles is a right angle, all angles will be right angles.

 (Herigone, 1634) [cf. PROCLUS, In Euclidis 189]

 E5: The distance between two points is the straight line. (Pascal, 1655) [cf. Archim.

 De sphaera et cylindro I, Ass. 1; cf. El]

 E6: The diameter bisects the circle. (Pascal, 1655) [Elements I, def. 18].

 E7: All lines drawn from the center to the circumference of a circle are equal to one

 another. (Borelli, 1658)

 E8: Two circles that have equal radii are equal. (Borelli, 1658)
 E9: Two equal circles have equal radii. (Borelli, 1658)
 E10: If from the two ends of a straight line, there is drawn an arc of a circle, as well

 as two straight lines meeting at a point outside of the circle and not intersecting

 the circle, and a curve entirely outside the circle, the latter curve and the two

 straight lines will both be longer than the circle, and the circle will be longer

 that the initial straight line. (Borelli, 1658)

 El 1: If two lines on the same plane have their ends in common and are both convex

 toward the same part, the one which is contained by the other is shorter than

 it. (Arnauld, 1667) [ARCHIM. De sphaera et cylindro, Ass. 2]

 E12: The degrees of equal circumferences are equal. (Arnauld, 1667)

 El 3: Among all straight lines drawn from the center of a circle, those smaller than

 the radius have their other end inside the circle, those equal to the radius have

 their other end on the circumference, and those longer than the radius have

 their other end outside of the circle. (Arnauld, 1667)

 E14: If two straight lines intersect, and two points of the cutting line are singularly

 equidistant from two points of the other line, then all other points in the cutting

 line will also be equidistant from those two points of the other line. (Arnauld,
 1667)

 E15: Squares with equal sides are equal to one another. (Arnauld, 1667)

 E16: Rectangles with equal bases and heights are equal to one another. (Arnauld,

 1667)

 E17: Similar segments of circles on equal straight lines are equal to one another.

 (Arnauld, 1667) [Elements III, 24],

 El 8: Λ line between two points that deviates toward one part of the other from the

 straight line between the same points is longer than the straight line. (Lamy,
 1685)

 E19: A polygon is larger than the circle inscribed in it. (Lamy, 1685)

 E20: A polygon is smaller than the circle in which it is inscribed. (Lamy, 1685)
 E21: If one end of a straight line lies on a plane and is conceived as the center

 of a circle in the plane, the straight line is perpendicular to the plane if and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 635

 only if the other end is equidistant from the circumference of the circle. (Lamy,
 1685)

 E22: A solid figure is bigger than the one to which it is circumscribed and smaller

 than the one to which it is inscribed. (Lamy, 1685)

 E23: Among prisms with equal height, the one with the smaller base is smaller.

 (Lamy, 1685)

 E24: In equal circles, arcs of equal chords are equal and chords of equal arcs are

 equal. (Lamy, 1685) [Elements III, 23 and 24; cf. Ε17]

 E25: The space ABC formed by the straight lines running from a point A to all the

 points of a line BC is the smallest space bounded by AB, BC, and AC. (Prestet,
 1689)

 E26: Equal circles have equal circumferences. (Marchetti, 1709)

 E27: If two circles have equal circumferences, they are equal. (Marchetti, 1709)
 E28: A greater circle has a greater circumference and greater radii. (Marchetti,

 1709)

 E29: If a circle has a greater circumference or radius than another circle, it is greater

 than the latter. (Marchetti, 1709)

 E30: In a triangle two sides taken together in any manner are greater than the

 remaining one. (Marchetti, 1709) [Elements I, 20]

 E31: If two straight lines forming an angle have the same length as two other straight

 lines forming an equal angle, the segment joining the ends of the former lines

 will be equal to the segment joining the ends of the latter lines. (Simpson, 1747)
 [Elements 1,4; cf. E3].

 E32: If two solids of the same height are cut by planes parallel to their bases and the

 sections at equal distance from the bases are either equal or in constant ratio,

 the solids themselves are equal or in the same constant ratio. (Simpson, 1747)

 E33: Arcs of a circle that contain equal angles are similar to one another. (König,

 E34: Upright prisms with equal bases and heights are equal to one another. (Simpson,

 1758)

 1760) [cf. Elements XI, 29]

 E35: The circumference of a circle is greater than the perimeter of any inscribed

 polygon, and lesser than the perimeter of any circumscribed polygon. (Simpson,
 1760) [cf. E19 and E20]

 2.13 The parallel postulate

 PP1: If two straight lines lying on the same plane and extended to infinity in both

 directions do not meet, they are equidistant. (Fine, 1532)

 PP2: If a straight line meets one parallel, it will also meet the other parallels. (Ricci,

 PP3: Parallel lines have a common perpendicular. (Tacquet, 1654)

 PP4: Two perpendiculars cut off equal segments from each of two parallel lines.

 1651)

 (Tacquet, 1654)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 636

 V. De Risi

 PP5: If a straight line perpendicular to a given straight line is translated into a

 plane remaining with one of its ends on the given straight line, the other end

 of it will draw with its flow another straight line. (Borelli, 1658)

 PP6: If two straight lines extended toward one side come closer and closer, they

 PP7: If two lines are parallel, all the perpendiculars from one to the other are equal

 will eventually meet. (Arnauld, 1667)

 to one another. (Dechales, 1672)

 PP8: If two straight lines diverge more and more when they are extended in one

 direction, they will converge and meet in the other direction. (Roberval, 1675)

 PP9: Two straight lines do not incline toward one another if one of them does not

 incline toward a third, unless the other also inclines toward it. (Mercator,
 1678)

 PP10: Two non-equidistant straight lines lying on the same plane, if produced far

 enough, will meet on one side. (Rondelli, 1719) [cf. PP6]

 PP11: If two points on a straight line have different distances to another straight

 line, the two straight lines, infinitely produced, will meet. (Simpson, 1747)
 [cf.PPIO]

 PP12: A straight line passing through a point that is inside an angle cuts at least one

 of the sides of the angle. (Lorenz, 1773)

 PP13: Two straight lines cannot be drawn through the same point, parallel to the

 same straight line, without coinciding with one another. (Playfair, 1795)

 PP14: If two straight lines forming an angle are infinitely produced from a point,

 their distance will exceed any finite magnitude. (Commandino, 1572)

 PP15: If one assumes that two straight lines which form internal angles equal to two

 right angles when intersected by a third straight line meet in that direction,

 one should also grant that the two lines always meet when they form the same

 angles with a third line. (Richard, 1645)

 Hilbert's Axioms of geometry

 Axioms of incidence

 1,1: For every two points A, Β there exists a line a that contains each of the points A,

 1,2: For every two points A, Β there exists no more than one line that contains each

 1,3: There exist at least two points on a line. There exist at least three points that do

 B.

 of the points A, B.

 not lie on a line.

 1,4: For any three points A, B, C that do not lie on the same line there exists a plane

 a that contains each of the points A, B, C. For every plane there exists a point
 which it contains.

 1,5: For any three points A, B, C that do not lie on one and the same line there exists

 no more than one plane that contains each of the three points A, B, C.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 637

 I, 6: If two points A, Β of a line a lie in a plane a then every point of a lies in the

 I, 7: If two planes α, β have a point A in common then they have at least one more

 plane a.

 point Β in common.

 I, 8: There exist at least four points which do not lie in a plane.

 Axioms of order (or Betweenness)

 Π, 1: If a point Β lies between a point A and a point C then the points A, B, C are

 three distinct points of a line, and Β then also lies between C and A.

 II, 2: For two points A and C, there always exists at least one point Β on the line AC

 such that C lies between A and B.

 II, 3: Of any three points on a line there exists no more than one that lies between the

 other two.

 Π, 4: Let A, B, C be three points that do not lie on a line and let a be a line in the

 plane ABC which does not meet any of the points A, B, C. If the line a passes

 through a point of the segment AB, it also passes through a point of the segment

 AC, or through a point of the segment BC. (Pasch's Axiom)

 Axioms of congruence

 III, 1: If A, Β are two points on a line a, and A' is a point on the same or another

 line a', then it is always possible to find a point B' on a given side of the line

 a' through A' such that the segment AB is congruent or equal to the segment
 A'B'. In symbols AB = A'B'.

 III, 2: If a segment A' B' and a segment Α"Βare congruent to the same segment

 AB, then the segment A'B' is also congruent to the segment A"B", or briefly,

 if two segments are congruent to a third one they are congruent to each other.

 ΠΙ, 3: On the line a let AB and BC be two segments which except for Β have no point
 in common. Furthermore, on the same or on another line a' letA'B' and B'C'

 be two segments which except for B! also have no point in common. In that
 case, if AB £ A'B' and BC = B'C', then AC = A'C'.

 ΠΙ, 4: Let /.(h,k) be an angle in a plane a and a' a line in a plane a! and let a definite

 side of a! in a' be given. Let h' be a ray on the line a' that emanates from the

 point 0'. Then there exists in the plane a' one and only one ray k! such that the

 angle L(h,k) is congruent or equal to the angle L(h!, k') and at the same time

 all interior points of the angle L(h', k') lie on the given side of a.'. Symbolically

 /.(h,k) = L(h', k'). Every angle is congruent to itself, i.e., L(h,k) = L(h,k) is

 always true.

 Axiom of parallels

 IV. 1: Let a be any line and A a point not on it. Then there is at most one line in the

 plane, determined by a and A, that passes through A and does not intersect a.
 (Playfair's Axiom)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 638

 V. De Risi

 Axioms of continuity

 V, 1: If AB and CD are any segments then there exists a number η such that η segments

 CD constructed contiguously from A, along the ray from A through B, will pass

 beyond the point B. (Axiom of Archimedes)

 V, 2: An extension of a set of points on a line with its order and congruence relations

 that would preserve the relations existing among the original elements as well

 as the fundamental properties of line order and congruence that follow from

 Axioms /-/// and from V-l is impossible. (Axiom of Linear Completeness)

 3 The editions of the Elements

 3.1 Greek manuscripts of the Elements used by Heiberg

 Ρ (Vatican, Early ninth century; partially belonging to a non-Theonine tradition)

 αιτήματα: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 KOiναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 Β (Oxford, 888 AD)

 αίτήματά έστι πέντε: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.
 KOi ναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*.

 F (Firenze, tenth century)

 αίτήματά έστι πέντε: PI, Ρ2, Ρ3, Ρ4, Ρ5, Ρ6*.
 κοιναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 b (Bologna, eleventh century)
 αιτήματα: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.
 κοιναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*.

 V (Wien, twelfth century)

 αιτήματα πέντε: PI, Ρ2, Ρ3, Ρ4, Ρ5, [Ρ6*].
 κοιναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, Ρ6*.

 ρ (Paris, twelfth century)
 αιτήματα: PI, Ρ2, Ρ3, Ρ4, Ρ5.
 κοιναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, Ρ6*.

 q (Paris, twelfth century)

 αιτήματα: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 κοιναι έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN4, CN5.

 3.2 Medieval translations in Latin manuscripts

 [BOETHIUS], Geometria.

 Book I

 Petitiones, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.

 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN3, CN2, CN4.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 639

 • Cassiodorus (Institutiones II, vi 3) states that Severinus Boethius (early sixth century) translated Euclid

 into Latin. A few fragments of this translation were preserved in the Middle Ages and merged with other

 geometrical material (mostly for practical use). However defective, "Boethius's" geometry remained for

 several centuries the only access to Euclid's Elements in the West. Although a complete critical edition of

 the Boethian fragments is still missing, all the present evidence agrees upon the above system of principles.

 Boethius's Geometria altera (the most important item attributed to him on this topic) was printed in Venice

 in 1492, and later appended to the edition of the Sacrobosco's Sphaera published in Paris in 1500 (with

 several reprints, ed. LefSvre d'f-staples), but we will not follow this trend any further. A modern critical
 edition of the Geometria altera is to be found in Folkerts (1970).

 Adelard of Bath, first half of twelfth century.

 Petitiones quinque: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Scientia universaliter communis: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 • Translated from a modified version of the Arabic translation of Al-Hajjäj (first half of the ninth century).

 It is the earliest still-extant translation of Euclid into Latin. Axiom Al is missing in some manuscripts.

 Edition in Busard (1983).

 Hermann von Carinthia, first half of twelfth century.

 Quinque modi investigandi: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Sapientia: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN9*, AI, CN4, CN5.

 • Translated from a modified version of the Arabic translation of Al-Hajjäj, but probably independent

 from Adelard's tradition. Book I only survives in one manuscript and it may have been modified since

 Hermann's translation. A discussion on Hermann's sources is to be found in Brentjes (2001b). Edition in

 Busard (1967, 1977).

 Robert of Chester, first half of twelfth century.

 Peticiones sunt quinque: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Communes animi concepciones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 • Formerly attributed to Adelard, the authorship of Robert of Chester is still doubtful, but the text seems

 to be posterior to Adelard's version. It also depends on Hermann von Carinthia's version. Some manuscripts

 only have the statements of the propositions without the demonstrations, while others have hints on how

 carry on the proofs, and still others show the complete text. It was one of the most widespread editions of

 Euclid in the Middle Ages. The system of principles follows Adelard's version. A few manuscripts add the

 axiom CN8* before CN9*. Edition in Busard and Folkerts (1992).

 GERARDO DA CREMONA, Liber Euclidis philosophi, mid. twelfth century.

 Book I

 Book I

 Book I

 Book I

 Ea in quibus necesse est convenire: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.
 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*,
 CN4, CN5, P6*.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 640

 V. De Risi

 • An important edition of the Elements translated from the Arabic, which follows a modified version of

 the Arabic translation made by Ishäq ibn Hunain and revised by Τ habit ibn Qurra in the late ninth century

 (generally considered mathematically more reliable than the version by Al-Hajjäj). Edition in Busard (1984).

 A comprehensive study of Gerardo's version is to be found in de Young (2004).

 GERARDO DA CREMONA, [Anaritii in decern libros priores elementorum Euclidis com

 mentarii], mid. twelfth century.

 Book I

 Petitiones: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, [P6*].

 Propositiones per se note: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN4, CN5, P6*,
 Ml, M2, II, 12,13, P2-I4.

 • A translation from the Arabic of the commentary to the Elements written by An-Nayrizi (tenth century),

 who was in turn reading Simplicius's and Heron's lost Greek commentaries to Euclid. An-Nayrizi reports

 that Simplicius considered P6* to be an interpolation; An-Nayrizi also gives a proof of it. The original Arabic

 version also has CN9* after CN8*. Edition in Curtze (1899), improved in Tummers (1994) for Books I-IV;

 English translation and commentary in Lo Bello (2003a, b). On the relation between the Arabic original by

 An-Nayrizi and Gerardo's translation, see Brentjes (2001a).

 ANONYMOUS, second half of twelfth century.

 Book I

 Unlabeled principles: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5; CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*,
 CN4, CN5, P6*.

 • Possibly the first medieval translation made from the Greek. The final editor is not known, but probably

 the translation is the work of several scholars working at the court first of Frederick II and then of his son

 Manfredi in Sicily. Most of the text seems to follow a Greek manuscript close to Heiberg's manuscript B,

 with several discrepancies. The system of principles seems to follow manuscripts V or p. Critical edition
 in Busard (1987).

 JOHN OF Tynemouth, late twelfth century or beginning of the thirteenth century.

 Petitiones sunt quinque: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 A3, Rl. (...)

 Communes animi conceptiones: Nl, N2, N3. (...)

 • Translation from the Arabic probably made by John of Tynemouth (Johannes de Tinemue), formerly

 attributed to Adelard and following the same tradition of the Arabic text. Tynemouth made use of Adelard's

 system of principles. However, he claimed that the common notions are infinite in number, and gave axioms

 A3 and Rl in Book I as examples of them. Tynemouth also stated a few arithmetical common notions
 in Book VII, which form the first basis for an axiomatization of arithmetic in Euclid's Elements. They

 were to be found in An-Nayrizi's commentary to the Elements (see Curtze 1899, p. 191), who in turn

 attributed them to the commentary of Heron after Elements VII, 2 (without explicitly saying whether these

 assumptions, needed to prove Elements VII, 3, were to be considered as axioms). Gerardo da Cremona's

 translation of An-Nayrizi mentioned this point, but did not include the latter propositions as axioms of Book

 VII. The statement about the infinite number of common notions is also to be found in other anonymous

 Book I

 Book VII

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 641

 manuscripts in the tradition of Robert of Chester. These thirteenth-century manuscripts (that may predate,

 or not, Tynemouth's version) also added axioms A3 and R1 to Book I, but had no principles in Book VII;

 they have been edited in Busard (19%). The dating of Tynemouth's version is controversial; for an educated

 guess that it is to be dated to the thirteenth century, see Knorr (1990). The edition of Tynemouth's text is in
 Busard (2001).

 JORDANUS DE Nemore, De elementis arithmetice artis, first half of the thirteenth

 century.

 Petitiones sunt tres: N4, N5, N6.

 Communes animi conceptiones sunt octo: A2, N7, M3, M4, N8, N9, N10, Nil.

 • Jordanus's Arithmetica was the most important medieval treatise on arithmetic, but it is not an edition

 of the Elements. The material treated in it comes from the arithmetical Books of the Elements (in the version

 of Gerardo), as well as from Boethius's De institutione arithmetica (itself a translation of a Neopythagorean

 tract by Nichomacus of Gerasa) and several Arabic sources. Jordanus's axiomatics, however, seems to

 be his own creation (as it is not attested to in his known sources), and it influenced the further tradition

 of the arithmetical Books of the Elements (starting with Campano's edition). While Regiomontanus and

 Maurolico tried in vain to publish Jordanus's Arithmetica, it eventually went to print in 1496, edited (and

 modified) by Lefevre d'fitaples (see below). Edition in Busard (1991).

 Campano da Novara, around 1255-1259.

 Book I

 Petitiones sunt quinque: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4, CN5;
 A3, Rl. (...)

 Book VII

 Petitiones: N12, N5, N6, N13.

 Communes animi conceptiones: A2, M3, M4, N8, N7, N9, N10, N2, N3, Nl.

 • This edition of Euclid is not, properly speaking, a new translation but rather a recension of various earlier

 Latin editions. The main text used in this version seems to be one in the tradition of Robert of Chester, but

 Campano emended and integrated it, drawing on An-Nayrizi (via Gerardo da Cremona), John of Tynemouth,

 and the above-mentioned Latin translation made from the Greek text. Most of the arithmetical principles

 in Book VII come from Jordanus de Nemore's Arithmetica, while the others are drawn from Tynemouth's

 edition. Campano adds that Rl (the existence of the fourth proportional) is universally valid in continuous

 quantities, but it may be applied to numbers only when the second quantity is a multiple of the first, since

 numbers cannot be diminished to infinity (cf. N13). This N13 in Book VII is probably an original addition

 by Campano, and its main aim seems to be to allow a stop in the decomposition of a number into its factors

 (cf. Elements VII, 31); on Campano's system of arithmetical principles, see Rommevaux (1999). Printed
 in 1482 (see below). Edition in Busard (2005).

 THOMAS Bradwardine, Geometria speculativa, around 1320-1335.

 Book I

 Petitiones ab Euclydeponuntur quinque: Pl-El, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Communes scientie multe sunt, sed sufficiant novem: A4, CN5, CN1, A5, CN2,
 CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN4. (...)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 642

 V. De Risi

 • Bradwardine's treatise is a commentary on a few propositions of Euclid's Elements and several

 other mathematical results taken from various sources (including Archimedes). Bradwardine's Latin text

 generally follows Campano as far as the Elements are concerned, but also modified it under several respects.

 In particular, Bradwardine employed Archimedes's famous axiom (from De sphaera et cylindro), stating

 that the straight line is the shortest line, to ground the geometry of the Elements·, and possibly rejected

 postulate P2 on the extendibility of a straight line on metaphysical grounds, i.e., since the universe is

 finite (he offered a discussion on the topic in his major theological treatise, De causa dei). Bradwardine

 also introduced principle A4 that will be widely employed in further axiomatizations and represented the

 grounding principle of many early modern (extensional) mereological theories. He also added principle

 A7, which seems to be false as it is spelled and received no further attention in subsequent treatments of

 the matter. It should be noted that, in the fourth part of the book, Bradwardine attempted to prove a few

 assumptions among those mentioned by An-Nayrizi (in Gerardo da Cremona's translation), such as II, 12

 and 13. Bradwardine had probably written an Arithmetica speculativa, even though scholars are still in doubt

 about the exact version of it that should be ascribed to him (several works of this kind have been attributed

 to Bradwardine in the past); none of these works, however, contains axioms for the theory of numbers. The

 geometria speculativa was printed in 1495 (see below), and can now be read in Molland (1989). See also

 the essays by Molland (1978) (on Bradwardine's geometria) and Busard (1971, 1998) (on Bradwardine's
 and Johannes de Mures's arithmetica).

 3.3 Printed editions

 CAMPANO DA Novara, Preclarissimus liber elementorum Euclidis perspicacissimi,

 in artem geometrie incipit quamfoelicissime, Venezia, Ratdolt, 1482.

 Book I

 Petitiones sunt quinque: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.

 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5, A3, Rl. (...)

 Book VII

 Petitiones: N12, N5, N6, N13.

 Communes animi conceptiones: A2, M3, M4, N8, N7, N9, N10, N2, N3, Nl.

 • A printed edition of the medieval translation, and the first of all scientific treatises to go into print.

 The editor added CN7* among the common notions, which is absent in the known manuscript tradition.

 THOMAS Bradwardine, Breve compendium artis geometrie, ed. Pedro Sanchez Ciru

 elo, Paris, Guy Marchant, 1495.

 Book I

 Petitiones ab Euclyde ponuntur quinque: Pl-El, P3, P4, P5, P6*.

 Communes seiende multe sunt, sed sufficiant novem\ A4, CN5, CN1, A5, CN2,
 CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN4. (...)

 • A printed edition of Bradwardine's geometria speculativa, edited by the mathematician and theologian

 Ciruelo. The volume was reprinted several times in the following decades and exerted a certain influence

 on many authors, such as Pacioli, Bovelles, Vogelin and others.

 JACQUES LefEvre D'Etaples, Arithmetica decern libris demonstrata, Paris, Higman,
 1496.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 643

 Dignitates: A2, N7, M3, M4, N8, N9, N10, N11, N14, CN1, CN3, M7, M8, CN2,
 M6, A4, N15, N16, R2, M5.
 Petitiones: N4, N5, N6, N13, N17, N18.

 • A printed edition of Jordanus's Arithmetica. Lefevre d'ßtaples (Faber Stapulensis), however, added sev

 eral arithmetical axioms and postulates, which are partly new and partly taken from the medieval Euclidean

 tradition. The treatise had a big influence on the cossist tradition, and for instance the celebrated Arithmetica

 integra (1544) by Michael Stifel (1487-1567) depended heavily on Lefevre's version of Jordanus. We will

 not follow further this line of development, which falls outside of the tradition proper of the Elements.

 Giorgio Valla, De expetendis et fugiendis rerum opus, Venezia, Manuzio, 1501.

 Book I

 Petitiones: PI, P2, P3, [P4], P5.
 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9* CN4, CN5, P6*.

 • Several books of Valla's posthumous encyclopedic work deal with the content of the Elements, which

 Valla could read in the Greek and of which he translated about a hundred of propositions. He mentioned no

 principles for arithmetic (since he found none in the Greek manuscripts), but provided a list of principles

 for geometry (Book X, Chapter 110). Integrating the Greek manuscript of the Elements with Proclus's

 commentary, he stated that P4 can in fact be proven. Note that even if their sources were different, Valla's

 system of principles is the same as Gerardo da Cremona's (but different from Campano's).

 BARTOLOMEO ZAMBERTI, Euclidis megarensis philosophi platonici Mathematicarum
 disciplinarum Janitoris: Uabent in hoc volumine quicumque ad mathematicam
 substantiam aspirant: elementorum libros XIII. cum expositione Theonis, Venezia,
 Tacuino, 1505.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.

 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P6*.

 • The first printed translation made from the Greek, and thus providing the system of principles of some

 Greek manuscripts. Zamberti's edition is the heir of Valla's endeavor (see above), and he often reproduced

 the latter translation. Zamberti's system of principles is in fact the same as Valla's. Zamberti was highly

 critical regarding the "barbarisms" of Campano's translation from the Arabic and initiated a long-lasting

 quarrel on the superiority of the Greek manuscript tradition over the Arabic one.

 Luca Pacioli, Euclidis megarensis philosophi acutissimi mathematicorumque
 omnium sine controversia principis opera a Campano interprete fidissimo translata,
 Venezia, Paganino, 1509.

 Book I

 Petitiones·. P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.

 Communes animi conceptiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, AI, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5, A3, Rl. (...)

 Book VII

 Petitiones·. N12, N5, N6, N13.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 644

 V. De Risi

 Communes animi conceptiones: A2, M3, M4, N8, N7, N9, N10, N2, N3, Nl.

 • An emended version of Campano (1482), with Pacioli's remarks. It was written in 1485 and possibly

 printed already in 1486. Pacioli may also have translated the Elements into Italian, but this work is now
 lost.

 JACQUES LefEvre d'Etaples, Euclidis Megarensis Geometricorum elementorum
 libri XV. Campani Galli transalpini in eosdem commentariorum libri XV. Theonis

 Alexandrini Bartholomaeo Zamberto Veneto interprete, in tredecim priores, commen
 tariorum libri XIII, Paris, Henri Estienne, 1516.

 • A celebrated synoptic edition of Campano and Zamberti, with a comparison of their respective systems

 of principles. It was reprinted several times (see for instance the edition published in Basel, Herwagen 1537).

 JOHANNES VÖGELIN, Elementale geometricum ex Euclidis geometria, Wien, Singren,
 1528.

 Postulata: P4, P5, P6*, E2.
 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 A4.

 • Vogelin's version is not a proper edition of the Elements but rather a collection of a few important

 theorems taken from Books I, III, V and VI. It is remarkable that Vögelin did not include PI, P2 and P3

 among the principles, whereas he added Elements 1,7 (=E2) as a postulate, since (he claimed) it is difficult

 to prove and his aim was to write a book for students. Reprinted in 1536 with a preface by Melanchton.

 Oronce Fine, Protomathesis, Paris, 1532.

 Book I

 Book I

 Postulata, seuPetitiones: PI, P2, P3, P4, PP1, CI, C2. (...)

 Axiomata, vel Effata, seu Communes sententiae: CN4, CN1, M3-M4, CN2-CN3,
 CN6*-CN7*, P6*, CN5-A4.

 • A treatise on several pure and applied mathematical sciences that does not follow the deductive order

 of the Elements (it begins with an essay on arithmetic). Fine allowed no axioms for the theory of numbers,

 but offered one of the very first reworkings of the geometrical axiomatics. Fine explicitly claimed that

 PP1 and CI are needed in the proofs of the Elements. The Parallel Postulate (P5) is not included among

 the postulates (but implicitly employed many times), even though Fine stated that the latter principles are

 infinite in number, and the ones that he mentions at the beginning of the treatise are just a few examples.

 See also Fine (1536).

 SIMON Grynaeus, ΕΥΚΛΕΙΔΟΥ ΣΤΟΙΧΕΙΩΝ, Basel, Herwagen, 1533.

 Book I

 αιτήματα: PI, P2, P3.
 κοιναί έννοιαι: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4,
 P5, P6*.

 • The editio princeps of the Greek text, and one of the most influential works in the history of mathemat

 ics. It was printed along with Proclus's commentary to Book I. The modified division between postulates

 and common notions will have a great importance in the following tradition, and it is probably owed to

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 645

 Proclus's opinion on the matter, who attributed it to Geminus (In Euclidis 181-184). Such division is already

 to be found in a Greek manuscripts used by Grynaeus for his edition (the Marc. gr. 301), dating from the

 fifteenth century, while the alleged source of the latter manuscript (following Heiberg's reconstruction of

 this line of transmission), dating from the fourteenth century, followed the standard arrangement; it may

 be possible, therefore, that the modified list of axioms and postulates had its origins in the work of the

 fifteenth-century Byzantine scribe that produced the Marc. gr. 301. On the making of Grynaeus's edition,

 see Oosterhoff (2014).

 ORONCE FINE, In sex priores libros geometricorum elementorum Euclidis Megarensis
 demonstrationes, Paris, Simon de Colines, 1536.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.
 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P6*.

 • Zamberti's system of principles.

 NlCCOLÖ TARTAGLIA, Euclide Megarense philosopho, solo introduttore delle scientie
 mathematice, Venezia, Rossinelli, 1543.

 Commune sententie: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 Book I

 Petitioni: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.

 Book VII

 Petitioni: N12, N5, N6, N13.

 Commune conceptioni dell'animo: A2, M3, M4, N8, N7, N9, N10, N2, N3, Nl.

 • The first printed translation of the Elements into Italian, although several manuscripts with previous

 translations are known, mostly dating from the first decades of the sixteenth century; see Pagli (2003).

 Tartaglia translated from Campano. He acknowledged that Campano also included A3 and R1 among the

 "commune sententie" but claimed that this was a mistake (esp. for Rl). He also removed Al as a useless
 reduplication of CN1.

 PIERRE DE LA RAMiE, Euclides, Paris, Grandin, 1545.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.

 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P6*.

 • Zamberti's system of principles. It is possible that a previous edition had been published already in

 1541. The volume contains no proofs of the theorems, just the statements of the propositions. Ramus was

 subsequently to publish, besides his celebrated Scholae mathematicae, also a treatise on Arithmetica (1557)

 and a Geometria (1669), neither of which contains any axiom. Ramus's mathematical works enjoyed many

 translations in modern languages and several abridgements in the sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries. On

 Ramus's edition of Euclid, see Loget (2004).

 ANGELO Caiani, I quindici libri degli Elementi di Euclide, di greco tradotti in lingua
 thoscana, Roma, Blado, 1545.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 646

 V. De Risi

 Book I

 Domande: PI, P2, P3.

 Comunipareri: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, P5,
 P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. Like the contemporary edition by La Ramie, Caiani only stated the

 theorems without proving them.

 JOACHIM Camerarius, Euclidis elementorum geometricorum libri sex, conversi in

 Latinum sermonem, Leipzig, Valentin, 1549.

 Book I

 Petita: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notitiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The volume was edited by Rheticus.

 JOHANN Scheybl, Euclidis Megarensis philosophi et mathematici excellentissimi,

 Sex libri priores de geometricis principijs, Basel, Herwagen, 1550.

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notitiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The geometrical section of the book is introduced by a treatise on

 Book I

 algebra.

 [Book II]

 ROBERT Recorde, The Pathway to Knowledg, containing the First Principles of
 Geometrie, London, Wolfe, 1551.

 Grauntable requestes: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Common sentences: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 A4.

 • Recorde's book is not an edition of Euclid, but rather a rearrangement of some propositions of the first

 four books of the Elements for practical use, and the first printed translation into English of this material.

 After giving the definitions and solving a few classical geometrical problems in Book I (written already in

 1546), Recorde began Book II with a list of principles taken from Campano and other sources (as in the

 case of A4); he made no real use of these principles, though, as the Pathway does not contain any proof of

 the geometrical statements (see above the 1545 Euclidean edition by La Ramee, which may have influenced

 Recorde's work). While this translation was soon superseded by the one by Billingsley and Dee (1570),

 it exerted a certain influence on further English editions of Euclid (especially in practical mathematics).

 Recorde had published his English treatise on practical arithmetic, The Grounde of Aries, in 1542; the latter,

 however, contains no principles. On Recorde's life and works, see Roberts and Smith (2012) and Barany

 (2010); on the British tradition of practical mathematics, see Taylor (1954, 1966).

 VALENTIN Naboth, Euclidis Megarensis mathematici clarissimi elementorum geo

 metricorum liber primus, Köln, Birkmann, 1556.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 647

 Book I

 Petita: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notitiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The volume contains a selection of theorems and problems from

 Book I of the Elements, without proofs, and a few other propositions chosen from Books Π, III and VI.

 Naboth (aka Nabod, or Nabodus) was a famous astrologer.

 JACQUES Peletier DU mans, In Euclidis Elementa Geometrica Demonstrationum

 Libri sex, Lyon, Tomes, 1557.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, Ρ2, Ρ3, P4, [P5].
 Animi notiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, [P6*];
 E3. (...)

 • Zamberti's system of principles as a starting point (but the main text is based on Campano). Peletier

 claimed that P5 is in fact a kind of definition of non-parallel (converging) lines and should not be placed

 among the postulates. He also stated that P6* should be ranged among the postulata rather than the animi

 notiones. Finally, he famously claimed that Euclid's proof of Elements 1,4 (=E3) should be rejected, as it

 employs motion and superposition, and proposed to count the statement among the innumerable implicit

 principles of geometry.

 [Jean Magnien, Pierre de Montdor£, St. Gracilis], Euclidis Elementorum libri
 XV, Graece et Latine, Paris, Cavellat, 1557.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. A preface by a certain St. Gracilis explains that this edition was

 first conceived and prepared by Jean Magnien, and later completed, after the latter's untimely death, by

 Gracilis himself. Book X of the Elements follows the edition of it given by Pierre de Montdori (Euclidis

 elementorum liber decimus, Petro Montaureo interprete, Paris, Vascosan 1551). The edition enjoyed several

 reprints and was especially used in Jesuit colleges. Like La Ramie (1545) and Caiani (1545), it gave no

 proofs of the propositions.

 Xylander (Wilhelm Holtzmann), Die Sechs ersten Bücher Euclidis, vom Anfang
 oder Grund der Geometrj, Basel, Kündig, 1562.

 BookI

 Petitiones, seu Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notitiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The first printed translation of the Elements into German. Before

 Xylander, at least one other important mathematical volume had been published in German, Das erst Buch

 der Geometria, written by Wolfgang Schmidt and printed in Nürnberg in 1539. The latter book, however,

 did not follow the Euclidean order of the propositions, and only dealt with a few geometrical problems
 (rather than theorems); it included no axioms whatsoever.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 648

 V. De Risi

 CONRAD Dasypodius, Euclidis quindecim Elementorum Geometriae primum, Stras
 bourg, Mylius, 1564.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.

 Communes notiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. Dasypodius (Konrad Rauchfuss) edited several books of the Elements,

 in both Greek and Latin, between 1564 and 1579, without altering the list of principles. See also the important
 Herlin & Dasypodius (1566).

 PIERRE Forcadel, Les six premier livres des Elements d'Euclide traduicts et com

 mentez par Pierre Forcadel de Bezies, Paris, Marnef, 1564.

 Demandes: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes sentences: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6* CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The first printed translation of the Elements into French. The following

 year, Forcadel also published his edition of the arithmetical books of the Elements. The latter edition has

 no axioms, but in discussing the proof of Elements VII, 1, Forcadel claimed the necessity to assume N17,
 N2.N1.

 Christian Herlin, Conrad Dasypodius, Analyseis geometricae sex librorum
 Euclidis, Strasbourg, Rihel, 1566.

 Book I

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes notiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8* CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 [P4], [P5], P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. A famous and influential edition that reshaped into syllogisms the

 proofs of Euclid. Books I and V were written by Herlin, while his pupil Dasypodius, who had already

 published several partial editions of the Elements, completed the volume. In the appended Commentaria,

 Dasypodius stated that P4 and P5 are provable and should not be counted among the communes notiones.

 Francois de Foix-Candale, Euclidis Megarensis mathematici clarissimi elementa

 geometrica libri XV ad germanam geometriae intelligentiam e diversis lapsibus tem

 poris iniuria contractis restituta, Paris, Royer, 1566.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 Book VII

 Communes sententiae: N19, Nl.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 649

 • Grynaeus's system of principles in Book I. Candale, however, stated that CN8* and CN9* should

 be interpreted as referring to any multiple and submultiple (cf. M3 and M4, in Jordanus and Campano); a
 similar remark is found in Proclus, In Euclidem 196-197. Candale also thought it necessary to add a few

 arithmetical principles, but found Campano's list of them too long and reduced it to two axioms only.

 Francesco Maurolico, Euclidis elementorum compendia, 1567 (unpublished).

 Postulata: P1-P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Communes sententiae: CN1, CN2-CN3-CN6*-CN7*, CN8*-CN9*, CN4, CN5
 A6.

 Book I

 Book V

 Communes animi conceptiones: R3, R4, R5, R6, R7, R8, R9, RIO, R11, R12, R13,
 R14, R15, R16.

 • Maurolico was highly dissatisfied with the editions of Euclid printed in the Renaissance, and from the

 1530s on he raised several criticisms of both the Campano and Zamberti traditions. Between 1532 and 1534,

 he prepared new versions of Books II, V, VII, VIII, IX and X of the Elements which treated the Euclidean

 material with great freedom, and never went to print. In the same years, he also reworked the stereometric

 books of the Elements which were later published among Maurolico's Opuscula mathematica (1575), and

 he wrote the Arithmeticorum libri duo (also published in 1575). None of these works presents any principle

 besides the definitions. In 1567, however, Maurolico prepared the abridged version of a number of Euclidean

 books, the Euclidis elementorum compendia, with the aim of merging together Zamberti's and Campano's

 versions (something that Leftvre had only partially done in 1516) and adding a few new proofs and results.

 The latter edition, which also remained unpublished but circulated in manuscript form, has a set of axioms

 in Book I and V. The new axiomatization of the theory of proportions, in particular, represented an important

 starting point for further studies on the topic. Note that axioms R11 and R12 on the composition of ratios

 are completely new, and treat multiplications and divisions among ratios. The formal statement of A10 is
 that if A:B = D:E and B:C = E:F, then A:C = D:F (composition δι'ϊσου, or ex aequali). The axiom

 will be employed again by Benedetti, Viviani, Marchetti, and others. The edition of Maurolico's text is in

 Garibaldi (2002). On Maurolico's axiomatization of Book V, see Sutto (2000).

 PEDRO Juan DE Lastanosa (DE MonzOn), Elementa Arithmeticae ac Geometriae,
 Valencia, Huete, 1569.

 Dignitates arithmeticae: CN1, N7, N8, N9, A4, N20, N21, N22, CN2, CN3, CN6*,
 CN7*, ΝΙΟ, N14, N23, N24, N15, N25, N26, N16.

 Petitiones seupostulata [arithmeticae]: N6, N13, N27, N28, N4, N17.
 Axiomata, seu dignitates [geometriae]: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*,
 CN9*, CN4, CN5-A4.

 Postulata [geometriae]: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, CI, P6*. (...)

 • The book does not follow the Euclidean order and only covers a few elementary results in arithmetic

 and geometry. Μοηζόη gave, however, two complete systems of principles for the two sections of his book,

 mostly drawing on Leftvre d'Etaples (1496) and Fine (1532), but with a few additions of his own.

 Henry Billingsley, John Dee, The elements of geometrie of the most ancient
 Philosopher Euclide of Megara, faithfully (now first) translated into the English
 tongue, London, Daye, 1570.

 £] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 650

 Book I

 V. De Risi

 Peticions, or requestes: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 Common sentences: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 Book VII

 Common sentences: N7, M3, M4, Nl, N3, N2, N29.

 • The first complete translation of the Elements into English, with a Preface by John Dee. Billingsley

 adopted Campano's system of principles in Book I, as emended by Tartaglia, and a modification of Cam

 pano's axiomatics in Book VII. He added principle N29 of his own, stating the transitivity of the equality of
 ratios; it is an arithmetical version of Elements V, 11. The edition set the standards for further translations

 of Euclid into English. Thomas Rudd's edition of the Elements (London, Leybourn 1651), for instance,

 followed quite closely Billingsley's edition, and endorsed the same system of principles. On the Euclidean
 tradition in Britain, see Barrow-Green (2006).

 FEDERICO COMMANDINO, Euclidis elementorum libri XV una cum Scholiis antiquis,

 Pesaro, Franceschini, 1572.

 Italian version as De gli elementi d'Euclide libri quindici con gli scolii antichi, Urbino,
 Frisolino, 1575.

 Postulata (postulati, overo dimande): PI, P2, P3, P4, [P5].
 Axiomata, seu communes notiones (assiomi, overo communi notitie)·. CN1, CN2,
 CN3, CN6*, CN7* [CN8*], CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*; PP14.

 Notiones communes (communi notitie): M3, M4.

 Petitiones (petitioni, overo dimande): N12, N5, N6-N13.
 Notiones communes (communi notitie): M3, M4, N30, N31, N8, N32, N33, N35,
 N36, N34, N2, N3, Nl.

 Notiones communes (communi notitie): AA1, M9, M10, Ml 1.

 • A crucially important edition based on the Greek text by Grynaeus (1533) but double-checked against

 other, more reliable Greek manuscripts. Commandino remarked that P6* is not self-evident enough to be

 ranged among the axioms, and for this reason Campano had put it among the petitiones. He stated that P5

 should be proven and removed from the list of postulates, and gave Proclus's proof of it, relying on the new

 assumption PP14 (Latin ed. p. 19v; Italian ed. p. 21v). Moreover, Commandino noted that CN8* can be

 deduced by reiterated applications of CN2, and is thus redundant as a principle (cf. Proclus, In Euclidis

 196-197). This notwithstanding, Commandino added axioms M3 (a generalization of CN8*) and M4 in

 Book V, taking them from Campano's edition of Book VII; he also employed the same two principles in

 Book VII, just as Campano did. While in the Latin edition these axioms refer generally to "things" that

 are multiplied, in the Italian edition of the Elements Commandino stated a modified version of axioms M3
 and M4 in Book V, which only applies to continuous magnitudes, and another version of the same axioms

 in Book VII, which only applies to numbers. In Book X, Commandino added a version of Archimedes's

 Axiom (AA1) and three new axioms (M9, M10, Mil) which are modifications of the arithmetical axioms

 Book I

 Book V

 Book VII

 Book X

 N3, Nl and N2.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 651

 CHRISTOPH Clavius, Euclidis elementorum libri XV, Roma, Vincenzo Accolto, 1574.

 Book I

 Petitiones, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3, A7.

 Communes notiones, sive Axiomata, sive Pronunciata, sive Dignitates: CN1, CN2,
 CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, [P5], P6*, 15, Ml, M2, M12,
 M13, A4, M14.

 Book V

 Axioma: R17.

 Book VII

 Postulata, sive petitiones·. N12, N5, [N6-N13].
 Axiomata, sive pronuntiata: M3, M4, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2,
 N3,N1.

 BookX

 Postulatum, sive petitio: AA1.

 Axiomata, sive pronunciata: Ml 1, M9, MIO.

 • Another very important edition, which remained, for two centuries, the basis of many further axioma

 tizations of the Elements. Clavius claimed that all the principles can be proven from the definitions. Among

 them, P5 is complex enough to have to be removed from the list of axioms and to be considered a theorem.

 Clavius stated that Ml and M2 are taken from Pappus, quoted in PROCLUS, In Euclidem 197 (but they

 were already known to Campano through Gerardo da Cremona's translation of An-Nayrizf s commentary).

 Axiom R17 (the existence of the fourth proportional) is added at the beginning of Book V. Clavius mostly

 followed Commandino's system of principles in Books VII and X. Principle N6-N13 is not listed among

 the arithmetical postulates, but added in a following remark. Principle AA1 was an axiom in Commandino

 and became a postulate in Clavius. See below the different list of geometrical principles in the 1589 edition
 of Clavius's masterwork.

 RODRIGO ZAMORANO, Los seis libros primeros dela geometria de Euclides, Sevilla,
 La Barrera, 1576.

 Peticiones: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.
 Comunes sentencias: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P6*.

 • Zamberti's system of principles. The first translation of the Elements into Spanish.

 GlOVAN Battista BENEDETTI, In quintum Euclidis librum, in Diversarum specula

 tionum mathematicarum, & physicarum Liber, Torino, Belvilacqua, 1585.

 Book I

 Book V

 Postulata: R11-R12, CN3-CN2, R3-R5, R4-R6, R8, R9, RIO, R18, R19, R20,
 R21, R22.

 • A reworking of Book V of the Elements with a new system of principles, which exerted a certain

 influence on seventeenth-century axiomatizations of the theory of proportions. Benedetti's first and second

 axioms put together the standard Euclidean common notions on the composition of magnitudes (their

 sum and difference), with Maurolico's new axioms on the composition of ratios (their multiplication and

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 652

 V. De Risi

 division), with the clear aim of justifying the latter by the reference to the former. Benedetti's following

 axioms are simply the Euclidean propositions of Elements V, 7-13. They are followed by R20 that makes

 explicit the connection between ratios among magnitudes and ratios among numbers, and by two more

 axioms that seem to define continuous proportion. On Benedetti's theory, see Bodriga (1926) and Giusti
 (1993).

 FRANCESCO Patrizi, Delia nuova geometria, Ferrara, Baldini, 1587.

 [Book I]

 Supposizioni: SI, S2, S3, S4, S5.
 Assiomi: A8, A9, A10, CN5, AI 1, A12.

 • This book is not, properly speaking, an edition of the Elements, but rather an independent logical

 treatment of the first Euclidean results regarding straight lines, angles and triangles (covering more or less

 the Euclidean material up to Elements I, 29). The book is important inasmuch as it is the first treatise to

 discuss space as the object of geometry, as well as for developing a quasi-formal treatment of this field (cf.

 Herlin & Dasypodius, 1566). Patrizi's geometrical "suppositions" are mostly taken from his own essays

 on the metaphysics of space (De rerum natura libri II priores. Alter de spacio physico, alter de spacio
 mathematico, Ferrara, Baldini 1587), while his "axioms" are modified Euclidean common notions.

 CHRISTOPH Clavius, Euclidis elementorum libri XV, Roma, Bartolomeo Grassio,
 15892.

 Petitiones, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3, A7.
 Communes notiones, sive Axiomata, sive Pronunciata, sive Dignitates: CN1-A13
 A14, CN2, CN3, CN6*-M15, CN7*-M16, CN8*-M17, CN9*-M5, CN4, CN5,
 15,16, P4, [P5], P6*, Ml, M2, M12, M13, A4, M14.

 Book I

 Book V

 Axioma: R17.

 Book VII

 Postulata, sive petitiones: N12, N5, [N6-N13].

 Axiomata, sive pronuntiata: M3, M4, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2,
 N3,N1.

 BookX

 Postulatum, sive petitio: AA1.

 Axiomata, sive pronunciata: Mil, M9, MIO.

 • With respect to the 1574 edition, Clavius's second edition added, in Book I, a number of common

 notions on the comparison of magnitudes, as well as the new axiom 16, which Clavius employed in the

 proof of P5. The main difference between the two editions is given, in fact, by the lengthy discussion of the

 Parallel Postulate, that was engendered by Clavius's new acquaintance with the work of Nasir ad-Din (see

 below). The following editions of Clavius's commentary (the last one being in Clavius's Opera mathematica

 from 1612) made no further changes in the system of principles.

 NASIR ad-Din AT-Tusi, Euclidis elementorum geometricorum libri tredecim ex tra

 ditione doctissimi Nasiridini Tusini, Roma, typographia Medicea, 1594.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 653

 Book I

 al-usul al-mawdu'a: P6*, P2, P4, P5.

 al- 'ulum al-muta'arifa: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*-CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 • The Persian mathematician and scientist Nasir ad-Din at-Tüsi (1201-1274) wrote a commentary on

 the Elements (largely inspired by Ibn al-Haytham's work), as well as an important treatise on the proof of the

 Parallel Postulate. After his death a disciple of his compiled, in 1298, a further commentary on Euclid that

 drew on Nasir ad-Din's work and was later attributed to Nasir ad-Din himself. Many centuries later, three

 manuscripts containing the two commentaries (the one by Nasir ad-Din, and the other by his disciple, later

 called the pseudo-Tüsi) came into possession of the Medici family, along with many other Arabic works.

 A publishing house, the Oriental Press or Typographia Medicea, was then established in Rome under the

 direction of Giovan Battista Raimondi (1536-1614) with the aim of publishing several of these works. The

 commentary of the pseudo-Tüsi (still attributed to Nasir ad-Din) was published in Arabic (with a Latin title)

 in 1594. This famous Arabic edition could not exert much influence in Europe: yet Nasir ad-Din's proof of

 the Parallel Postulate was read (still in manuscript form) by Clavius, engendering the 1589 edition of his

 commentary (see above), and was later translated into Latin by Edward Pocock (1661) and published as

 an appendix to Wallis's Algebra (1693). This was the only fragment of the pseudo-Tüsi's commentary that

 enjoyed some diffusion in a Western language. His more general system of principles in Book I, apparently,

 was not able to affect any further study on the topic. While the list of axioms of this edition is quite standard,

 the geometrical postulates are widely discussed and connected with metaphysical considerations; PI and P3

 on the construction of lines and circles are expunged from the list of proper principles. On Nasir ad-Din's

 commentary on Euclid, its sources, and its relation with the pseudo-Tüsi's edition, see de Young (2003,

 2009). A complete discussion of the Medici edition is to be found in Cassinet (1986).

 Jan Pietersz Dou, De ses eerste Boecken Euclidis, Leiden, Bouwensz, 1606.

 Eenige stucken tot dese konst behoorende: PI, Ρ2, P3.
 Ghemeene bekantenissen: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5, P4, P5, P6*.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. The first translation of the Elements into Dutch. Dou's book follows

 the German version by Xylander (1562) with a few modifications. The same system of principles was to

 be used by the following Dutch edition of the Elements edited by Frans van Schooten, Sr. (De propositien
 vande XV. Boucken der Elementen Euclidis, Leyden, Basson, 1617).

 PlETRO Antonio Cataldi, I primi sei libri de gl'Elementi d'Euclide ridotti alia
 Prattica, Bologna, Cochi, 1613.

 Book I

 Book I

 Petitioni, overo domande: PI, P2, P3, [P4], [P5], P6*.

 Comuni concessioni, ο comuni notitie: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, [CN8*],
 CN9*, CN4, CN5-A4.

 Book V

 Petitione: M14.

 Comuni concessioni: CN1, CN2.

 • Cataldi claimed that P4, P5 and CN8* (but probably also CN9*) can be proven and should not be

 counted among the principles.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 654

 V. De Risi

 DENIS Henrion, Les quinze livres des elements d'Euclide traduicts de Latin en
 Frangois, Paris, Joallin, 1615.

 Petitions, ou demandes: PI, P2, P3.
 Communes sentences: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P4, P5, P6*.

 Communes sentences: M3, M4, N30, N31, N8, N32, N34, N35, N36, N2, N3, Nl.

 BookI

 Book VII

 BookX

 Demande: AA1.

 Communes sentences: Ml 1, M9, MIO.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles in Book I, and a simplification of Clavius's (and Commandino's)

 principles in the other books. The volume enjoyed great success and was reprinted several times.

 PlERRE Herigone, Cursus mathematicus. Cours mathematique, Paris, Le Gras, 1634.

 Book I

 Petitiones, sive Postulata (Petitions, ou Demandes): PI, P2, P3, A7.

 Communes notiones, sive Axiomata, sive Pronunciata, sive Dignitates (Communes
 notions, ou communes sentences, ou maximes): CN1, A15, A13, A14, A16-A17,
 A18, A19, CN2, CN3, M18, CN6*, M6, M15, CN7*, M7, M16, CN8*,M19, M20,
 M21, CN9*, M22, M23, M24, CN4, CN5, A20,15,16, P4, E4, P5, P6*, 17, 18,
 Ml, M2, M12, M13, A4, M25, M14, M26, A21.

 Book V

 Axioma: M27.

 Book VII

 BookX

 Postulatum: AA1.

 Axiomata: Mil, M9, MIO.

 Postulata: N12, N5, N37.
 Axiomata: N38, A22, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2, N3, Nl.

 • A complete reworking of the system of principles of the Elements, Herigone's work was a milestone

 in the development of Euclidean axiomatics, and several of its principles were employed many times in

 the following years. The intended interpretation of a few of the added principles is the following. Axiom

 A15 should guarantee the transitivity of equality, and refers to things which are equal (not just "the same

 things"). Axiom A18 is a principle of substitutivity salva aequalitate: ifA + B = C + D and Β = D, then

 A + D = C + B. The example that Herigone gives for A19 is the following: if AF is the square of AB, CG

 is the square of CD, and AF is equal to CG, then by A19 the square of AB is equal to the square of CD.

 The example of A21 is that if A > Β and A < Β are both false, then A = B; the axiom was later to be

 stated in this form (A24, in Schott 1661). Axiom M27 means that if A is an equimultiple of Β as Ε is of F

 (i.e., A:B = E:F), and C is an equimultiple of D as Ε is of F, then A is an equimultiple of Β as C is of D.

 Axiom E4 on the right angles seems to come from Proclus, In Euclidis 189, where it is said that Pappus

 had denied this principle, stating that curvilinear right angles may be different to one another.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 655

 CHRISTOPH Grienberger, Euclidis sex primi elementorum geometricorum libri cum

 parte undecimi ex majoribus Clavij commentarijs in commodiorem forma contracti,
 Graz, Widmanstad, 1636.

 Book I

 Petitiones, seu Postulate. PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata, seu Pronunciata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5,19, P4, P5, P6*, A4, M14.

 • Another Jesuit edition of the Elements, Grienbergers's book presented a simplification of Clavius's

 axiomatics, which substituted 15 and 16 with axiom 19, and deleted Ml, M2, M12, and M13 from Clavius's

 list. Grienberger had no axioms in Book V.

 MARIN Mersenne, Universae geometriae, mixtaeque mathematicae synopsis, Paris,
 Bertier, 1644.

 Axiomata, seu Communes notiones: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*,
 CN4, CN5, P6*.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5.

 Book VII

 Petitiones·. N12, N5, N6-N13.

 Communes notiones: M3, M4, N30, N31, N8, N32, N33, N35, N36, N34, N2, N3,
 Nl.

 BookX

 Communes notiones: AA1, M9, MIO, Mil.

 • Mersenne's treatise of mathematics offers a simplification of Commandino's axiomatics, which

 includes no axioms in Book V and does not further discuss the principles in Book I. Mersenne's book

 only states the theorems, without giving the proofs of them. The book also contains several other mathe

 matical works given in a similarly abridged form.

 CLAUDE Richard, Euclidis elementorum geometricorum libros tredecim, Antwerp,
 Verdus, 1645.

 Petitiones, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3, A7, ΤΙ, T2.

 Axiomata, seu Pronunciata, seu Dignitates, seu Communes notiones: CN1-A13
 A14-A15-A16-A17, CN2, CN3, CN6*-M15, CN7*-M16, CN8*-M17, CN9*
 M5, CN5-A6, CN4-T3,15,16, P4, P5-PP15, P6*, Ml, M2, M12, M13, A4, [M14],
 T4, C3, C4,110, C5, C6, C7, C8, C9, T5.

 Book I

 Book V

 Axiomata: R17, A23, M28; [A4, CN2, CN6*, CN3, CN1, CN7*, A13, Ml].

 Book VII

 Petitiones: N12, N5.

 Axiomata: M3, M4, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2, N3, Nl.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 656

 Book X

 Petitio: AA1.

 V. De Risi

 Axiomata, sivepronunciata: Mil, M9, MIO.

 • Jesuit textbook. Richard enriched Clavius's axiomatization, which he took as a starting point for his

 emended edition of Euclid. Axioms T1 and T2 are the first attempt to explicitly axiomatize the use of

 movement in geometry, and depend on Clavius's discussion with Peletier (in Clavius 1589 and following

 editions, commenting Elements III, 16). The movements described by T2 are translations and rotations

 around a point or an axis. The rigidity of the figure during movement is intended to be guaranteed by the

 new axiom T5. Axioms CN8*-M17 and CN9*-M5 are in fact stated in a more general way which applies

 to any multiple and submultiple (not just the double and the half). Richard gave a complete proof of his

 T3, relying on superposition (but, following Clavius, he thought that a proven axiom is still an axiom).

 Richard stated that Proclus's and Clavius's proofs of P5 rely on more obscure principles than P5 itself, and

 thus he claimed that it should be regarded as an axiom rather than as a theorem (as Clavius had stated).

 Principle PP15 comes from Ptolemy's proof of Elements 1,28 (see Proclus, In Euclidis 362-363): If two

 straight lines form internal angles equal to two right angles on the one side, they cannot meet; otherwise

 there would be no reason why they should not meet on the other side as well (where they also form internal

 angles equal to two right angles), and this is impossible as they would enclose a space. Axiom PP15 states

 the symmetry requirement. Richard expunged M14 from the list of principles, since it was introduced by

 later commentators to make explicit an assumption of the Euclidean proof of Elements III, 20, while Richard

 gave another proof of the same proposition that does not recur to such a principle. Axioms C5, C6, C7, and

 C8 are about "Line-Circle" continuity. Axiom C9 is a form of the so-called Pasch's Axiom. The system

 of principles employed by Richard in Book V largely consists in new definitions, but he also had a list of

 eleven axioms that simply repeat (with small changes) a few of the common notions of Book I, adapting

 them to continuous magnitudes and ratios; the only principles to which nothing corresponds in Book I,

 besides R17, are A23 and M28; the other principles are modified versions of A4, CN2, CN6*, CN3, CN1,
 CN7*, A13, Ml.

 EVANGELISTA TORRICELLI, De proportionibus liber, 1647 (unpublished).

 Suppositiones et Axiomata: RIO, R3-R4, R5-R6, R23, R24, R20.

 • Torricelli's treatise on the theory of proportions reworked Galileo's own theory, which was dictated

 to him by Galileo and first published by Viviani in 1674 (as the Fifth Day of the Discorsi). Even though

 Torricelli's book was never published, it enjoyed some manuscript circulation, and influenced several

 writers. Axioms R23 and R24 give in fact a different characterization of proportionality than the Euclidean

 definition. Torricelli's book on proportions was first published in Vol. 1 of Torricelli's Opere (see p. 306),

 and can now be read with a critical edition and a commentary in Giusti (1993).

 JOHN Wallis, In Elementa Euclidis Praelectiones, 1651 (unpublished).

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN9*, CN8*, CN4, CN5, P4, [P5],
 P6*.

 • The Bodleian Library preserves a manuscript with Wallis's Oxford lectures on Euclid's Elements from

 1651. They are still unpublished, and contain a remarkable amount of notes and philosophical discussions

 on the principles and theorems of Book I of the Elements. Among them, we find Wallis's alleged proof

 of the Parallel Postulate, that he published in the essay De postulate quinto, appended to the 1693 Latin

 edition of his Algebra. In his lectures, Wallis made use of Grynaeus's text and system of principles, even

 though he discussed Clavius's list as well, stating that the axioms added by the Jesuit are rather theorems

 (as a matter of fact, Wallis provided a few proofs of other axioms as well).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 657

 GIOVANNI Ricci, De gli Elementi di Euclide Iiprimi sei Libri, Bologna, Longhi, 1651.

 Postulati, overo Dimande: PI, P2, 111, S6, T6, T7.

 Assiomi, overo communisentenze: CN1, A13, A14, CN2, CN3, CN6*, M15, CN7*,
 M16, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*, A4, P4,16, T8, T9, PP2, A21.

 • The aim of the author was to produce a text for students. Postulate II 1 is a modification of P3, while

 T6 is intended to guarantee the possibility of reproducing any figure (Ricci employed it in Elements 1,5 in

 order to construct an isosceles triangle congruent with the given one), and T7 is a version of Richard's Tl.

 In Ricci, each axiom A13 and A14 is split in two different principles (referring to the greater or the lesser

 relation respectively). Axiom T8 is a simplified version of Richard's T3. Axiom PP2 is a substitute for the

 Parallel Postulate (P5).

 ANDREAS Tacquet, Elementa geometriae planae et solidae, Antwerp, Meurs, 1654.

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata: CN1-A13, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*-CN9*, CN4, T10-T11,
 CN5, P4, PP3, PP4, P6*, [15].

 Book I

 Book II

 Assioma: Al.

 Book I

 Book V

 Axioma: R25.

 • Jesuit textbook. It only contains Books I-VI and XI-XII of the Elements, while Books VII-IX were

 published by Tacquet in 1656 (see below). Tacquet's edition of the Elements modified several proofs and

 offered a new theory of proportions in Book V, as well as a proof of the Parallel Postulate. It enjoyed a broad

 circulation and was regarded as a model for subsequent reformulations of elementary geometry. Tacquet

 added axioms T10 and Tl 1 as partial converses of CN4 (cf. Richard's T3). He explicitly recused P5 (the

 Parallel Postulate) from the list of axioms. Tacquet's new theory of parallels is grounded on the definition of

 parallel lines as equidistant straight lines, and on his new axioms PP3 and PP4. In fact, each of these three

 principles is enough to guarantee the provability of the Parallel Postulate (P5). Assuming the existence of

 equidistant straight lines (as Tacquet did) is in fact equivalent to assuming P5 itself. Axioms PP3 and PP4
 are false in hyperbolic geometry as well, and from each of them P5 can be deduced, while both of them

 can in turn be proven, assuming the existence of equidistant straight lines. Tacquet's intended interpretation

 of PP4 is that every perpendicular to a straight line is also perpendicular to a parallel to it (in hyperbolic

 geometry, ultraparallel lines only have one common perpendicular). After the statement of 15, Tacquet gave

 a proof of it. The axiom R25 of Book V is simply the existence of the fourth proportional already employed

 by Clavius and others, in a clearer wording. In dealing with irrational magnitudes and ratios in Book V,

 Tacquet added three more axioms, which he took to be provable and which had in fact been proven by

 Grßgoire de Saint Vincent (Tacquet's teacher) in his Opus geometricum quadraturae circuli et sectionum

 coni (1647). Further editions of Tacquet's book (among which an emended version from 1665) did not

 modify the system of principles. The book enjoyed a broad diffusion in English translation (see for instance
 William Whiston's edition from 1714).

 ISAAC Barrow, Euclidis Elementorum Libri XV breviter demonstrate, Cambridge,
 Nealand, 1655.

 Book I

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 658

 V. De Risi

 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4 [T10, T12], CN5,
 15,16, P4, P5, P6*, Ml, M2, M12, M13, A4, M14.

 Book V

 Axioma: M27.

 Book VII

 Postulata: N12, N5, N37.

 Book X

 Postulatum: AA1.

 Axiomata: Mil, M9, MIO.

 Axiomata: N38, A22, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2, N3, Nl.

 • A famous abridged edition of the Elements, with new proofs by Barrow. Barrow's system of principles

 in Book I is a slight simplification of Clavius's 1589 edition. Barrow stated that CN4 can be converted in the

 case of straight lines and angles (cf. Tacquet's axiom T10, to which he added T12). This notwithstanding,

 in his Lectiones mathematicae from 1665 he explicitly criticized Tacquet, claiming that Euclid's CN4 may

 be converted in all cases. The meaning of the converse of CN4, according to Barrow, should be that "Things

 that are equal to one another may coincide with one another", where the modal verb should express the

 possibility to dissect the first thing into pieces (and even in infinitesimal or indivisible pieces) and recompose

 them again in another thing which is congruent to the second. He wanted, in sum, to ground the equality of

 measure on the congruence of parts (see in particular his Lect. XIII). Barrow's lectures were posthumously

 published in 1685 and reprinted in a celebrated edition by Whewell (Cambridge University Press, 1860).

 Barrow's system of principles in Books V, VII, and X follows Herigone (1634).

 BLAISE Pascal, Introduction ä la geometrie, around 1655 (unpublished).

 [Book I]
 Principes: S8, S9, S10, Sil, E5, S12.
 Theordmes connues naturellement: S13,E8-S14, S15, S16, E6,13, CIO, CI 1, C12,
 C13, C14, C15.

 • The sketch of an introduction to geometry written by Pascal around 1655. Pascal went no further in

 the project, nor did he publish his introduction, since Amauld was then working on his Nouveaux elements

 (published in 1667) and Pascal decided that a further edition would have been useless. Pascal's draft was

 later copied by Leibniz and was found among Leibniz's papers in Hannover (the original manuscript is now

 lost); it is published in PASCAL, Oeuvres, vol. 9, pp. 292-294. Axiom S16 is the converse of Elements III,

 24. Axiom E6 is taken from a Euclidean assumption in Elements I, def. 18: there had been several attempts

 to prove this proposition, from Antiquity to the Early Modern Age.

 ANDREAS Tacquet, Arithmeticae theoria et praxis, Leuven, Coenestenius, 1656.

 Book VII

 Axiomata: M3, M4, N30, N31, N8, N9, N34, N36, N5, N2, N3, Nl.

 • Jesuit textbook. Tacquet's edition of Books VII, VIII, and IX of the Elements, complementing his

 edition of the geometrical books, already appeared in 1654 (see above). A treatise on practical arithmetic
 follows the Euclidean books.

 Giovanni Alfonso Borelli, Euclides restitutus, sive prisca geometriae elementa,
 Pisa, Ε Onofrio, 1658; Roma, Mascardi, 16792. Italian ed. Euclide rinnovato ovvero

 gli antichi elementi della geometria, Bologna, Ferroni, 1663.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 659

 [Book I]
 Petitiones, seu Postulata: PI, P2, P3, A7.
 Axiomata, seu Pronunciata: CN1-A13-A14, CN2, CN3, CN6*-CN7*, CN8*
 CN9*, M29, CN5, A4, CN4,19, P6*, E7, C16; PP5.

 [Book II]
 Axioma: E8-E9.

 [Book ΠΙ]
 Axiomata: M9, R17, M30, R26, R27.

 [Book V]
 Axioma: E10.

 [Book VI]
 Postulata: 112,14.
 Axiomata: 113,114,115,18,116.

 [Book IX]
 Axiomata: M2-M13, M12.

 • Borelli's Euclides restitutus attempted a new foundation of the Elements through the introduction of

 several new axioms, new proofs and a new ordering of the classical theorems. Book I deals with elementary

 geometrical theorems similar to Elements I, while Book II is the theory of the circle (similar to Elements

 III); Book III discusses the theory of proportions (Elements V); Book V a few results in inscribing and

 circumscribing polygons (cf. Elements IV) and their similarity (Elements VI); Book VI has several points

 in common with Elements XI; Book VIII deals with arithmetic (Elements VII, VIII and IX). Book IX deals

 with irrational quantities (with a few connections with Elements X). In Book I, axiom M29 is a simple

 extension of N2. Axioms E7 and C16 are used by Borelli to prove Elements 1,1, which, in his opinion, was

 in need of a further continuity assumption. Axiom E7 is used in the following Books as well. Axiom PP5

 is added at p. 32, just before proving P5 and Elements 1,29; it is in fact equivalent to the Parallel Postulate.

 Borelli's definition of parallel lines is that of straight lines such that any perpendicular to one of them is

 also a perpendicular of the others and such that all these perpendiculars are equal to one another (a property

 that in fact follows from the first condition); axiom PP5 is intended to guarantee their existence. In Book

 III, axiom R17 on the existence of the fourth proportional is split into two different axioms. The system

 of principles in Book III, completed with a set of new definitions for equiproportionality, is intended to

 radically reform the Eudoxian theory of proportions (see Palladino 1991; Giusti 1993). Axioms 113,114

 and 115 are extensions of the usual axioms on the straight line, while 18 is explicitly referred to Elements

 XI, 1, where it is implicitly assumed by Euclid; 116 is referred to Elements XI, 2. Borelli had no axioms

 on arithmetic in his Book VIII. Borelli's work was translated into Italian by Domenico Magni in 1663, in

 an abridged edition that did not include Books VIII and IX. This edition had (in the remaining Books) the

 same system of principles than the first edition, with the only exception that Magni, contrary to Borelli's

 opinion, claims that CN4 can be converted (i.e.: everything which is equal can be superposed; cf. the edition

 by Barrow, 1655, above). A second Latin edition of the work appeared in 1679, again without Books VIII

 and IX. In it, Borelli eliminated the continuity principle C16 from the axioms of Book I, supplying a new

 (less rigorous) proof of Elements 1,1 which only employs E7.

 CLAUDE Francois Milliet Dechales, Huict Livres des Elements d'Euclide rendus

 plusfaciles, Lyon, Coral, 1672.

 Book I

 Demandes: PI, P2, P3.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 660

 V. De Risi

 Axiomes, ou Principes: CN1-A13, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*-CN9*, CN4,
 T10-T12, CN5, P4, PP7, P6*, 19.

 Book V

 Axioma: R25.

 • Jesuit textbook. This edition only contains Books I-VI and XI-XII of the Elements (cf. Tacquet,

 1654), thus eliminating the arithmetical treatises (VII-IX), the tenth book on irrational magnitudes, and

 the thirteenth book on the Platonic solids; this new arrangement of the matter was later followed in many

 eighteenth-century editions. Dechales's system of principles derived from Tacquet (1654), but substituted a

 new axiom PP7 to prove the Parallel Postulate (it is in fact equivalent to it). Dechales's book enjoyed several

 reprints and translations. A Latin version of it was inserted into Dechales's monumental Cursus seu Mundus

 mathematicus, the first edition of which was printed in 1674, followed by an important posthumous enlarged

 edition in 1690. The system of geometrical principles remained, however, unchanged in these later editions.

 The Cursus also added a few books on arithmetic, which are introduced by five arithmetical axioms. These

 books, however, do not follow the Euclidean development and their (very practical) principles only concern

 the decimal number system.

 Caspar Schott, Cursus mathematicus, sive Absoluta omnium mathematicarum dis

 ciplinarum encyclopaedia, Würzburg, Hertz, 1661.

 Book I

 Petitiones, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3, A7.
 Axiomata, sive Pronunciata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5, P4, [P5], P6*, 15,16,17,18, Ml, M2, M12, M13, A4, M14, M26, A24, E8,
 C17, A16.

 • Jesuit textbook. Book III of Schott's Cursus includes the first six Books of the Elements. Schott's

 axioms for Euclid's Book I, mostly follow Clavius, with a few additions from Herigone and a couple of

 new principles. Schott claimed to have proven P5 with a simple (and wrong) conversion of Elements 1,27

 (p. 73). He had no axioms in Elements V.

 ANTOINE ARNAULD, Nouveaux Klemens de geometrie, Paris, Savreux, 1667.

 [Book I]
 Axiomes de l'egalite et inegalite: CN5, A4, CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, M3,
 M4.

 [Book II]
 Axiomes: R20, R13, R29, R30, M31, R31.

 [Book V]
 Axiomes: Ell, PI, P2,15,117, PP6; P3, T13, E8, E12, S16-E17, E13, S17; E14.

 [Book XIII]
 Axiomes: E15, Ε16, N39.

 • Arnauld's text on elementary geometry was one of the most important books on the subject in the

 seventeenth century. It did not follow the Euclidean order or axiomatics, but wanted to improve upon it (cf.

 Tacquet's and Borelli's works). It was written around 1655-1656 in connection with Pascal's Introduction

 (see above), but printed only in 1667; a second, modified edition was published in 1683 (see below). It was

 clearly influenced by Clavius (1589), Herigone (1634), and Tacquet (1654), among others. Book I deals with

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 661

 arithmetic and adds several unproven rules to the Euclidean common notions. Books II-IV deal with the

 theory of proportions and incommensurable magnitudes, and begin with an axiomatization of the classical

 Eudoxian theory (which was to be modified in the second edition of the volume). Book III ends with two

 simpler axioms on equal ratios which are, however, not employed in the book, and are removed in the

 second edition. Books V-XV deal with plane geometry, all axioms being at the beginning of Book V with

 the exception of the three used in Book XIII for the calculation of areas. The interpretation of axiom R29

 is that nA:mA = nB:mB (for any A, B), while R30 states that nA:nB = mA:mB; they are generalizations
 of R20 (πΑ:Α = nB:B) andR13 (nA:nB = A:B), respectively. Axiom 117 is a formulation of the classical

 P6*, but has in Arnauld a simpler statement. Axiom PP6 is a substitute for the Parallel Postulate (it rules

 out asymptotic parallel lines); Arnauld, however, also attempted a proof of P5 independent from this axiom

 in Book VI. The intended meaning of E12 is that the "degrees" of a smaller circumference are smaller

 than the degrees of a larger circumference, since both lines are divided in the same number of degrees (i.e.,

 360). Axiom E14 is connected with Amauld's definition of a perpendicular, which is a line that satisfies the

 condition of the axiom (in two points).

 GlLLES-FRAN£DIS DE GOTTIGNIES, Elementa geometriae planae, Roma, Angelo Bern
 abö, 1669.

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata: CN1-A13-A14, CN2, CN3, CN6* CN7*, CN8*-CN9* CN4, T10
 T11, CN5, P4, P6*, 15, R32, R28.

 • Gottignies's book is not, properly speaking, an edition of the Elements, but rather an introduction to

 geometry following Euclid as closely as possible. Gottignies assumed that P5 had been proven by Clavius.

 HONORfi Fabri, Synopsis geometrica, Lyon, Molin, 1669.

 Axiomata: CN1-CN8*-CN9*, CN2-CN3-CN6*-CN7*, CN5-A4-M14-A24,
 R33,117-15, T14, CN4, R34, R35, R36.
 Postulata: PI, P3, P2-T15, A7, T2, S18, T16.

 • Jesuit textbook. Once again, this is not, properly speaking, an edition of the Elements, but rather

 an introduction to geometry following Euclid as closely as possible. I have simplified somewhat Fabri's

 verbose axioms R33, R35, R36. Axiom T14 is introduced in order to employ motion in geometry. Fabri

 claimed that CN4 can be unrestrictedly converted. Fabri's constructive postulate T15 is stated among a list

 of operations that can be accomplished with geometrical tools and it does not seem to have real foundational

 relevance. Axiom T2 is again employed in order to make use of rigid motion in geometry, while the new

 T16 was intended to guarantee non-rigid motion in a few occurrences. The Parallel Postulate is proven from

 the definition of equidistant lines (assumed as a real definition).

 VlNCENZO VlVIANI, Quinto Libro degli Elementi di Euclide, owero Scienza Univer

 sale delle Proporzioni spiegata colla dottrina del Galileo, Firenze, Condotta, 1674.

 Assiomi, owero Comuni notizie: R38, R39, R35, R36, R16-R37, RIO, R4, R40,
 Rll.

 Domanda: R17.

 • Since Tonicelli's book on the theory of proportion (written in 1647) had not been published, this edition

 by Viviani of Galileo's Fifth Day of the Discorsi is the first printed essay containing Galileo's reform of

 Book V of the Elements. It is prefaced by Viviani's own attempt to render more rigorous the theory of

 proportions, which includes ten new principles. Viviani was to publish a fuller edition of the Elements in

 1690, in which, however, he was to adhere to a more standard axiomatization, following Zamberti for the

 system of principles in Book I and including no axioms in Book V.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 662

 V. De Risi

 Gilles Personne de Roberval, Clements de geometrie, around 1673-1675 (unpub
 lished).

 [Book I]
 Axiomes: A4, CN5, CN1, CN2.

 Postulats: S19,118,119,120,121,122,123, T2,124, PI, A7, A25.

 [Book II]
 Axiomes: CN4, T17, El.
 Postulat: C18.

 [Book III]
 Postulats: P3, AA4, C19.

 [Book IV]
 Axiome: PP8.

 [Book VIII]
 Axiome: E19.

 • Roberval died before publishing the text, which is a new sy stematization of elementary geometry (plane

 and solid) in eight books. Several postulates in Book I are more of a philosophical than of a geometrical

 nature, while others have a more recognizably mathematical appearance. Among them, S19 and 122 together

 should guarantee the existence of all mathematical objects. Principles 118-121 may also be employed in a

 theory of indivisibles. Axiom 123, stating the possibility to include a "space" between any two bounded

 regions, seems to state a modern separability property (e.g., the so-called topological separability axiom

 T4, stating that space is "normal"). Axiom 124 is the condition for the definition of a straight line as a

 rotational axis. Book II has, besides the axioms, two postulates: The first of them is, however, incompletely

 formulated; the second, CI 8, may be regarded as a form of Pasch's Axiom. Postulate AA4 in Book III is a
 form of the Archimedean Axiom. Axiom PP8 in Book IV is a substitute for P5. The edition of Roberval's

 manuscript is in Jullien (1996).

 Jean Prestet, Elemens des mathematiques, ou principes generaux de toutes les
 sciences qui ont les grandeurs pour objet, Paris, Pralard, 1675.

 Axiomes: A26, M32, A4, CN5, M33, CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*; M3, M4,
 N40, Mil, MIO, N41, N42.

 • Jesuit textbook. Prestet's book is a treatise on arithmetic and algebra with a few geometrical examples.

 It does not follow the demonstrative order of the Elements, but contains a few axioms in the first two Books

 which may be considered an extension of the Euclidean Common Notions. Prestet also added several other

 unproven practical principles (which he called "demandes" or simply "regies") that teach how to manipulate

 the algebraic symbolism; they are not included here, as they are too numerous and depart widely from the

 Euclidean style. A second edition appeared in 1689 (see below).

 Mercator (Nikolaus Kauffmann), Euclidis Elementa Geometrica Novo Ordine

 ac Methodo fere demonstrata, London, Martyn, 1678.

 Axiomata: I5-P6*, P4, PP9, CN4-T10-T12, CN5-A4, CN1,CN8*-CN9*, CN2
 CN3, CN6*-CN7*; R35, R8, R41, RIO, R42.

 Principia practica, sive Postulata: PI, P2, P3.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 663

 • Mercator's book is not, properly speaking, an edition of the Elements, but rather a new arrangement

 of Euclid's mathematics. Mercator stated the first nine axioms as principles of plane geometry, and the

 further five axioms as principles of the theory of proportions. He tried to separate theorems and problems,

 and claimed that all theorems can be proven relying on the axioms alone, while the problems require

 the three postulates (or practical principles). Mercator's definition of parallel lines is that of straight lines
 which do not incline toward one another; the notion of inclination is left undefined. Axiom PP9 states

 the transitivity of parallelism, and this may be the first instance of the use of this principle to ground the

 Parallel Postulate. The entire theory may be considered a first step toward a direction theory of parallelism

 (developed in the nineteenth century). Mercator took Elements V, 18 (=R42) as a principle, as Euclid's proof

 of it requires the assumption of the existence of the fourth proportional; he preferred to directly assume the

 Euclidean proposition rather than accepting axiom R1 or R17 (employed by Clavius and others to prove

 Vitale Giordano da Bitonto, Euclide Restituto, ovvero gli antichi elementi geo

 metrici ristaurati efacilitati, Roma, Angelo Bernabö, 1680.

 the proposition).

 Book I

 Postulati: PI, P2, P3, A7.
 Assiomi: CN1-A13, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8* CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, [P5],

 Assiomi: M3, M4, N30, N31, N32, N33, N34, N35, N36, N2, N3, Nl.

 [P6*], [15].

 Book VII

 Postulati: N12, N5.

 BookX

 Postulato: AA1.

 Assiomi: Ml 1, M9, M10.

 • Giordano's system of principles is strongly dependent on Clavius. Giordano attempted to prove the

 geometrical axioms P5, P6* and 15 in the course of Book I, and his defective proof of the Parallel Postulate

 (pp. 45-66) is especially worthy of notice. A second edition in 1686 did not change the system of principles.

 JACQUES Rohault, Les six premiers Livres des Elemens d'Euclide, in Ouvres
 posthumes, ed. C. Clerselier, Paris, Desprez, 1682.

 Book I

 Demandes: PI, P2, P3, A7.
 Axiomes: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9* CN4, A4, CN5, P4, P6*,
 15,16, Ml, M2, M12, M13, M14.

 Book V

 Axiomes: R43, R44, R45.

 • One of the most influential treatises on Cartesianism, it also included a shortened version of the

 Elements. In Book I, Rohault mostly followed Clavius's axiomatization. He did not include P5 among the

 axioms, nor did he give a proof of it, but rather stated it as an evident truth before proving Elements I,

 29 (vol. 1, p. 60). Rohault added three axioms in Book V which are a simple variation of the Euclidean

 definitions of the equality and inequality of ratios, Rohault having himself defined these in a different

 way.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 664

 V. De Risi

 ANTOINE Arnauld, Nouveaux Klemens de geometrie, Paris, Desprez, 16832.

 Axiomes de l'egalite et inegalite: CN5, A4, CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, M3,
 M4.

 [Book I]

 [Book II]

 Raisons igales naturellement connues: R46, R20, R13, R29, R30.
 Axiomes: R18, R47, R48, R28, R49, RIO, R4, R50, R51, R52.

 [Book V]
 Axiomes: Ell, PI, P2,15,117, PP6; P3, T13, E8, E12, S16-E17, E13, S17; E14.

 [Book ΧΙΠ]
 Axiomes: E15, E16, N39.

 • The second edition of Arnauld's 1667 work. Several changes were made in this second edition in Books

 II—IV on the theory of magnitudes and proportions, mostly following Nonancourt's Euclides logisticus,

 which had been published in 1652 and which Amauld became familiar with in 1679-1680. The new system

 of principles in Book II is a modification of the 1667 edition with Nonancourt's own axioms. Several further

 editions were printed, with no changes in the axiomatics. A modern critical edition, which underlines the

 differences between the 1667 and 1683 editions, is to be found in Descotes (2009).

 BERNARD Lamy, Les elemens de geometrie, Paris, Pralard, 1685.

 Principes generaux, ou Axiomes: CN5, A4, CN1, CN2, CN3, CN7*, CN6*, CN4,
 CN8*, CN9*, N43.

 [Book I]
 Propositions, ou Demandes: 129,13, E18, PI, P2,131,132,130,117; P3, E24, E6,
 E13, E8; E14,125,126; PP1.

 [Book II]
 Demandes: Ε19, E20.

 [Book III]
 Demandes·. N44, N45, R53.

 [Book IV]
 Axiomes: 14,133,116,134,115, E21,127,128; E22, E23, AA2, AA3.

 • Lamy's volume is a textbook mostly based on Arnauld (1683). It added a few geometrical axioms, and in

 particular several principles on the straight line that are almost identical to one another (PI,131,132,130,117)

 in an attempt to formalize the incidence properties of this line. It includes no axiomatization for the theory

 of proportions (except for a few hints in one appendix, and the three postulates on the commensurability

 of ratios in Book III). Book IV deals with solid geometry. Axiom E14 is in fact expressed by Lamy as four

 distinct propositions. Axioms AA2 and AA3 are related to the method of indivisibles.

 JEAN Prestet, Nouveaux elemens des mathematiques, ou principes generaux de

 toutes les sciences qui ont les grandeurs pour objet, Paris, Pralard, 16892.

 Axiomes, ou notions communes, et principes generaux du corps entier des Math

 ematiques: CN5, A4, M33, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, M12, A13, A27, A28.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 665

 Axiomes, ou notions communes, etprincipes generaux du corps entier de la Geome
 trie: P1-P2-P6*, CN4, E25.

 • The widely popular second edition of Prestet's Elements (1675) appeared in two largely augmented

 and revised volumes in 1689. It changed the system of axioms for the theory of magnitudes, and added a

 few principles for geometry, which is treated of cursorily in the book.

 [John Keill], Euclidis elementorum libri priores sex, item undecimus et duodecimus

 ex versione latina Federici Commandini in usum juventutis academicae, Oxford, The
 atrum Sheldonianum, 1701.

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*, P4, P5.

 Book I

 Book V

 Axiomata: M3, M4.

 • A very successful edition in Britain. The first Latin edition appeared anonymously, but a number of

 the many subsequent Latin and English editions stated that the editor was John Keill. The Latin text mostly

 follows Commandino, but the system of principles in Book I is the one by Grynaeus. In the Latin editions,

 the axioms in Book V are those by Commadino, but in the English translation they were later suppressed.

 David Gregory, ΕΥΚΛΕΙΔΟΥ ΤΑ ΣΩΖΟΜΕΝΑ, Euclidis quae supersunt omnia,
 Oxford, Theatrum Sheldonianum, 1703.

 αιτήματα, Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 κοιναι εννοιαι, Communes notiones, sive Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*,
 CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, P5, P6*.

 • An new edition of the Greek text of the Elements and the other works of Euclid, together with a new

 Latin translation. The Greek of the Elements is largely based on Grynaeus's edition, but it is improved in

 several respects. The system of principles, however, is left unmodified.

 Edmund Scarburgh, The English Euclide, being The First Six Elements of Geometry,

 translated out of the Greek, Oxford, Theatrum Sheldonianum, 1705.

 Book I

 Book I

 Postulates: PI, P2-[T18], P3.
 Axioms: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, [P5], P6*,
 PP1.

 • A further Oxonian edition of Euclid from the beginning of the eighteenth century, this one is provided

 with an extensive commentary by Scarborough. He claimed that Postulate T18 was not stated by Euclid,

 since it is somehow included in P2, but that it should, nonetheless, be explicitly given. He thought that the

 Parallel Postulate is too complicated to be assumed as a principle, and preferred to add the alternative axiom

 PP1 on equidistance. Scarborough also offered a thoroughgoing discussion of the theory of proportions in

 Elements V, but he did not add any further axiom to this effect.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 666

 V. De Risi

 NICHOLAS DE Malezieu, Elemens de geometrie de Monseigneur le Due de Bour
 gogne, Paris, Boudot 1705.

 [Book I]
 Axiomes, ou verites connues d'elles memes: CN5, A6, A4, CN1, CN2, CN3, N46,
 N47, N30, N48, N49.

 • Malizieu was the mathematics teacher of the Duke of Burgundy (who, in 1705, was a child of only

 fourteen but who appears nonetheless as the author of this book). The volume is not an edition of Euclid, but

 rather a textbook in elementary mathematics which enjoyed a certain diffusion in the eighteenth century,

 largely inspired by the "revisionist" French attitude toward Euclid which had previously informed Richard's

 and Arnauld's work, and the latter's dismissive opinion about a strictly formal treatment of mathematics.

 In particular, Malizieu's work has no geometrical postulates at all, and simply assumes the possibility of

 constructions as obvious in the proofs of the propositions (see below Legendre, 1794, for a similar treatment).

 It only has a few common notions that are mainly employed in the arithmetical book which opens the volume,

 and which clearly have to be interpreted in a much more general way than they are actually stated (i.e., N46

 and N47 state the commutative and distributive properties of multiplication in general). Many subsequent

 French books on elementary geometry in the eighteenth century simply removed any axiomatic system for

 the demonstrations, assuming in the body of the proofs any principle that was needed; among them, we may

 mention the celebrated books by Joseph Sauveur, Geometrie elementaire et pratique, ed. Le Blonde, Paris,

 Rollin 1753 (posthumous, but widely circulating in manuscript form already for decades by this date) and

 by Alexis Claude Clairaut, Elemens de geometrie, Paris, Lambert & Durand 1741. See also below, Deidier

 (1739), which also has only a few common notions.

 ISAAC Newton, [The Science of Axiomatc Deduction], around 1693-1706 (unpub
 lished).

 Geometriae libri duo

 Postulata: PI, T22, T23.

 [Arithmetic and Geometry]
 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, R4, A4, R54.
 Postulata: N50, N51,... .

 De constructione problematum geometricorum
 Postulata: T19, T20, T21.

 • A few drafts dealing with the principles of geometry have been found among Newton's unpublished

 papers and can now be read in volumes 7 (p. 388) and 8 (pp. 197, 200) of Whiteside et al. 1967-1981. The

 draft of some Geometriae libri duo has been tentatively dated by the editor to the early 1690s, possibly

 1693. In it, Newton added to the first Euclidean postulate two more principles which had a broader scope

 than those in the Elements (Newton explicitly claimed that T22 implies P2 as a particular case, while T23

 implies P3). Principle T22, in fact, is a modification of Elements I, 2-3 on the transportation of segments

 (cf. T15, T26) and adds nothing to the deductive power of the Elements (Newton thought, as did many

 others, that such propositions are so elementary as to be better assumed as principles). Principle T23, on the
 other hand, far exceeds the standard Euclidean constructions, making it possible to draw algebraic curves

 of higher degree and therefore to solve "all plane and solid problems" (i.e. those which require conic sec

 tions), and others as well (since reiterating constructions by T23 one can draw curves of degree greater than

 two). In a later passage, Newton admitted that other ways of solving solid problems may also be postulated

 at the beginning of geometry, such as the classical νεΰσις construction, but these other methods do not

 allow the drawing of conic sections and other algebraic curves, and therefore T23 should be preferred.

 Even the basic assumption of cutting a cone with a plane ("datum conum dato piano secare", p. 382) is

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 667

 more complicated than his own postulate. The mathematician Frangois Viete had previously postulated

 the νεϋσις construction in his Supplementum geometriae (1593); I have not included it among the present

 list of works, since it is neither an edition of Euclid nor does it state any further mathematical principle.

 Two further Newtonian drafts on axiomatics may belong to the years 1705-1706. A first one on arithmetic

 and geometry begins with a list of Common Notions, followed by two arithmetical postulates, and then

 breaks off. A second one on the construction of geometrical problems seems to envisage a geometrical

 axiomatics based on mechanical principles, as Newton himself had famously claimed in the Preface of the

 Principia.

 Book I

 ANGELO MARCHETTI, Euclides reformatus, Livorno, Celsi, 1709.

 Petitiones, seu Postulata: PI, P2, T24, T25, P3, A7.
 Axiomata, seu Pronunciata: CN1, A13, CN8*-CN9*, CN2, CN3, M6, M7, CN5,
 A4, Mil, T4-T8, P4,15, E6, E7, E8-E26, E9-E27, PP5, E28, E29, CN4, E30;
 PP1, AA1.

 [Book III]
 Axiomata: R35, R8, R55, RIO, R16, R37, Rll, R12, R14, R56, R15, R57, R58,
 R59, R17.

 [Book VI]
 Postulata: 112,14.
 Axiomata: 135,114,115,18,116.

 • Marchetti mainly followed Borelli's axiomatization in Book I, but with several twists. He justified

 the assumption of Elements I, 20 (=E30) among the axioms, stating that it follows from the definition of

 a straight line as the shortest line between two points, which he considered the only viable definition of a

 straight line. Axiom PP5 is equivalent to the Parallel Postulate in Borelli's axiomatization, but Marchetti

 also added PP1 (p. 25) to the same effect. Axiom AA1 is added in p. 42. Marchetti's axiomatization of the

 theory of proportions is to be found in his Book III. It amounts to a profound revision of the Euclidean

 theory, but it is not entirely new, as it was prepared by several other works of the Galileian School (Torricelli,

 Borelli, Viviani, and others). Marchetti himself had already published his axiomatization in his booklet La

 natura della proporzione e della proporzionalitä in 1695. Axiom R55 is a kind of restatement of Elements

 V, def. 5, for commensurable magnitudes (cf. also Elements V, 3). Marchetti's Book VI is on solid geometry.

 On Marchetti's theory of proportions see Giusti (1993).

 GEMINIANO RONDELLI, Sexpriora Euclidis elementa, quibus accesserunt undecimum,
 & duodecimum, Bologna, Longhi, 1719.

 Book I

 Petitiones, seu Postulata: PI, P2, P3, S6, T7, A7.
 Axiomata: CN1-A13-A14, CN2, CN3, CN6*-M15, CN7*-M16, CN8*-M17,
 CN9*-M5, CN4, CN5,15,16, P4, [P5], P6*, M2, Ml, M13, M12, A4, M14, A16,
 A24, PP2, PP10,136.

 Book V

 Axioma unicum: R25.

 • A first edition of this book had been published by Rondelli in 1684, using Clavius's system of principles.

 The 1719 edition, however, added several axioms. Some of them were introduced by Rondelli, while others

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 668

 V. De Risi

 were taken from Ricci (1651). Rondelli held the Bologna University chair of mathematics which had been

 held by Ricci some years before. Rondelli proved the Parallel Postulate (P5), grounding his demonstration

 in the equivalent principle PP2. He also added another principle equivalent to P5, namely PP10, which,

 however, he did not employ in his proof of P5.

 HENRY Hill, The Six First, Together with the Eleventh and the Twelfth Books of
 Euclid's Elements, Demonstrated after a New, Plain, and Easie Method, London,
 Pearson, 1726.

 Book I

 Postulates: PI, P2, P3.
 Axioms: CN1, A13, A14, A29, A30, A31, CN8*, CN9*, N52, N53, CN2, CN3,
 N48, N49, M2, M13, CN5, A4, CN4, P6*, P4, P5.

 • A quite typical modern edition of Euclid, that added a few algebraic principles and performed several

 proofs by symbolic reasoning. The entire Elements V on the theory of proportions is reduced to a few
 calculations.

 GUIDO Grandi, Elementi geometrici piani e solidi di Euclide posti brevemente in

 volgare, Firenze, Tartini, 1731.

 Book I

 Dimande: PI, P2, P3.
 Assiomi: CN1, CN2-CN3, CN6*-CN7*, CN8*-CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, [P5], P6*,
 15.

 • Grandi's edition of the Elements is very classical, and draws on Grynaeus's system of principles,

 adding to it a rather standard axiom by Clavius (15). At the time of Grandi's edition of Euclid, Gerolamo

 Saccheri had already written his Euclides vindicates (published in 1733), in which he disproved Clavius's

 proof of the Parallel Postulate (P5). Even though Grandi was in personal relations with Saccheri, however,

 he proved P5 following Clavius's demonstration.

 MANOEL DE CAMPOS, Elementos de geometria plana, e solida, segundo α ordern de
 Euclides, Lisboa, Rita Cassiana, 1735.

 Book I

 PP4, P6*, 15.

 Postulados: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomas: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, P5 [PP3],

 • A Potuguese edition of the Elements, employing a rather common choice of principles (see Grandi

 above). Campos stated that Tacquet's axiom PP3 might be substituted for the Parallel Postulate (P5); in any

 case, he also added axiom PP4, which is itself equivalent to P5.

 ANTOINE DEIDIER, La science des geometres, Paris, Jombert, 1739.

 Axiomes: CN5, A4, CN2, CN3, N48-N49, CN6*-CN7*-N54-N55, CN8*-CN9*,
 AA5, CN1.

 Book I

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 669

 • A quite famous French edition in the eighteenth century, which does not follow Euclid's text but

 rather systematizes it, Deidier's version of the Elements has no geometrical principles, and grounds its

 demonstration on the definitions of geometrical figures. See above Malfizieu (1705) for a similar example.

 Samuel Klingenstierna, Euclidis elementorum libri sex priores una cum undecimo

 et duodecimo, Upsala, Höjer, 1741.

 Book I

 Book V

 Axiomata: M3, M4.

 Postulata: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P6*, P4, P5.

 • An Euclidean edition by one of the greatest Swedish mathematicians. The system of principles follows

 Grynaeus in Book I, but the additional axioms in Book V bear trace of Keill's edition from 1701. A Swedish

 translation of Euclid was made a few years later by Strömer (see below).

 MÄRTEN Strömer, Euclidis Elementa eller Grundeliga inledning til geometrien, til

 riksens ungdoms tienst pä swenska spräket utgifwen, Upsala, Kiesewetter, 1744.

 Book I

 Postulater: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomer: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9* CN4, CN5, P6*, P4, P5.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. Possibly the most widely read (and republished) edition of the

 Elements in Swedish.

 Thomas Simpson, Elements of Plane Geometry, London, Farrer & Türner, 1747.

 Book I

 Postulates, or Petitions: PI, P2, P3,137-T26.

 Axioms, or Self-evident Truths: CN1, CN5, A4, CN2, CN3, CN6*-CN7*, P4,
 PP10, E31.

 [Book IV]
 Axioms: R60, R61, R62, R8, RIO.

 [Treatise of Regular Solids]
 Postulatum: E32.

 • A textbook rearranging the geometrical results of the Elements. Simpson's volume substituted for the

 Parallel Postulate (P5) a principle based on equidistance (PP10), and assumed a few basic or controversial

 theorems of the Elements (Book One, propositions 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 23) as axioms. Axiom Ι37-Τ26 allows

 the transportation of segments and angles (cf. Hilbert's Axioms III, 1, 4, and 6, for a similar axiomatic

 treatment), but Simpson incidentally added that it should also ground the possibility to construct parallel

 lines (in his definition: equidistant lines) by parallel displacement of a segment, therefore assuming a second

 time the Parallel Postulate. Simpson's Book IV is a treatment of the Euclidean theory of proportions in

 Elements V. Simpson added in the same volume a treatise on solid elementary geometry (Elements XI and

 XII), with its own new postulate. A second, revised edition of Simpson's Elements appeared in 1760 (see
 below).

 Φ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 670

 V. De Risi

 Robert SiMSON, Euclidis Elementorum libri priores sex item undecimus et duodec

 imus ex versione latina Federici Commandini, Glasgow, Foulis, 1756.

 English version as The Elements of Euclid, viz. the first Six Books together with the

 Eleventh and Twelfth. In this Edition, the Errors, by which Theon, or others, have

 long ago Vitiated these Books, are Corrected, and some of Euclid's Demonstrations

 are Restored, Glasgow, Foulis, 1756.

 Postulata (Postulates): PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomata (Axioms): CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5,
 P6*, P4, [P5].

 Book I

 Book V

 Axiomata (Axioms): M3, M4, M34, M35.

 • Grynaeus's system of principles in Book I. An important edition of the geometrical books of Euclid,

 Simson's volume also attempted to restore the original text of the Elements after the many corruptions and

 modifications added in the previous early modern editions. To this effect, Simson's commentary is put at

 the end of the book, so that it would not interfere with the original text, and the system of principles is

 the most conservative possible. In Elements I, Simson placed the Parallel Postulate posterior to the other

 axioms, since he believed that it should, in fact, be ranged among the theorems, and gave the old proof of

 it by Proclus (even though it had been refuted several times in the preceding literature). In Elements V, he

 added four axioms taken from, or inspired by, Campano to deal with the theory of proportions. The book

 enjoyed several reprints and translations into other languages (including German and Portuguese), and was

 used by several other British authors as the foundational text for their editions; see for instance the editions

 by John Playfair (1795, below), and Alexander Ingram (Edinburgh, Pillans 1799). The French edition by

 Castillon (Berlin, Soci6te typographique 1767) also followed Simson's Elements, and made use of the same

 system of axioms (with an even more naive proof of the Parallel Postulate).

 SAMUEL KÖNIG, Elemens de geometrie contenant les six premiers livres d'Euclide,

 Den Haag, Scheurleer, 1758.

 Book I

 Demandes: PI, P2, P3.
 Axiomes ou notions communes: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*,
 CN5, T27, P4, [P5-PP2], P6*.

 Book II

 Axiomes: A4, Ε16.

 Book III

 Axiomes: E8, E33.

 Book V

 Demandes: M36, A32, [N37],

 • König's edition of the Elements attempted to offer a quasi-formal account of the Euclidean proofs.

 König employed Grynaeus's system of principles in Book I, but added several axioms in the subsequent

 books. The only modification in the axiomatization of Elements I is the substitution, for CN4, of T27.

 The latter principle is itself quite classical, as Euclid himself had employed the terms "similar and equal"

 (ϊσακαιδμοια) to mean congruent figures in Elements XI, def. 10. In the Early Modem Age this formula

 was often used to explicitly define congruence, but König may be the first to have employed it as an axiom.

 The Parallel Postulate (P5) is included among the axioms, but the further discussion shows that König

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 671

 wanted to replace it with axiom PP2, which he found simpler and from which he proved P5. Book V does

 not have axioms, but rather two postulates; it also has an Appendix on logarithms which departs from the

 Euclidean text, and in which König added a demande stating that it is possible to make multiplications

 and divisions of any magnitude (something similar to axiom N37). In a second edition printed in 1762, the

 mathematician J.J. Blassifcre added a version of Books XI and XII in the style of König—without, however,

 adding any further principle.

 Abraham Gotthelf KÄSTNER, Anfangsgründe der Arithmetik, Geometrie, ebenen

 und sphärischen Trigonometrie und Perspectiv, Göttingen, Vandenhoeck, 1758.

 [Book I]
 Forderungen: P1-P2-S20, P3.
 Grundsätze: I17-P6*, 15-16, CN4, T10-T12, P4, E6, C20,138; P5; 133.

 • Not an edition of Euclid's Elements, but the most important German textbook on elementary mathe

 matics in the eighteenth century. Kästner did not axiomatize arithmetic, but endorsed a highly composite

 system of axioms for geometry, which he took from several previous Euclidean editions (Kästner was a

 remarkable historian of mathematics). He also added a few practical "postulates". The Anfangsgründe went

 through many editions in Germany and deeply influenced research on the foundations of geometry.

 THOMAS Simpson, Elements of Geometry, London, Nourse, 1760.

 Book I

 Axioms, or Self-evident Truths: CN1, CN5, A4, CN2, CN3, CN6*-CN7*, P4,117,
 PP11, E31.

 Postulates, or Petitions: PI, P2, P3, [I37-T26].

 [Book IV]
 Axioms: R63, R61, R60, R62, R8, R41, RIO, R64, M37.

 [Book VII]
 Axiom: E34.

 Postulate: 139.

 [Book VIII]
 Postulates: AA1, AA6, E35.

 • A deeply revised edition of Simpson's work from 1747, this volume rearranges in eight books the

 geometrical results of the Elements. With respect to the first edition, Simpson slightly modified his version

 of the Parallel Postulate (now PP11), and while he still assumed rigid motion through postulate 137—

 T26, he deleted any reference to parallel lines in it, and even claimed that it can be proven with a standard

 Euclidean procedure. He also introduced the classical axiom 117. Simpson's Book IV extended the axiomatic

 basis of the theory of proportions; in particular, his axiom Μ37 is the distributive property of addition

 and multiplication. Simpson's Book VII is a reworking (with different principles) of his treatise on solid

 geometry, while his newly written Book VIII deals with the method of exhaustion and proves some results of

 Elements X. In it, axiom AA6 is a formulation of Archimedes's Axiom, while axiom E35 is a modification

 of Lamy's E19 and E20 (which refer to the areas of a circle and a polygon, while Simpson's E35 refers

 to circumferences and perimeters). The volume also contains a few sections further developing elementary

 geometry with new methods, as well as many historical and technical notes on Euclid's theorems.

 Johann Friedrich Lorenz, Euklid's Geometrie, oder die sechs ersten Bücher der

 Elemente nebst dem eilften und zwölften aus dem Griechichen übersetz, Halle, Weisen
 haus, 1773.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 672

 BookI

 of principles.

 Book I

 V. De Risi

 Forderungen: PI, P2, P3.
 Grundsätze: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, P5,
 P6*; [PP12].

 • Grynaeus's system of principles. Translated into German directly from Grynaeus's Greek text, Lorenz's

 edition enjoyed a wide popularity in Germany by the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the

 nineteenth century, and it was consistently referred to by several studies on the theory of parallels. In the

 preface to Lorenz's edition, the mathematician Andreas Segner discussed the provability of P5, proposing a

 demonstration of it which implicitly relied on the new principle PP12. Lorenz, in his later Grundriß der reinen

 und angewandten Mathematik, oder der erste Cursus der gesamten Mathematik (Helmstädt, Fleckeisen,

 1791), reworked the entire system of axioms, and explicitly included PP12 among the Grundlehren·, the

 latter book, however, was not an edition of Euclid. Lorenz's 1773 Geometrie went through many reprints and

 inspired the following German editions of Euclid by Michelsen (Berlin, Maßdorff 1791), Hauff (Marburg,

 Akademie 1797) and Hoffmann (Mainz, Kupferberg 1829), among others, which endorsed the same system

 JOHN Bonnycastle, Elements of Geometry, London, Johnson, 1789.

 Postulates: PI, P2, P3, PP2.
 Axioms: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, A4, CN4.

 • A common English edition of the geometrical books of the Elements which alters from time to time the

 Euclidean deductive structure. Principle PP2 is a substitute for P5 and is, surprisingly, stated as a postulate
 rather than an axiom.

 ADRIEN-MARIE LEGENDRE, tliments de geometrie avec des notes, Paris, Didot, 1794.

 Book I

 Axiomes: CN1, CN2, CN3, N30, N31, CN5, A4,131, CN4, [P5], (...)

 • One of the most famous Euclidean editions ever, Legendre's Elements does not follow the Greek text

 but develops the same results in a different order and with different proofs. Legendre did not include any

 postulate in his list of principles, and stated that the axioms which he gave at the beginning of the first book

 are merely illustrative of an infinity of other similar axioms. At later times, people complained that he had

 erased the distinction between axioms and postulates [see for instance the opinion of Grassmann and Houel

 in Voelke (2005), p. 63], even though this does not seem to have been Legendre's aim. The book went

 through many editions, with several subsequent modifications, and in most of them Legendre attempted (in

 various ways) to prove the Parallel Postulate (P5). The system of axioms also changed since the second

 edition (see below). Legendre's book was later translated into several languages.

 JOHN Playfair, Elements of Geometry, containing the first six books of Euclid with

 two books on the geometry of solids, Edinburgh, Bell & Bradfute, 1795.

 Postulates: PI, P2, P3.
 Axioms: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5, P4, PP13.

 Axioms: M3, M4, M34, M35.

 • The edition of the Elements by Playfair is mainly based on Simson (1756), who had tried to restore a

 text closer to the Greek original. Playfair, however, allowed a few modifications (especially in the proofs

 Book I

 Book V

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics

 673

 of Book V) for the sake of clarity and rigor. Among these, the introduction of axiom PP13 ("Playfair's

 Axiom") as a substitute for the Parallel Postulate (P5) was especially successful. The latter principle had

 already been recognized as equivalent to P5 by Ibn al-Haytham and others, even though it had never been

 used explicitly to this effect in an edition of the Elements. On Playfair's edition, see Ackerberg-Hastings
 (2002).

 Adrien-Marie Legendre, tliments de geometrie avec des notes, Paris, Didot,
 17992.

 Axiomes: CN1, CN5, A4,131, CN4, [P5]. (...)

 • The second edition of Legendre's celebrated Aliments de geometrie offered a significant simplification

 of the system of axioms employed in the first one from 1794. Further editions of this work followed the

 VlNCENZO FLAUTI, I primi sei libri degli elementi di Euclide, Napoli, Stamperia Reale,
 1810.

 Postulati: PI, P2, P3, P4, [P5].
 Assiomi, ο nozioni comuni: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*, CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4,
 CN5, P6*.

 Book I

 present list.

 Book I

 Book V

 Postulate: Rl.

 • An edition of the Elements which enjoyed broad diffusion in Italy, and which went through many

 reprints as one volume of Flauti's Corso di geometria elementare e sublime. It is very rich in historical and

 mathematical notes, and in some editions, Flauti claimed to have proven the Parallel Postulate (P5) using

 an old argument by Nasir ad-Din (in further editions, however, he acknowledged his mistake here).

 Francois Peyrard, ΕΥΚΛΕΙΔΟΥ ΤΑ ΣΩΖΟΜΕΝΑ, Euclidis quae supersunt, Les
 oeuvres d'Euclide, Paris, Patris, 1814.

 Book I

 αιτήματα, Postulata, Demandes: PI, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6*.
 KOivat έννοιαι, Notiones communes, Notions communes: CN1, CN2, CN3, CN6*,
 CN7*, CN8*, CN9*, CN4, CN5.

 • The crucially important edition of Euclid's works by Peyrard gives the original Greek text and a

 translation into Latin and French. It was the first edition to contain a thoroughgoing discussion of several

 extant Greek manuscripts, and, in particular, it mainly followed the text of the Vatican manuscript Ρ (see

 above), found by Peyrard himself, which appears to represent the oldest version of the Elements which

 survived into the modern age. Peyrard emended several mistakes in the previous Greek editions by Grynaeus

 (1533) and Gregory (1703), as well as in Commandino's translation (still considered as counting among

 the best editions of Euclid); yet, in several places he preferred Grynaeus's version to the text found in his

 newly discovered Greek manuscript. It was preceded by an incomplete edition of the Elements in 1804 by

 Peyrard which did not make use of the Vatican manuscript. The 1814 edition was prefaced by an appraisal

 of it by Lagrange, Legendre and Dalambre.

 In the following years, several older editions were reprinted many times, but Peyrard's text and system

 of principles gained a growing acceptance by the scholarly community. Another Latin edition based on

 Peyrard's text was prepared by Niede in 1825, and in 1826 it was translated into English by Philips. In

 1824, Camerer and Hauber published, in Germany, a very influential and heavily annotated edition of the

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 674

 V. De Risi

 Elements also based on Peyrard's manuscript (and axioms). In 1826-1829, E.F. August published another

 edition of the Greek text, also following Peyrard's manuscript and correcting the latter's edition in a few

 places. Many years later (1883-1916), Heiberg and Menge built their edition of Euclid on the same Vatican

 manuscript found by Peyrard (even though they emended and integrated it in several places), and this edition
 is still the most authoritative reconstruction of the text of the Elements that we have.

 Acknowledgments Open access funding provided by Max Planck Society (Max Planck Institute for the
 History of Science).

 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna

 tional License (http://creativecommons.Org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,

 and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the

 source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

 References

 Acerbi, F., and Β. Vitrac. 2014. Heron d'Alexandrie. Metrica. Pisa: Sena.

 Ackerberg-Hastings, A. 2002. Analysis and synthesis in John Playfair's Elements of Geometry. British

 Journal for the History of Science 35:43-72.

 Barany, M.J. 2010. Translating Euclid's diagrams into English, 1551-1571. In Philosophical aspects of
 symbolic reasoning in early modern mathematics, ed. A. Heeffer, and M. Van Dyck. London: College
 Publications.

 Barrow-Green, J. 2006. "Much necessary for all sortes of men": 450 years of Euclid's Elements in English.

 BSHMBulletin 21:2-25.

 Bodriga, G. 1925-1926. Giovanni Battista Benedetti filosofo e matematico veneziano del secolo XVI. Atti

 del Regio Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere e Am 85: 585-754.

 Brentjes, S. 1997-1998. Additions to Book I in the Arabic traditions of Euclid's Elements. Studies in History

 of Medicine and Science 15: 55-117.

 Brentjes, S. 2001a. Two comments on Euclid's Elements? On the relation between the Arabic text attributed

 to al-Nayrizi and the Latin text ascribed to Anaritius. Centaurus 43:17-55.

 Brentjes, S. 2001b. Observations on Hermann of Carinthia's Version of the Elements and its relation to the

 Arabic transmission. Science in Context 14: 39-84.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1967. The translation of the Elements of Euclid from the Arabic into Latin by Hermann of

 Carinthia (?). Janus 54: 1-140.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1971. Die Arithmetica speculativa des Johannes de Muris. Scientiarum Historia 13:103-32.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1977. The translation of the Elements of Euclid from the Arabic into Latin by Hermann of

 Carinthia (?) Books VII-X1I. Amsterdam: Mathematisch Centrum.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1983. The first Latin translation of Euclid's Elements commonly ascribed to Adelard of

 Bath. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1984. The Latin translation of the Arabic verion of Euclid's Elements commonly ascribed

 to Gerard of Cremona. Leiden: Brill.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1987. The mediaeval Latin translation of Euclid's Elements. Stuttgart: Steiner.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1991. Jordanus de Nemore. De elementis arithmetice artis. A medieval treatise on number

 theory. Stuttgart: Steiner.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1996. A thirteenth-century adaptation of Robert of Chester's version of Euclid's Elements.

 München: Institut für Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften.

 Busard, H.L.L. 2001. Johannes de Tinemue's redaction of Euclid's Elements, the so-called Adelard III

 version. Stuttgart: Steiner.

 Busard, H.L.L. 1998. Zwei mittelalterliche Texte zur theoretischen Mathematik: Die Arithmetica specula

 tiva von Thomas Bradwardine und die Theorica numerorum von Wigandus Durnheimer. Archive for

 History of Exact Sciences 53: 97-124.

 Busard, H.L.L. 2005. Campanus of Novara and Euclid's Elements. Stuttgart: Steiner.
 Busard, H.L.L., and M. Folkerts. 1992. Robert of Chester's (?) Redaction of Euclid's Elements, the so-called

 Adelard II Version. Basel: Birkhäuser.

 Cassinet, J. (ed.). 1986. Cahiers d'histoire des mathematiques de Toulouse, 9.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The development of Euclidean axiomatics 675

 Curtze, Μ. 1899. Anaritii in decern libros priores elementorum Euclidis commentarii ex interpretatione

 De Risi, V. 2007. Geometry and monadology. Leibniz's analysis situs and philosophy of space. Basel:

 Gherardi Cremonensis. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Birkhäuser.

 De Risi, V. 2014. Francesco Patrizi e lanuova geometria dello spazio. In Locus-spatium, ed. D. Giovannozzi,

 and M. Veneziani, 269-327. Olschki: Firenze.

 De Risi, V. (ed.). 2015 a. Mathemanzing space. The objects of geometry from Antiquity to the Early Modern

 Age. Basel: Birkhäuser.

 De Risi, V. 2015b. Leibniz on the parallel postulate and the foundations of geometry. Basel: Birkhäuser.

 Descotes, D. (ed.). 2009. Geometries de Port-Royal. Paris: Champion.
 de Young, G. 2003. The Tahrir of Euclid's Elements by Nasit al-Din al-Tusi: Redressing the balance.

 Farhang 15-16: 117-143.

 de Young, G. 2004. The Latin translation of Euclid's Elements attributed to Gerard of Cremona in relation

 to the Arabic transmission. Suhayl 4: 311-383.

 de Young, G. 2009. The Tharir Kitab Usui Uqlidis of Nasit al-Din al-Tusi: Its sources. Zeitschrift fir

 Geschichte der Arabisch- Islamischen Wissenschaften 18: 1-71.

 Folkerts, M. 1970. Boethius Geometrie II. Stuttgart: Steiner.
 Garibaldi, A.C. (ed.). 2002. Francesco Maurolico. Euclides et geometricaquaedam. In Francisci Maurolyci

 opera mathematica. http://www.maurolico.unipi.it/edizioni/euclide/intro.htm.

 Giusti, E. 1993. Euclides Reformatus. La teoria delle proporzioni nella scuola galileiana. Torino: Bollati

 Greenberg, M.J. 1988. Aristotle's axiom in the foundations of geometry. Journal of Geometry 33: 53-57.
 Greenberg, M.J. 2010. Old and new results in the foundations of elementary plane Euclidean and non

 Euclidean geometries. The American Mathematical Monthly 117: 198-219.

 Hallett, M., and U. Majer (eds.). 2004. David Hilbert's lectures on the foundations of geometry 1891-1902.

 Boringhieri.

 Berlin: Springer.

 Hartshorne, R. 2000. Geometry: Euclid and beyond. New York: Springer.
 H0yrup, J. 1988. Jordanus de Nemore, 13th century mathematical innovator: An essay on intellectual

 context, Achievement, and Failure. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 38: 307-363.

 Itard, J. 1961. Les livres arithmetiques d'Euclide. Paris: Hermann.

 Jullien, V. 1996. Elements de geometrie de G.P. de Roberval. Paris: Vrin.

 Knorr, W.R. 1990. John of Tynemouth alias John of London: Emerging portrait of a singular medieval

 mathematician. The British Journal for the History of Science 23: 293-330.

 Knorr, W.R. 1996. The wrong text of Euclid: On Heiberg's text and its alternatives. Centaurus 36:208-276.

 Lo Bello, A. 2003a. The commentary of Al-Nayrizi on Book I of Euclid's Elements of Geometry. Leiden:

 Brill.

 Lo Bello, A. 2003b. Gerard of Cremona's translation of the commentary ofAl-Nayrizi on Book I of Euclid's

 Löget, F. 2004. La Ram6e critique d'Euclide. Sur le Prooemium mathematicum (1567). Archives interna

 Elements of geometry. Leiden: Brill.

 tionals d'histoire des sciences 54: 3-28.

 19: 113-175.

 Molland, A.G. 1978. An examination of Bradwardine's geometry. Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 Molland, A.G. 1983. Campanus and Eudoxus; or, trouble with texts and quantifiers. Physis 25: 213-225.
 Molland, A.G. 1989. Thomas Bradwardine. Geometria speculativa. Stuttgart: Steiner.
 Murdoch, J.E. 1963. The medieval language of proportions: Elements of the interaction with greek founda

 tions and the development of new mathematical techniques. In Scientific change, ed. A.C. Crombie.
 London: Heinemann.

 Oosterhoff, J. 2014. The Fabrist Origins of Erasmian Science: Mathematical Erudition in Erasmus' Basle.

 Journal of Interdisciplinary History of Ideas 3: 1-37.

 Pagli, P. 2003. Volgarizzazioni manoscritte degli Element! di Euclide. In II sogno di Galois, ed. R. Franci,

 P. Pagli, and A. Simi, 53-90. Siena: Centre Studi della Matematica Medioevale.

 Palladino, F. 1991. Sulla teoria delle proporzioni nel Seicento. Due macchinazioni notevoli: Le sezioni dei

 razionali del galileiano G.A. Borelli; Le classi di misura del gesuita A. Tacquet. Nuncius 6: 38-81.

 Pambuccian, V. 1994. Zum Stufenaufbau des Parallelenaxioms. Journal of Geometry 51: 79-88.
 Pascal, Β. 1904-1914. Oeuvres, ed. L. Brunschvicg, P. Boutroux, and F. Gazier, Paris: Hachette.
 Riccardi, P. 1974. Saggio di una bibliografia Euclidea. Hildesheim, Olms (1887—18921).
 Rashed, R., and B. Vahabzadeh. 1999. Al-Khayyam mathematicien. Paris: Blanchard.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 676

 V. De Risi

 Roberts, G., and F. Smith (eds.). 2012. Robert Recorde. The Life and Times of a Tudor Mathematician.

 Rommevaux, S. 1999. La proportionnaliti numirique dans le livre VII des filaments de Campanus. Revue

 Cardiff: University of Wales Press.

 d'histoire des mathematiques 5: 83-126.

 Rommevaux, S., A. Djebbar, and B. Vitrac. 2001. Remarques sur l'Histoire du Texte des Eliments d'Euclide.

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 55: 221-95.

 Schlimm, D. 2013. Axioms in mathematical practice. Philosophia Mathematica 21: 37-92.

 Steck, Μ. 1981. Bibliographia Euclideana. Hildesheim: Gerstenberg.
 Sutto, J.-P. 2000. Le compendium du 5e livre des Aliments d'Euclide de Francesco Maurolico. Revue

 d'histoire des mathematiques 6: 59-94.

 Taylor, E.G.R. 1954. The mathematical practitioners of Tudor & Stuart England. Cambridge: CUR
 Taylor, E.G.R. 1966. The mathematical practitioners of Hanoverian England. Cambridge: CUR
 Torricelli, E. 1919-1944. Opere, ed. G. Loria, and G. Vassura. Faenza: Montanari.

 T\immers, M.J.E. 1994. The Latin translation ofAnaritius' commentary on Euclid's Elements of Geometry,

 Books I-IV. Nijmegen: Ingenium.

 Tummers, M.J.E. (ed.). 2014. Albertus Magnus. Super geometriam Euclidis. In Opera omnia, vol. 39,

 Münster, Aschendorff.

 Vitrac, B. 1990-2001. Euclide. Les Clements. Paris: PUF.

 Voelke, J.-D. 2005. Renaissance de la geometrie non euclidienne entre 1860 et 1900. Bern: Lang.

 Volkert, K. 2015. David Hilbert. Grundlagen der Geometrie. Berlin: Springer.
 Whiteside, D.T., et al. (ed.). 1967-1981. The mathematical papers of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: CUP.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:55:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

