 

 

 

 

The education of Walter Kohn and the creation of density functional theory
Author(s): Andrew Zangwill
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 6 (November 2014), pp. 775-848
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569561
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:53 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569561?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:775-848
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-014-0140-x

 The education of Walter Kohn and the creation

 of density functional theory

 Andrew Zangwill

 Received: 12 March 2014 / Published online: 18 May 2014

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

 Abstract The theoretical solid-state physicist Walter Kohn was awarded one-half of

 the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his mid-1960s creation of an approach to the

 many-particle problem in quantum mechanics called density functional theory (DFT).

 In its exact form, DFT establishes that the total charge density of any system of elec

 trons and nuclei provides all the information needed for a complete description of that

 system. This was a breakthrough for the study of atoms, molecules, gases, liquids,

 and solids. Before DFT, it was thought that knowledge of the vastly more compli

 cated many-electron wave function was essential for a complete description of such

 systems. Today, 50years after its introduction, DFT (in one of its approximate forms)

 is the method of choice used by most scientists to calculate the physical properties of

 materials of all kinds. In this paper, I present a biographical essay of Kohn's educa

 tional experiences and professional career up to and including the creation of DFT.
 My account begins with Kohn's student years in Austria, England, and Canada during

 World War II and continues with his graduate and postgraduate training at Harvard

 University and Niels Bohr's Institute for Theoretical Physics in Copenhagen. I then
 study the research choices he made during the first 10 years of his career (when he

 was a faculty member at the Carnegie Institute of Technology and a frequent visitor to

 the Bell Telephone Laboratories) in the context of the theoretical solid-state physics
 agenda of the late 1950s and early 1960s. Subsequent sections discuss his move to the

 University of California, San Diego, identify the research issue which led directly to

 DFT, and analyze the two foundational papers of the theory. The paper concludes with

 an explanation of how the chemists came to award "their" Nobel Prize to the physicist

 Communicated by Tilman Sauer.

 A. Zangwill (EE3)

 School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
 e-mail: andrew.zangwill@physics.gatech.edu

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 Kohn and a discussion of why he was unusually well suited to create the theory in the

 776 A. Zangwill

 first place.

 1 Introduction

 The 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry recognized the field of quantum chemistry, a the

 oretical enterprise where quantum mechanics is used to study molecules and address
 chemical problems (Barden and Schaeffer 2000; Gavroglu and Simöes 2012). The

 prize was shared equally by "Walter Kohn for his development of density functional

 theory and John Pople for his development of computational methods in quantum

 chemistry" (NPC). The award to Pople surprised no one. Ten years earlier, an interna

 tional conference, "Forty Years of Quantum Chemistry," had honored Pople's career

 long commitment to developing semiempirical and first-principles methods to pre

 dict the structure and properties of molecular systems (Handy and Schaefer 1990).

 A notable early contribution was the 1970 free release of his group's GAUSSIAN com

 puter program which solved the Schrödinger equation for molecules in the Hartree

 Fock approximation. Today, after decades of improvements in accuracy and function

 ality, it is estimated that 90% of all quantum chemistry calculations are performed

 using the (now commercial) GAUSSIAN suite of programs (Crawford et al. 2001).

 By contrast, the fact that Walter Kohn earned a share of the Nobel Prize in chemistry

 surprised many because his international reputation was gained as a theoretical solid

 state physicist. Indeed, his body of work had previously earned him the Oliver E.

 Buckley Prize (1961 ) and the Davisson-Germer Prize (1977) of the American Physical

 Society for his contributions to, respectively, "the foundations of the electron theory
 of solids" and "understanding the inhomogeneous electron gas and its application

 to electronic phenomena at surfaces".1 A card-carrying chemist could reasonably

 ask: what do these things have to do with quantum chemistry? The answer lies in
 the research Kohn conducted in the period 1963-1965 which created the density

 functional theory (DFT) cited by the Nobel committee. This theory focuses on the

 density of electrons in an atom, molecule, or solid rather than on the many-electron

 wave function, which is the central concern of traditional quantum chemistry.

 The connection between the work of the two 1998 Chemistry Nobel Laureates can

 be understood from the "hyperbola of quantum chemistry" which Pople published in

 the proceedings of a 1965 symposium on atomic and molecular quantum theory (Pople

 1965; Park 2003). The horizontal axis of this graph (see Fig. 1) indicates the number

 of electrons N in the system of interest. The vertical axis lists a sequence of quantum

 mechanical methods (in order of increasing accuracy) used to determine the system's

 "electronic structure," i.e., its many-electron wave function, electronic charge density,

 electron energy levels, and other properties calculable from these. Pople suggested

 that the activities of most quantum chemists tended to cluster around the extremities

 of the hyperbolic solid line. Those interested in the highest accuracy were forced by

 computational constraints to focus on small molecules (small N) while those interested

 in large molecules (large N) were forced by computational constraints to use methods

 Prizes of the American Physical Society (AMP).

 £l Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 111

 Exact
 Exact

 Explicit r,2
 Explicit r,2

 u

 W

 I ci
 I CI
 ^ Hartree-Fock
 M
 M

 Hartree-Fock

 LCAO-SCF

 •| LCAO-SCF
 9
 g
 § ppp
 ppp
 I
 A

 Hlickel
 Hüchel

 Free Electrons
 Free Electrons

 J I I L
 J I I L

 20 40 60 80
 20 40 60 80

 Number of Electrons, N
 Number of Electrons, N

 Fig. 1 The applicability range of Kohn's density functional theory placed on Pople's hyperbola of quantum

 chemistry. Adapted from Pople (1965)

 that were capable of only low accuracy. He noted that progress would occur by moving

 off the hyperbola either horizontally from left to right or vertically from bottom to top.

 The density functional theory created by Walter Kohn represented a dramatic move

 away from Pople's hyperbola, particulary for systems with a large number of electrons

 (see the arrow in Fig. 1). Many chemists were wary (or dismissive) of this theory at

 first because it made no use of the //-electron wave function, a quantity thought to be

 indispensable for a proper description of any atom or molecule. Eventually, improve

 ments to Kohn's theory made by chemists themselves led to quantitative successes

 that could not be denied. Today, it is the method of choice used by most scientists who

 wish to calculate the properties of real materials.

 Unlike many other scientific achievements, the technical question which led Kohn

 to create DFT in the mid-1960s was not "in the air" among physicists, chemists, or

 anyone else. It is entirely possible that the theory would be unknown today if Kohn's

 background, technical skills, and scientific experiences differed very much from what

 they were. Accordingly, this article (1) recounts the unusual personal and intellectual

 journey which led to Walter Kohn's success as a theoretical physicist; (2) identifies the
 scientific issue which motivated the creation of DFT in the context of theoretical solid

 state physics research in the 1960s; (3) summarizes the key elements of the founding

 papers of DFT; (4) argues that Kohn's scientific background made him particularly

 well suited to create density functional theory; and (5) explains in brief how Kohn

 came to win a share of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the creation of DFT.

 2 An unsentimental education

 In 1933,10-year-old Walther Kohn2 began the 8-year course of study at the Akademis

 che Gymnasium, the oldest and one of the best secondary schools in his home city

 Walther Kohn began to use the name Walter Kohn informally in 1940 and professionally in 1945.

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 778 A. Zangwill

 of Vienna. In doing so, he was not unlike the children of many middle-class Jewish

 parents who were actively engaged in the intellectual and artistic life of their city.3 His

 father Salomon owned an art publishing company that specialized in the manufacture

 and distribution of high-quality art postcards. His mother Gittel was a highly edu

 cated woman who spoke four languages and it was she who chose the humanistically

 oriented Akademische Gymnasium to educate her son. Walther excelled at Latin and

 ancient Roman history but showed no apparent aptitude for mathematics. The only

 grade of C he ever received was in that subject (WK98).

 Besides marking the beginning of Kohn's secondary school education, 1933 was

 also the year that Adolf Hitler and his Nazi party took power in neighboring Germany.

 The Nazi party was illegal in Austria, but its many sympathizers worked tirelessly

 to undermine the existing democratically elected government. Finally, in May 1934,

 the country succumbed to a form of authoritarian rule known to historians as Austro

 fascism (Berkley 1988). Four years later, cheering crowds welcomed Hitler when the

 German army crossed the border and marched into Vienna. The immediately subse

 quent events were vivid in Kohn's memory many years later (WK98, WK13a):

 The family business was confiscated but my father was required to continue its

 management without any compensation.. .He wrote to a London art distributor
 and business client named Charles Hauff (whom he had never met) and asked

 if he and his wife would temporarily accept me and my older sister Minna into

 their home. Hauff replied affirmatively and Minna emigrated to England very
 soon thereafter. For reasons of their own, the Nazis made it much more difficult

 for young Jewish boys to leave. I remained in Vienna, but was expelled from my
 school.

 Many expelled students never went to school again. Kohn was lucky because he was

 permitted to finish the school year at a segregated high school for Jews. In August 1938,

 he was one of a few hundred high-achieving Jewish students from the various Viennese

 secondary schools who were given the opportunity to continue their education at the

 Zwi Perez Chajes Gymnasium, a private all-Jewish high school.4 This experience was
 transformative for Kohn because his interest in science was ignited by the physics

 teacher F.mil Nohel5 (Fig. 2) and the mathematics teacher Victor Sabbath. He later
 recalled that (Kohn 2004, WKOOa).

 3 Beller (1989) paints a cultural portrait of the Jewish community in early twentieth century Vienna.

 4 This would be Kohn's sixth (and last) year of secondary school in Vienna. Quite unusually for Austria

 at that time, boys and girls were not separated for instruction in Walther's small class at the Chajes school
 (Neuhaus 2003).

 5 Emil Eliezer Nohel grew up on a small farm in Bohemia. He studied mathematics at the Karl-Ferdinand

 (German) University in Prague and served as an assistant to Albert Einstein when Einstein was a professor
 there from 1911 to 1914. Nohel's descriptions of the difficult conditions endured by Jews in Bohemia
 awakened Einstein's concern for the plight of his coreligionists. For most of his career, Nohel taught
 mathematics at the Handelsakademie Wien, a business-oriented secondary school in Vienna. The Anschluss

 precipitated his dismissal, and he found work as the physics teacher (and then the principal) of the Zwi Perez

 Chajes Gymnasium. Nohel was arrested on December 12,1942, and spent 2 years at the Theresienstadt labor

 camp before he was transferred to the Auschwitz concentration camp and murdered by the Nazis (Frank
 1947; Pais 1982).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 779

 Fig. 2 Emil Eliezer Nohel (ca.
 Fig. 2 Emil Eliezer Nohel (ca.
 1938) was a high school physics
 1938) was a high school physics
 teacher who inspired Kohn to
 teacher who inspired Kohn to
 become a scientist. Courtesy of
 become a scientist. Courtesy of
 the Yad Vashem Photo Archive
 the Yad Vashem Photo Archive

 Nohel was a tall, quiet, noble man who devoted himself to his students. It was
 really a combination of my admiration for this man as a person and his deep
 knowledge of physics that started me off...Though I was only fifteen going on
 16 years old, I already understood—due to Nohel's role model and by comparing

 myself to others—what it meant to really comprehend something in physics. This

 is one of the most important insights for a future theoretical physicist.

 Sabbath was also a fantastic guy. The thing I remember about him is that while
 he was teaching us he told us about a new book he was reading by the great
 French physicist [Louis] de Broglie called Matter and Light...Sabbath was a
 teacher with great enthusiasm and it was very exciting what he told us.

 November 10, 1938, was particulary memorable at the Chajes school because it
 was the day following a night of state-sanctioned destructive violence against Jewish
 homes, businesses, synagogues, and people. This November pogrom6 put emigration
 into everyone's mind, but it was difficult and expensive to make it happen (Ehrlich
 2003). Kohn was again lucky. Just 3 weeks before Germany invaded Poland to launch

 World War II, he escaped probable extermination by the Nazis by virtue of the Kinder

 transport, an organized effort to evacuate Jewish children under the age of 18 from
 Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia. Kohn was one of the 10,000 unaccompanied
 children who escaped to England between December 1, 1938, and September 1, 1939
 (Curio 2004; Fast 2011).7

 6 The November pogrom is often called Kristallnacht (the night of broken glass), a name coined by the
 Nazis themselves.

 7 Kohn's parents were murdered by the Nazis in 1944.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 780 A. Zangwill

 By pre-arrangement, Walther went to live with Charles and Eva Hauff, the same

 couple who had previously welcomed his sister Minna (WK13a). It was also pre

 arranged that Kohn should learn to be a farmer, an occupation that would make him

 less subject to economic dislocations (WK98). Thus, Kohn's formal English education

 began at a training farm in Kent, where he promptly contracted meningitis. Sulfa

 drugs saved his life, but left him so weak that going back to the farm was out of the

 question (WKOOa). Luckily, the Hauff's succeeded to enroll Walther in the nearby

 East Grinstead County Grammar School for the term beginning January 1940. The

 headmaster, Thomas W. Scott, noted Kohn's poor English skills and created a daily

 German class where Walther was the only student. The instructor taught English to

 Kohn for half the class, and Kohn taught advanced German to the instructor for the

 other half (JF13, WKOOb).

 Kohn's preparation in mathematics and science was equal to or exceeded that of his

 fellow 16-year-old English classmates (WK13a). The level of physics he was exposed

 to at East Grinstead can be judged from two of his textbooks, both intended for stu

 dents preparing for University Scholarship Examinations. Heat (1939) by R.G. Mitton

 is a thorough introduction to the thermal properties of matter, the kinetic theory of

 gases, heat engines, entropy, and the laws of thermodynamics. The prose is brisk, yet

 clear, and the author assumes familiarity with the laws of algebra and the geometrical

 meaning of the derivative. The oddly named Properties of Matter (1937) by D.N.

 Shorthose is a textbook of particle and continuum mechanics which includes chap

 ters devoted to ballistic motion, circular motion, simple harmonic motion, rigid body

 motion, hydrostatics, friction, elasticity, and viscosity. The exposition moves freely

 between geometrical and algebraic reasoning, and the reader is expected to understand

 first derivatives, second derivatives, and the law of integration which connects them.

 Kohn studied at East Grinstead for five months before Germany invaded Holland,

 Belgium, and Luxembourg on May 10, 1940. Winston Churchill replaced Neville
 Chamberlain as Prime Minister of Great Britain, and the British newspapers became

 filled with war hysteria. The British War Office feared that an invasion was imminent

 and recommended to the Home Office that the government "intern all enemy aliens in

 areas where German parachute troops are likely to land" (Gilman and Gilman 1980).

 Arrests begin immediately, and, when Italy entered the war on June 10, Churchill

 demanded that police officials "collar the lot". This terse order expanded internment

 to all parts of the country and to all enemy aliens, i.e., to all holders of passports

 from Italy or Nazi-occupied countries age 17 or older. It took Scotland Yard less than
 6 weeks to intern 24,000 men and 4,000 women (Cesarini and Kushner 1993). Those

 arrested included not just foreign nationals of quite short residency in England like

 university students but also highly trained scientists, engineers, doctors, artists, and

 musicians who had lived in England for many years.8

 Kohn had turned 17 on March 9 and thus was subject to the order of internment.

 He was arrested and shipped by train to a large camp that had been hastily constructed

 in the town of Huyton on the outskirts of Liverpool. It was at Huyton that Walther

 8 Vienna native Otto Frisch was working in the physics laboratory of Prof. Mark Oliphant at the University

 of Birmingham when the roundup of aliens began. He avoided internment only because his employers made
 the case that he was engaged in important war work (Frisch 1979).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 781

 met and began a lifelong friendship with Josef Eisinger, a boy who had been 1 year

 behind him at the Akademische Gymnasium in Vienna.9 A week or so later, both boys

 were transferred to an internment camp on the Isle of Man. The Hauffs arranged for

 Walther's East Grinstead teachers to send him his physics textbooks because they were

 told he would return home soon (KH99). Instead, he spent a month on the Isle of Man

 where there was no work and little food. He lost 30 pounds.

 The burden of warehousing this great mass of civilian internees and the belief that

 many German prisoners of war would arrive soon led Churchill's government to seek

 help from the British Commonwealth nations. Accordingly, on July 4,1940, Kohn and

 his friend Eisinger found themselves bound for Canada aboard a Polish cruise ship that

 had been captured by the British and converted to a troop transport (Koch 1980; Auger

 2005). By the time, the British government discontinued its policy of internments and

 deportations in early August 1940, nearly 4,400 civilian internees and 1950 prisoners
 of war had been relocated to Canada. What the Canadians did not know—because the

 British did not tell them—was that the majority of the civilian internees were not Nazi

 sympathizers but Jewish refugees from Nazi barbarism.

 Kohn spent the next eighteen months in four different Canadian internment camps.

 He lived a full year at Camp B, a 15-acre compound built in the heavily wooded

 Acadia forest twenty miles east of Fredericton, the capital of the province of New

 Brunswick. A vivid portrait of the camp written by Jones (1988) explains that the

 internees organized themselves into a highly structured mini-society composed of

 sixteen distinct groups based on age, education, geography, past friendships, religious

 practices, and political views. Kohn belonged to a group of academically minded
 boys between 16 and 20. A different group was populated largely by academics from

 Cambridge University (graduate students, recent Ph.D.'s, postdoctoral fellows, and

 junior faculty). Even before the construction of the camp was complete, each group

 elected a leader and a deputy leader, as well as chairmen for the various departments

 of the internee camp Cabinet.

 The camp's Canadian officials had a clear idea of how the able-bodied internees

 would spend most of their time: lumbeijacking in the forest outside the camp for 20

 cents a day. Kohn was not unhappy to do this because the sheer physical labor of

 chopping trees warded off the Canadian winter cold. However, much more important

 to him were the many hours he spent at the "camp school" where internees with special

 technical or academic knowledge offered classes for the benefit of anyone who wanted

 to learn. Appeals to humanitarian organizations and letters written by the instructors to

 acquaintances around the world produced donations of textbooks, writing materials,

 exercise books, blackboards, painting supplies, musical instruments, etc. Two months

 after it opened in November 1940, the camp library boasted a collection of nearly
 1,000 volumes.

 The Camp B school was organized by Alfons Rosenberg, a 39-year-old former

 gymnasium teacher from Berlin. The many Cambridge men in the camp offered their

 services, and, over time, courses were given in accounting, acting, anthropology, archi

 9 Eisinger's family smuggled him onto a Kindertransport train out of Vienna after failing to find an official

 sponsor or a foster family for him in England. He fended for himself, working on a farm in Yoikshire and

 washing dishes in a hotel in Brighton, until the internment roundup of 1940 (JE13).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 782 A. Zangwill

 tecture, art history, astronomy, biology, composition, chemistry, economics, engineer

 ing, English, French, geography, German, history, Latin, law, literature, mathematics,

 music theory, philosophy, physics, physiology, political theory, psychology, sex edu

 cation, Spanish, and typing. Walther attended a daily physics class offered by Kurt

 Guggenheimer, a chemical physicist who anticipated the shell model of the nucleus by

 pointing out similarities in the systematics of the binding energies of molecules and

 nuclei.10 He also attended a set theory course taught by Fritz Rothberger, a professional

 mathematician with a Ph.D. from the University of Vienna.11

 It is easy to demonstrate that Walther took his classes very seriously. First, he earned

 all passing marks in June 1941 when Rosenberg arranged for his students to sit (inside

 the camp) for the nation-wide McGill Junior Matriculation Exam—a necessary step

 to enter a Canadian university.12 Second, Kohn took the 20 cents a day he earned

 lumberjacking and used the "princely sum, carefully saved" to order two books which

 were sent to him at the camp: A Course in Pure Mathematics ( 1938) by G.H. Hardy and

 Introduction to Chemical Physics (1939) by J.C. Slater (WK98). In an uncanny way,

 the contents of both books foreshadow the mathematical rigor, taste for foundational

 issues, and deep interest in the properties of matter that characterize much of this

 subsequent work.

 Hardy and Slater were both first-rate researchers with a strong interest in the ped

 agogy of their fields. Hardy wrote the first edition of his book in 1908 for the express

 purpose of making the teaching of mathematics more rigorous at British universities.13

 It was aimed specifically at first-year University students of "scholarship standard,"

 i.e., the top 10-20 % in ability. The preface to the first edition is explicit: this is "a book

 for mathematicians: I have nowhere made any attempt to meet the needs of students

 of engineering or indeed any class of students whose interest are not primarily mathe

 matical". Thirty years later, in the preface to Kohn's edition, Hardy remarks that "the

 10 Kurt Martin Guggenheimer (1902-1975) studied chemistry at the University of Munich and physics
 at the University of Berlin. He earned his Ph.D. in 1933 for work on the ultraviolet absorption spectra of
 zinc, potassium, and cesium under the direction of Fritz Haber. Guggenheimer pursued postdoctoral work
 in Paris under the direction of Paul Langevin and published his speculations about nuclei while there. He

 returned to Munich in 1935 but was arrested in 1938 and spent several months at the Dachau detention

 center. He emigrated to England and was working at King's College (Cambridge) when he was interned

 as a enemy alien. After the war, Guggenheimer worked as a lecturer at the University of Bristol and the

 University of Glasgow before retiring from academic life in 1967 (Riirup and Schilling 2008; Fernandez
 2013).

 11 Fritz Rothberger ( 1902-2000) was a native of Vienna who graduated from the Akademisches Gymna

 sium and earned B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the University of Vienna. He came under the

 influence of Waclaw Sierpinksi in Warsaw and began his lifelong work in combinatorial set theory. Roth

 berger emigrated to England just before the start of World War II, and he was working as a scholar at Trinity

 College (Cambridge) when he was interned. After the war, he served as a professor on the mathematics
 faculties of several Canadian universities: Acadia, Fredericton, Laval, and Windsor (Swaminathan 2000).

 12 The subjects tested were English literature, English composition, general history, elementary algebra,

 elementary geometry, physics, Latin authors, Latin composition, German grammar, German composition,

 intermediate algebra, intermediate geometry, and trigonometry (GG13).

 13 A Course in Pure Mathematics is an elegant and rigorous introduction to mathematical analysis for

 serious first-year college students. The subject matter includes the notions of limit and convergence applied

 to series, sequences, functions, derivatives, and integrals. All the main theorems of the calculus of a real
 variable are discussed, as is the general theory of logarithmic, exponential, and sinusoidal functions.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 783

 general plan of the book is unchanged" but "I have inserted a large number of new
 examples from the papers of the Mathematical Tripos". Kohn would have learned from

 his campmates that these "new examples" were drawn from the demanding examina
 tions used by Cambridge University to evaluate its students who hoped to earn a BA

 degree in mathematics.

 The Slater book that Walther bought and read (doubtless cover to cover) was very

 unusual for its time. The preface states that the author worked hard "to make it intel

 ligible to a reader with a knowledge of calculus and differential equations, but unfa
 miliar with the more difficult branches of mathematical physics". For that reason, "the

 quantum theory used is of a very elementary sort...and it has seemed desirable to
 omit wave mechanics". On the other hand, the content is far from elementary. Slater

 notes that "it is customary to write books either on thermodynamics or on statistical
 mechanics; this one combines both". Moreover, "atomic and molecular structure are

 introduced, together with a discussion of different types of substances, explaining
 their interatomic forces from quantum theory and their thermal and elastic behavior

 from our thermodynamic and statistical methods". All told, the first 100 pages cover
 "Thermodynamics, Statistical Mechanics, and Kinetic Theory," the second 200 pages
 discuss "Gases, Liquids, and Solids," and the final 200 pages concern themselves with
 "Atoms, Molecules, and the Structure of Matter".

 At the end of July 1941, Kohn and his friend Josef Eisinger were transferred to Camp

 A in the southern Quebec town of Farnham, 60 km southeast of Montreal (JE13). Camp
 A also boasted an excellent internee school, and Kohn was able to think deeply about

 his schoolwork during the hundreds of hours he spent making camouflage nets in
 the camp knitting shop (WK13a, Auger 2005). At the end of September 1941, Kohn
 and a group of other internees were permitted to travel (under guard) to Camp S on
 St. Helen's Island in Montreal to sit for McGill University's Senior Matriculation

 Examination (Fig. 3). The records show that Kohn did well in all the subjects tested:

 algebra, geometry, trigonometry, physics, chemistry, and coordinate geometry (GG13).

 Opportunity arrived for Kohn and Eisinger in October 1941 when they received

 a letter from the wife of a faculty member at the University of Toronto. She had

 Fig. 3 Walther Kohn in Canada
 Fig. 3 Walther Kohn in Canada
 at age 18 (1941). Courtesy of
 at age 18 (1941). Courtesy of
 Josef Eisinger
 Josef Eisinger

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 784 A. Zangwill

 heard about them from a former internee and offered to sponsor them to come live

 with her family after their release (Eisinger 2011).14 Letters were exchanged with

 Scotland Yard, and, by the end of January 1942, the boys found themselves sharing

 a comfortable attic space in the home of Hertha and Bruno Mendel.15 The Mendels

 were refugees from the Nazis themselves who had earlier helped young Jewish cou

 ples escape Germany and start new lives in Canada (Feldberg I960).16 Within days,

 Eisinger was enrolled in a Toronto high school. Kohn, who was 1 year older, needed

 help from two complete strangers to get started at the University of Toronto.17 He first
 received some valuable advice (WK13a),

 Dr. Mendel worked at the university and his good friend, Leopold Infeld, came

 to their home very soon after I arrived. Infeld questioned me about my plans and

 I told him I wanted to be an engineer (another practical profession). He asked

 "Is that your main interest?" and I said no, it was mathematics and physics. He

 told me that engineering at the university was good but that the Math-Physics

 program was superb and that I should pursue a degree there. With the training I

 received, I could always do engineering.

 At that time, the University of Toronto had a Mathematics Department, a Physics

 Department, and a small (five-person) Department of Applied Mathematics (de Beau

 regard Robinson 1979). Leopold Infeld was a member of the Applied Mathematics

 faculty, having come to Toronto in 1938 after working with Albert Einstein for 2 years

 at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.18 The Math-Physics program recom

 mended to Kohn by Infeld was an honors curriculum where all physics, mathematics,

 and applied mathematics students took the same courses for the first 2 years and then

 specialized in their final 2 years (Allin 1981).

 14 The Canadian government announced on May 1941 that any internee under the age of 21 cleared by

 Scotland Yard would be released and given the opportunity to continue his education in Canada if he could

 find a sponsor willing to pay a fee of two thousand dollars (Jones 1988).

 15 Eisinger was released in early January. Kohn was released a few weeks later after a short stay at Camp
 N, an internment camp outside the town of Sherbrooke, Quebec, about 130 km east of Montreal (Eisinger
 2011, JE13).

 16 Bruno Mendel (1897-1959) was the son of a research-active medical doctor who trained in Berlin

 and became a research-active physician himself. His medical practice slowly became less important as he

 increased the time he spent researching the metabolism of the cancer cell in his small private laboratory.

 Mendel read the political situation correctly, and he took his wife and three children to Holland when Hitler

 came to power in 1933. In 1937, he emigrated to Canada and became (at first) an unpaid faculty member

 at the Banting Institute for Cancer Research of the University of Toronto. He returned to Europe in 1950 to

 accept a chair in Pharmacology at the University of Amsterdam (Feldbeig 1960).

 17 Eisinger followed Kohn to the University of Toronto the following year (JE13).

 18 Leopold Infeld (1898-1968) earned the first Ph.D. in theoretical physics awarded by a Polish university

 from the Jagellonian University in his native city of Krâkow. He taught physics at Jewish high schools for

 nearly a decade before finding a senior assistantship in theoretical physics at Lwow University. Infeld knew

 the importance of contacts with foreign physicists and successfully gained 2-year visiting positions with

 Max Bom in Cambridge and Albert Einstein in Princeton. With the latter, he co-authored The Evolution

 of Physics, a popular account of the history of ideas in physics. In 1938, Infeld accepted a position at

 the University of Toronto where he worked on a variety of theoretical problems in general relativity and

 cosmology. He returned to Poland in 1950 to found an Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of
 Warsaw (Infeld 1978).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 785

 Fig. 4 Dean Samuel Beatty
 Fig. 4 Dean Samuel Beatty
 (ca. 1953) bent the admission
 (ca. 1953) bent the admission
 rules so Kohn could enter the
 rules so Kohn could enter the

 University of Toronto. Courtesy
 University of Toronto. Courtesy

 of the University of Toronto
 of the University of Toronto
 Archives
 Archives

 Walther attempted to enroll in Toronto's Math-Physics program, but was rebuffed
 by the University registrar because he lacked some of the mandatory prerequisites
 (WK13a). Mendel and Infeld arranged a meeting for Kohn with the Dean of the
 College of Arts & Science, Samuel Beatty (Fig. 4), who was also the chair of the
 Mathematics Department.19 Beatty was sympathetic, but he was unable to move the

 inflexible registrar. Therefore, he proposed to admit Walther as a "special student" who

 did not need the prerequisites. This time, it was the chair of the Chemistry Department,
 Frank Kenrick, who threw up a roadblock by refusing to allow a foreign national

 from any Triple Axis country to enter his chemistry building where war research was
 being conducted. Beatty arranged for Kohn to plead his case in person, first with
 Kenrick (who refused to acknowledge that Kohn was a refugee) and then with the

 University Chancellor, Rev. Henry John Cody (who was unwilling to overrule one of

 his department chairs).

 In the end, the creative Beatty simple redefined the meaning of "special student"

 to constitute the normal Math-Physics curriculum minus the usual chemistry require

 ment. In this way, Kohn entered the Math-Physics program several weeks after the

 beginning of the spring 1942 term. Relatively, little time was lost because Beatty had

 permitted Kohn to audit his gateway mathematics course the entire time the admission

 negotiations were going on. Even after the formalities were completed, Beatty tutored

 Walther privately for a month to bring him up to speed with the rest of the class.

 Kohn's undergraduate transcript shows that he completed the 2-year Math-Physics
 "common core" in three semesters.20 Besides algebra, analytic geometry, differential

 and integral calculus, differential equations, physics laboratory, mechanics, properties

 of matter, dynamics, electricity & magnetism, and light & acoustics, one finds two
 required courses in actuarial science, two required courses in French and German

 19 Samuel Beatty (1881-1970) earned the first Ph.D. in mathematics awarded by a Canadian university at
 the University of Toronto. He remained at Toronto and from 1911 to 1959 rose from Lecturer in Mathematics
 to Professor and chair of Mathematics, to Dean of the College of Arts & Science, and finally to Chancellor
 of the entire University (de Beauregard Robinson 1979).

 20 Dean Beatty apparently "regularized" Kohn's "special student" status at some point because his official

 transcript inaccurately states that he completed an introductory chemistry course and a chemistry laboratory
 course (CS 13).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 786 A. Zangwill

 replaced by English courses, and two elected courses in "oriental literature" where

 texts in ancient Egyptian, Arabic, Hebrew, Persian, and Turkish were read in trans
 lation. Kohn took twelve more advanced courses during the 1943-1944 academic

 year, including algebraic geometry, differential geometry, partial differential equa

 tions, the theory of functions, group theory, thermodynamics, classical dynamics,

 quantum mechanics, variational principles in physics, English literature, and modern

 ethics. These two semesters turned out to be his last as an undergraduate because he

 was inducted into the Canadian army in September 1944.21 He served until the war

 ended in August 1945 and was awarded his BA in Applied Mathematics at the summer

 1945 convocation ceremony while still on active duty.22

 The bare list of courses Kohn took during his five undergraduate semesters does

 not communicate the elite quality of the instructors who taught and mentored him.

 Leopold Infeld, who lectured to upperclassmen only, had been invited to join the

 Applied Mathematics Department by its chair, the eminent Irish mathematician and

 theoretical physicist, J.L. Synge.23 Synge and his Applied Mathematics colleague

 Bernard Griffith were the authors of Principles of Mechanics, the introductory but quite

 sophisticated textbook used by all the students in the Math-Physics program. Synge

 was always eager to add talent to his faculty, and in 1941, he succeeded to recruit the

 Russian mathematical physicist Alexander Weinstein, a mature scientist with a strong

 reputation for his work on free boundary problems and variational principles.24

 It is significant to our story that variational methods were something of a

 Toronto speciality at the time. Besides Weinstein, Synge, and Griffith, one should

 include Gilbert Robinson (Mathematics) and Arthur Stevenson (Applied Mathemat

 ics) because Cornelius Lanczos thanks them in the preface to his now-classic 1949

 text The Variational Principles of Mechanics because they together "revised the entire

 manuscript". In later years, Kohn singled out the algebraist Richard Brauer and the

 21 Kohn and Josef Eisinger had volunteered for (and been rebuffed by) the Canadian Air Force immediately

 after their release from internment (JE 13).

 22 Kohn worked the summers of 1942-1943 for the Sutton-Horsley Company, a Toronto X-ray equipment

 manufacturer which began producing signaling lamps and instrument panels for fighter and bomber air

 craft after the war began. His specific task was the design and testing of compensation circuits to ensure

 that cockpit instruments gave accurate readings when operated at unusually high and low temperatures.

 Kohn worked the summers of 1945-1946 for the mineral surveying and exploration geophysics company

 Koulomzine, Geoffroy, Brossard & Company of Val D'Or, Quebec. His job was to conduct magnetic field

 surveys in suspected gold-bearing regions of northern Ontario. A typical survey consisted of a grid of about

 1,000 magnetometer measurements with a grid spacing of 100m (GFF46, WK98, WK13b, HF13).

 23 John Lighton Synge (1897-1995) studied mathematics at Trinity College Dublin and accepted a position

 as Assistant Professor at the University of Toronto in 1920. There he began a lifelong interest in Einstein's

 theory of relativity and in geometrical methods to analyze dynamical systems. The peripatetic Synge

 subsequently held positions in Dublin, Toronto (again at the time Kohn was there), Ohio State, Carnegie

 Tech, and finally the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies (Florides 2008).

 24 Alexander Weinstein (1897-1979) was a Ph.D. student of Hermann Weyl. He worked with Tullio Levi

 Cività in Rome and Jacques Hadamard in Paris before the German occupation of France in 1940 drove him

 from Europe permanently. Weinstein was a member of the Applied Mathematics faculty of the University
 of Toronto from 1941 to 1946, worked for some time at the US Naval Ordnance Laboratory, and spent 18

 productive years at the Institute for Fluid Dynamics and Applied Mathematics at the University of Maryland
 (Diaz 1978).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 787

 non-Euclidean geometer H.S.M. (Donald) Coxeter as "luminous faculty members
 whom I recall with special vividness" (WK98). He also recalled the first-year elec
 tricity and magnetism lectures given by Lachlan Gilchrist, a 1913 Ph.D. student of
 Robert Millikan, because Gilchrist told his Toronto students that it was he who had

 purchased the oil used by Millikan in his famous oil drop experiment (WK03).

 Weinstein's influence on the undergraduate Kohn is apparent from Walter's first two

 published scientific papers.25 The first, submitted in July 1944, is a two-page report

 on an exact solution for the oscillations of a spherical gyroscope which generalizes
 a method presented in the Synge and Griffith book but thanks Weinstein for "his

 advice and criticism" (Kohn 1945). The second paper was completed and submitted

 in November 1944 at a time when Kohn was engaged in advanced basic training at

 Camp Borden, Ontario. This substantial piece of work (Kohn 1946) establishes bounds

 on the motion of a heavy spherical top using a contour integration method used by

 Weinstein (1942) to study a spherical pendulum. The text makes clear that Kohn had

 at least some familiarity with Über die Theorie des Kreisels (1898), the great treatise

 on tops by Felix Klein and Arnold Sommerfeld.

 In the 1945-1946 academic year (WK98),

 after my discharge from the army, I took an excellent crash masters program,

 including some senior courses I had missed, graduate courses, and a master's

 thesis consisting of my paper on tops and a paper on scaling atomic wave func
 tions.

 The atomic wave functions paper, "Two Applications of the Variational Method to

 Quantum Mechanics" (Kohn 1947) was the first of many to come (including the den

 sity functional papers) where Kohn exploits a variational principle. He first learned

 about such principles from an advanced undergraduate course where Weinstein dis

 cussed the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations of classical mechanics. Wein

 stein regarded Kohn as a potential Ph.D. student and thus shared with him his recent

 work on variational methods to study the vibrations of clamped plates and membranes

 (Aronszajn and Weinstein 1942). A review paper by Weinstein (1941) summarized

 the original contributions to this subject by Lord Rayleigh and Walter Ritz.

 Notwithstanding the foregoing, it was Applied Mathematics Professor Arthur

 Stevenson who broadened Kohn's perspective to include quantum problems and the
 use of variational methods to study them. He is thanked in Kohn (1947) "for his kind

 advice and interest".26 Stevenson's early research concerned quantum mechanical

 methods to calculate the energy levels of electrons in atoms, and he had performed

 variational calculations for the helium atom in collaboration with a colleague in the

 25 See footnote 2.

 26 Arthur Francis Chesterfield Stevenson (1899-1968) accepted a position in the Mathematics Department

 of the University of Toronto immediately after earning his B.A. from Trinity College, Cambridge in 1922.

 He returned to Cambridge in 1928 where he worked under the supervision of Ralph Fowler on a problem

 in theoretical spectroscopy which eventually led to his Ph.D. He returned to Toronto where he published

 original research and lectured on atomic physics, quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory, scattering

 theory, and the differential equations of mathematical physics. He spent the last dozen years of his academic

 career on the faculty of Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan (Duff 1969).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 788 A. Zangwill

 Toronto Physics Department (Stevenson and Crawford 1938). Kohn surely read this

 paper because the helium atom figured into his work also.

 Kohn assumed that the readers of his paper were familiar with the variational method

 to find approximate solutions to the Schrödinger equation. Indeed, most textbooks

 of quantum mechanics written between 1930 and 1945 devoted more than passing

 attention to this topic because Egil Hylleraas had used it in 1929 with spectacular

 success to calculate the ionization energy of the helium atom. This provided the first

 convincing evidence that quantum mechanics could achieve quantitative success for

 a system of more than one electron.

 For future reference, I sketch here a simple form of the Rayleigh-Ritz varia

 tional method appropriate to an N-electron system with ground-state energy Eq and

 Hamiltonian operator H. If r = (x, y, z), the starting point is a trial wave function,

 tHri, T2,..., rjv), which depends on the Cartesian coordinates of all the electrons.

 One then computes a 3/V-dimensional integral with the configuration space volume

 element dr = dri... dr^ and exploits the inequality,27

 0 < E[r/r] = J dr f*(H - E0)f = J dr r/t'Hi/r - Eq. (1)

 The exact ground-state wave function Vo satisfies the Schrödinger equation, Hf o =

 £otAo- Using the latter in Eq. (1) shows that E[ty] = 0 when ^ = 'Ao and suggests a

 strategy to find an upper bound to Eq\ write the trial function ^ as a linear combination

 of a set of basis functions and minimize the integral on the right side of Eq. (1)

 with respect to the expansion coefficients. Increasing the number of basis functions

 generally lowers the bound obtained for Eq. An important feature of this procedure
 emerges if we consider a trial function of the form V = 1^0 + where 6^ is
 "small" by some measure. Inserting this trial function into Eq. (1) gives the variation
 SE = E[r/f0 + Siff] as

 SE = J dr (fo + Sr/f)* (.H-E0) (lAo + H) = J dr81r*(H-E0M = 0 (s^ .
 (2)

 One says that the energy functional E[\[r] is "stationary" in the sense that a trial

 function that differs from V'o by a small amount (first order in <5i/0 produces an energy

 which differs from Eq by an amount that is very small (second order in S i/r). For that

 reason, minimizing E[\fr] with respect to a set of variational parameters produces a

 much better estimate for the ground-state energy than one might have supposed. The

 elegance and generality of this technique must have appealed powerfully to the young

 Kohn, because he "read many of the old papers on the subject and variational methods

 became the first tool in my theoretical physics toolbox" (WK12).

 In the spring of 1946, Kohn completed his M.S. studies, taught calculus and analytic

 geometry as an Instructor for the Mathematics Department, and applied to a dozen or

 so Ph.D. programs with the clear idea to study theoretical physics. Offers of admission

 with financial support came from Rudolf Peierls at Birmingham and Eugene Wigner at

 27 It is necessary here that trial function satisfies/= 1 and that the integral / àzir*Hijr converges.

 ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 789

 Fig. S Julian Schwinger (ca.
 Fig. S Julian Schwinger (ca.
 late 1940s) was Kohn's Ph.D.
 late 1940s) was Kohn's Ph.D.

 supervisor at Harvard
 supervisor at Harvard
 University. Source unknown
 University. Source unknown

 Princeton, among others. Kohn accepted the Birmingham offer on the advice of Infeld,

 who knew Peierls personally (WK13b). One day later, an offer arrived from Harvard

 which included a prestigious Arthur Lehman Fellowship. Kohn again consulted Infeld,

 who without hesitation told him to communicate his regrets to Peierls, accept the offer

 from Harvard, and try to work for Julian Schwinger (Fig. 5).28

 Accordingly, a somewhat insecure 23-year-old Walter Kohn arrived on the Harvard

 campus in the fall of 1946 as one of a group of about thirty first-year graduate students.
 The 28-year-old Schwinger had joined the Harvard faculty the previous spring and
 immediately began teaching a three-semester sequence of courses on special topics in
 theoretical physics (Schweber 1994). Kohn and his cohort stepped into the middle of
 this sequence as a supplement to their required courses in classical mechanics, electro
 dynamics, quantum mechanics, and statistical mechanics. In principle, Schwinger's
 course was devoted to nuclear physics. In practice, he devoted part of the time to a
 highly personal exposition of quantum mechanics in the style of Dirac (1935) and the

 rest of the time was given over to (PA99)

 essentially everything Schwinger knew about. All about Green functions, all
 about nuclear physics and so on. All the numerical tricks he had devised to solve
 quantum mechanical problems and nuclear physics problems...there was a lot
 of physics and there were a lot of variational techniques, for example to solve
 the deuteron...He was also starting to build the machinery that was going to

 solve the problems of quantum electrodynamics. We were treated to a lot of that

 machinery.

 Kohn himself has given one of the best descriptions of Schwinger's teaching style
 (Kohn 1996):

 28 Julian Seymour Schwinger ( 1918-1994) published ten papers in quantum mechanics and nuclear physics

 before the age of 21. He spent the war years working on waveguides for radar applications before turning

 his attention to quantum electrodynamics. The latter work earned him a one-third share of the 1965 Nobel
 Prize in physics (Martin and Glashow 1995; Mehra and Milton 2000).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 790 A. Zangwill

 Attending one of his formal lectures was comparable to hearing a new major

 concert by a very great composer, flawlessly performed by the composer him

 self. . .Old and new material were treated from fresh points of view and organized

 in magnificent overall structures. The delivery was magisterial, even, carefully

 worded, irresistible like a mighty river. He commanded the attention of his audi

 ence entirely from the content and form of his material, and by his personal

 mastery of it, without a touch of dramatization.

 Quite early on, the chairman of the Harvard Physics Department, John Van Vleck,

 approached Kohn and asked him whether he would like to work with him on a solid

 state physics problem.29 Kohn was not interested in solid-state physics and instead

 presented himself to Schwinger as Infeld had urged him to do.30 He described to

 Schwinger his experiences in Toronto (WK98, WK12)

 Luckily for me, we shared a common interest in the variational methods of theo

 retical physics.. .He accepted me within minutes as one of his 10 PhD students.

 He suggested I should try to develop a Green function variational principle for

 three-body scattering problems, like low-energy neutron-deuteron scattering,

 while warning me ominously that he himself had tried and failed.

 Schwinger was an acknowledged expert in the use of both variational principles and

 Green functions to solve a wide variety of problems. In Eq. (1), an energy functional

 E[\f/] with the stationary property SE = 0 made it possible to estimate the ground

 state energy of a bound-electron system such as helium. For a scattering problem,

 the energy is known and one is led to seek stationary variational functionals for other

 quantities. An example is the Green function, an energy-dependent operator defined
 in terms of the system Hamiltonian by

 G iE) = —1—. (3)

 E — H

 For two-body scattering, one writes H — Hf + V(r) where Hf<p = Eftp is the
 Schrödinger equation for a free particle, and V (r) is the potential responsible for the

 scattering. Using a coordinate space representation of the corresponding free-particle

 Green function G/, the scattered wave function x/r satisfies the integral equation,31

 fir) = (pit) + J dr'Gfir, r'\Ef)V(r')xlr(r').

 (4)

 29 John Hasbrouk Van Vleck (1899-1980) contributed widely to the fields of chemical physics, quantum

 electronics, and solid-state physics over a 46 years career at Harvard. In 1977, he was awarded a one-third

 share of the Nobel Prize in physics for his work in magnetism (Anderson 1987).

 30 Kohn had learned from his fellow graduate students about Wolfgang Pauli's famously negative view that

 solid-state physics was insufficiently fundamental and too approximate to attract the attention of a serious

 young theoretical physicist (von Meyenn 1989).

 31 It is necessary to replace Ef by the complex number Ef+ie in Eq. (3) and let e -» 0 at the end to
 ensure that ip behaves like an outgoing spherical wave (Baym 1969).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 791

 Kohn worked on the three-body Green function problem for half a year before

 abandoning it.32 Instead, he generalized Eq. (1) and developed a variational principle

 for the two-body scattering phase shift, a quantity which characterizes the final state

 when two particles interact via a short-range potential.33 He also derived a variational

 principle for the scattering amplitude for two-particle scattering with an arbitrary

 interaction potential. For both cases, Kohn borrowed from the Rayleigh-Ritz method

 and expanded the trial scattering wave function in a set of basis functions with the

 correct long-distance behavior. Finally, he derived a variational principle for the ele

 ments of the scattering matrix for the special case of nuclear collisions where multiple

 disintegrations are energetically forbidden. It is interesting that Kohn made no use

 of Schwinger's "beloved Green functions" (WK98) in his thesis, "Collisions of light
 nuclei," or in the published version of his thesis (Kohn 1948). He did, however, use

 his scattering amplitude variational principle to rederive an alternative variational

 principle for the phase shift that Schwinger had derived in his spring 1947 theoretical

 physics class using Eq. (3) and reported at a meeting of the American Physical Society

 (Schwinger 1947). The latter is commonly called "Schwinger's variational principle
 for scattering" (Adhikari 1998; Nesbet 2003).

 Kohn did not have a close personal relationship with his advisor. None of

 Schwinger's students did, in part because it was notoriously difficult to schedule a

 personal meeting with him. Kohn met with him only "a few times a year" (Kohn

 1996), and according to John David Jackson, an MIT graduate student who listened to

 Schwinger's lectures at Harvard, there was one occasion where "Kohn was miffed by

 Julian's unavailability. He completed his thesis, wrote up a paper, and submitted it to

 Physical Review without ever consulting him" (Mehra and Milton 2000). Such feel

 ings must have passed quickly because, in a moving tribute at a memorial symposium
 after Schwinger's death, Kohn makes it clear that (Kohn 1996)

 It was during these meetings, sometimes more than 2 hours long, that I learned

 the most from him.. .to dig for the essential; to pay attention to the experimental

 facts; to try to say something precise and operationally meaningful, even if one

 cannot calculate everything a priori; not to be satisfied until one has embedded his

 ideas in a coherent, logical, and esthetically satisfying structure.. .1 cannot even

 imagine my subsequent scientific life without Julian's example and teaching.

 Besides Schwinger, Kohn benefitted from members of his graduate student cohort

 who either contributed materially to his education at Harvard or who played an impor
 tant role subsequently. One group consisted of fellow Schwinger students: Kenneth

 Case, Frederic de Hoffmann, Roy Glauber, Julian Eisenstein, Ben Mottelson, and

 Fritz Rohrlich. Another group did their Ph.D. work in other areas of physics: the the

 orists Thomas Kuhn, Rolf Landauer, and Philip Anderson, and the experimentalists

 32 This difficult and subtle problem was solved in the early 1960s by the Russian mathematical physicist
 Ludvig Faddeev (Faddeev 1965).

 33 At some point before he wrote up his thesis, Kohn learned that the Swedish physicist Lamek Hulthén had

 independently derived a variational principle for the scattering phase shift very similar to his own. Hulthén

 (1946) and Kohn (1948) begin with the same variational functional but propose slightly different variational

 procedures. The Kohn-Hulthén variational principle later found wide application in atomic, molecular, and
 nuclear scattering problems (Adhikari 1998; Nesbet 2003).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 792 A. Zangwill

 Nicolaas Bloembergen, George Pake, and Charles Slichter. Joaquin Luttinger, another

 MIT graduate student who made the short trip to Harvard to audit Schwinger's classes,
 later became a close friend and a scientific collaborator. All these members of Kohn's

 student network went on to have successful scientific careers.34 Glauber, Mottelson,

 Anderson, and Bloembergen won Nobel Prizes themselves.

 Walter's life changed profoundly in two important ways when he accepted an offer

 by Schwinger to remain at Harvard as a postdoctoral fellow. First, the income from this

 job permitted him to bring to Boston and marry Lois Mary Adams, a former nursing

 student he had met at the University of Toronto who had been working in New York

 City while he finished his Ph.D. (SDUT 2010). A baby daughter soon arrived, and

 family responsibilities were added to the research and teaching responsibilities that
 came with his position as Schwinger's assistant. The research project he undertook

 was an investigation of the electromagnetic properties of mesons done in collabora

 tion with fellow Schwinger postdoc Sidney Borowitz. His teaching consisted of an

 introductory physics course in the summers of 1949-1950 and a junior/senior level
 classical mechanics course in the summer of 1950.35

 The second profound change in Kohn's life occurred through the good offices of

 John Van Vleck, the solid-state theorist he had rebuffed as a thesis supervisor (Fig. 6).

 Van Vleck re-enters the story because Kohn supplemented his summer 1949 income

 by working for the Polaroid Corporation at their Cambridge, Massachusetts Research

 Laboratory. His job was to discover the mechanism whereby high-energy charged

 particles produce an image when they impinge on photographic plates.36 This task

 required a knowledge of solid-state physics, which he acquired by reading Frederick
 Seitz' The Modern Theory of Solids (1940) and consulting with Van Vleck when

 necessary.

 By this time, Kohn's first paper with Borowitz had appeared (Borowitz and Kohn

 1949) and he had applied to the National Research Council for a fellowship to spend
 the 1950-1951 academic year with Wolfgang Pauli at the Eidgenössische Technische

 Hochschule in Zürich. Nevertheless, he was painfully aware that he had so far made

 only a "very minor contribution" to field theory research. This fact, and the stunning

 34 Josef Eisinger remained a close friend. He did his graduate work at MIT, just two miles down the
 Charles river from Harvard, and earned his Ph.D. in physics in 1951 for an experimental determination

 of the magnetic moment of K40. He spent 30 years at Bell Laboratories where he made a transition from

 solid-state physics to biophysics. From 1985 until his retirement in 1998, he taught and conducted research

 at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City (JE 13).

 35 An evaluation of Kohn written by Ms. Norme T. Casey provides insight into Kohn's teaching style and

 philosophy of physics. Ms. Casey was a 1949 Wellesley graduate pursuing an MA in teaching at Harvard. As

 part of her curriculum, she attended Kohn's summer 1950 class (devoted to introductory optics, electricity,

 magnetism, atomic physics, and nuclear physics) and wrote a four-page evaluation of her experience. Kohn

 received a copy of her report (WKP. 1950. A critical analysis of Physics S-lb), which states that "Dr.
 Kohn's lectures were clear and concise. Demonstrations accompanied every lecture and were given with

 great enthusiasm.. .It was obvious from the beginning that [Dr. Kohn's] interest was not his own mastery of
 the mathematics, but in our understanding of the physics.. .It was not infrequent that he read from source

 material giving direct quotes [such] as Newton's relating his discovery of the diffraction of light".

 36 This technique had recently been introduced to study cosmic rays using plates produced by another

 company and Polaroid wanted to enter the business (Powell and Occhialini 1947).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 793

 Fig. 6 Harvard's John Van
 Fig. 6 Harvard's John Van
 Vleck facilitated Kohn's
 Vleck facilitated Kohn's

 transition from nuclear physics
 transition from nuclear physics
 to solid-state physics. Courtesy
 to solid-state physics. Courtesy
 of the UW-Madison Archives
 of the UW-Madison Archives

 quality of the latest achievements by Schwinger and Richard Feynman, made him
 receptive when (WK98)

 Van Vleck explained to me that he was about to take a leave of absence and "since

 you are familiar with solid-state physics," he asked me if I could teach a graduate

 course on this subject he had planned to offer [for the fall 1949 semester]. This

 time, frustrated with my work on quantum field theory, I agreed.

 Kohn not only taught the solid-state physics course, he collaborated with Harvard
 graduate student Richard Allan Silverman to find approximate numerical solutions
 of the Schrödinger equation for the purpose of calculating the cohesive energy of
 metallic lithium (Silverman and Kohn 1950).37 Using the same numerical data, he
 and Bloembergen estimated the Knight shift for lithium, the latter being a measure of

 the electron wave function amplitude at the atomic nucleus accessible to experimenters

 using magnetic resonance techniques (Kohn and Bloembergen 1950). It is notable that
 Silverman and Kohn conclude with the remark, "One of us (W. Kohn) is investigating

 the cohesive energy by means of a variation iteration procedure based on the integral
 equation [Eq. (4) of this paper] and a Green function appropriate to a periodic lattice".
 Kohn, a naturalized Canadian citizen since 1943, looked everywhere in Canada
 and the United States for an entry-level academic position. Nothing turned up, but
 an early 1950 interview trip to the Westinghouse Research Laboratory in Pittsburgh,
 Pennsylvania, bore fruit even though his foreign citizenship precluded a job offer
 from Westinghouse. In Pittsburgh, Kohn stayed at the home of Alfred Schild, a friend

 from Toronto who had found a job teaching mathematics at the Carnegie Institute of

 Technology. Schild told him that the chairman of the Physics Department, Frederick
 Seitz, had just resigned and was moving his solid-state group to the University of
 Illinois (Seitz 1994). Perhaps, there was an opportunity at Carnegie Tech itself. The
 new chair, nuclear physicist Edward Creutz, interviewed Kohn and offered him a job

 37 Silverman's Ph.D. thesis states that "The author wishes to express his indebtedness to Professor Walter
 Kohn for suggesting the problem and for invaluable guidance during a large portion of the work (RS51).
 A generation of English-speaking solid-state physicists have Silverman to thank for his translation into
 English of Methods of Quantum Field Theory in Statistical Physics by Abrikosov et al. (1963).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 794 A. Zangwill

 as an Assistant Professor 48 h later.38 It turned out that Creutz needed someone who

 could teach solid-state physics and mentor a few graduate students who had lost their

 advisors when the Seitz group left (WK98). Kohn was delighted to accept.

 3 Portrait of the physicist as a Young Man

 Walter Kohn was thinking about the start of his academic career at Carnegie Tech

 when, in March 1950, the National Research Council approved his application for a

 fellowship to spend a year in Europe. Ed Creutz agreed to a 1-year leave of absence,

 but only if Walter agreed to teach solid-state physics for the fall 1950 semester. At

 the same time, Kohn was having second thoughts about his original plan to work with

 Wolfgang Pauli. This led him to seek and secure the approvals needed to switch the

 venue for his fellowship year from Zürich to Niels Bohr's Institute for Theoretical

 Physics in Copenhagen. Accordingly, Kohn moved to Pittsburgh, taught his course,

 and left for Copenhagen at the end of the term.39 When he arrived at the Institute in

 January 1951, Walter Kohn was an expert in scattering theory who had begun to think

 of himself as a solid-state physicist. Unfortunately, 'no one in Copenhagen, including

 Niels Bohr, had even heard the expression "solid-state physics'" (WK98).

 Kohn managed to publish two papers that year, but more important to his future was

 the fact that the Institute attracted a steady stream of short-term and long-term visitors

 from around the world from whom he could learn new physics.40 It was good luck

 for Kohn that postwar freedom of movement motivated Bohr to organize a meeting

 for all foreign physicists who had ever worked at the Institute (Rozental 1967). The

 resulting Conference on Problems in Quantum Physics (July 6-10 1951) was attended
 by an outstanding collection of theoretical physicists, many of whom Walter was able

 to incorporate into his expanding professional network.41 A few weeks later, Kohn

 38 Edward Chester Creutz (1913-2009) earned his Ph.D. in experimental nuclear physics from the Uni
 versity of Wisconsin in 1938. He moved to Princeton as an Instructor and used their cyclotron for nuclear

 physics projects until the Manhattan Project redirected his efforts to the synthesis of plutonium and the

 triggering of the plutonium bomb. After the war, Creutz joined the faculty at Carnegie Tech to direct the

 construction of a proton synchrocyclotron and to build an experimental nuclear physics group. After 9 years
 (seven as chair), Creutz moved to San Diego, California, to help found the General Atomics Division of

 General Dynamics Corporation. He spent 15 years there before concluding his career as Associate Director
 of the National Science Foundation (Hinman and Rose 2010).

 39 One former Carnegie Tech graduate student remembers Kohn's solid-state physics lectures as well

 prepared, clearly delivered, and mathematically precise. He was surprised when the final exam avoided
 mathematical issues and focused entirely on qualitative aspects of the subject (AA13).

 40 Aage Bohr and Christian Mpller were already fixtures at the institute. Kohn's Harvard classmate Ben

 Mottelson arrived in the fall of 1950 and never left. A partial list of visitors who overlapped with Kohn for
 at least some time includes Hendrik Casimir, Freeman Dyson, Ugo Fano, Nicolas Kemmer, Louis Michel,

 Wladyslaw Swiatecki, Jean Valatin, Nicolaas van Kampen, and Arthur Wightman. NBA 1951 Guest Book

 of the Institute for Theoretical Physics.

 41 A partial list of attendees includes Hans Bethe, Homi Bhabha, Léon Brillouin, Richard Dalitz, Paul
 Dirac, Maria Mayer, Dirk ter Haar, Werner Heisenberg, Walter Heitler, Léon van Hove, Lamek Hulthén, Egil

 Hylleraas, Hendrik Kramers, Ralph Kronig, Jens Lindhard, Lise Meitner, Wolfgang Pauli, Rudolf Peierls,
 Léon Rosenfeld, John Slater, Ernst Stueckelberg, Victor Weisskopf, Gregor Wentzel, John Wheeler, and

 Gian-Carlo Wick. NBA. Program and Participants for the Conference on Problems in Quantum Physics.

 July 6-10,1951. Institute for Theoretical Physics.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 795

 was tapped to lecture on solid-state physics for 2 weeks at the first Summer School of

 Theoretical Physics organized by Cécile De Witt at Les Houches, near Chamonix in

 the French Alps.42

 At the end of 1951, Bohr wrote a formal evaluation which concluded that43

 Dr. Kohn has proved himself a highly qualified theoretical physicist with great

 knowledge of a wide field of problems. His ability to stimulate others in their

 work and his willingness to assist them with his knowledge has been of great

 value to the many members of our group.

 This good opinion led Bohr to arrange a Rask 0rsted Foundation fellowship for Kohn

 so he could remain in Copenhagen through the summer of 1952. This was welcome

 news because Walter and his family enjoyed living in Denmark. Moreover, he had just

 begun a scientific collaboration with Res Jost, a Swiss mathematical physicist 5 years

 his senior who had lectured on quantum field theory at the Les Houches Summer

 School.44 Jost was interested in scattering theory, and his "predilection for mathemat

 ical rigor" (Enz 2002) struck a responsive chord in Kohn. Together, the two theorists

 completed three papers (including an "inverse scattering problem" where one deduces

 characteristics of the scattering potential from phase shift information) before Kohn

 returned to Carnegie Tech to begin the 1952-1953 academic year (Jost mid Kohn

 1952a,b, 1953). On his own, Kohn studied the validity of the Born expansion for scat

 tering (Kohn 1952a) and a non-Green function variational principle for electron waves

 in a periodic potential (Kohn 1952b).

 Back in Pittsburgh, the Physics Department had changed somewhat during Walter's

 absence. The senior experimentalist Immanuel Estermann had left to head the physics
 section of the Office of Naval Research (ONR), and his last Ph.D. student, Simeon

 Friedberg, had taken over his low-temperature physics laboratory. A senior theorist,

 Gian-Carlo Wick, had joined the faculty from Berkeley, and Roman Smoluchowski, an

 expert in the theory of defects in solids, had transferred to the Physics Department from

 the Metallurgy Department. A young experimenter, Jacob Goldman, and a young the

 orist, Paul Marcus, had joined the solid-state physics group to complement the senior
 experimentalist Emerson Pugh. One familiar face was Norman Rostoker, a Toronto

 native who had graduated from his hometown university as a physics major 1 year
 behind Kohn and then received his Ph.D. at Carnegie Tech under Pugh's supervision

 (Rostoker 2003, NR13). Kohn and Rostoker had become friends during the fall 1950

 semester, and Norman was still working in the Physics Department as a postgraduate

 research scientist when Kohn returned from Europe.

 The fall 1952 semester found Kohn teaching thermodynamics to undergraduates and

 nuclear physics to graduate students. He was also named as co-principal investigator

 42 Kohn was an emergency replacement for Mario Verde, a nuclear physicist who had fallen ill (DeWitt
 1951, CDW13).

 43 NBA. Evaluation of Walter Kohn 1951.

 44 Res Jost (1918-1990) wrote his Ph.D. thesis under the supervision of Gregor Wentzel and spent 3 years

 as the principal assistant to Wolfgang Pauli. He was a senior fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study

 in Princeton for 6 years (1949-1955) before accepting a professorship at the Eidgenössische Technische

 Hochschule in Zürich. Jost's research focused on mathematical physics and quantum field theoiy, particu
 larly axiomatic versions of the latter. (Kohn et al. 1992; Pais 1996).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 796 A. Zangwill

 with Jack Goldman on an ONR contract to conduct solid-state research.45 His main

 research project was to develop a Green function method to calculate the energy band

 structure for crystalline solids. In other words, he wanted to use Eq. (3) to solve the

 Schrödinger equation to find the energy eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for electrons

 moving in a periodic potential. A distraction arose in the spring 1953 semester when

 Carnegie Tech learned that Walter had received job offers from the Department of

 Mathematics at McGill University in Montreal and the Physical Research Department

 at Bell Telephone Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. Evidently, others besides

 Niels Bohr had formed a very positive impression of this new Assistant Professor. In

 the end, Carnegie Tech retained his services by promoting him to Associate Professor

 after only three semesters of academic service.46

 Kohn had brought to Carnegie Tech the germ of his Green function method to

 solve the electron band-structure problem. He recruited Norman Rostoker to help

 with the numerical calculations and that activity continued (part time) while Walter

 was in Copenhagen.47 The work accelerated when Kohn returned to Pittsburgh and

 he reported their still unpublished results at two invited talks, one at the June 1953

 Summer Meeting of the American Physical Society and one at the July 1953 Gordon

 Research Conference devoted to the Physics and Chemistry of Metals. The latter was

 a particularly prestigious venue, and it is notable that of the seven theorists invited

 to speak, the three youngest (by far) were Walter Kohn, Jacques Friedel, and David

 Pines.48 Friedel, an expert on the theory of metals and alloys, and Pines, an expert

 on electron-electron interactions in solids, had both published half a dozen papers in

 their fields by the time of the Gordon Conference. It is an indication of Kohn's rising

 reputation that he had published only one full-length paper in solid-state physics by this

 time. Kohn's Green function paper (Kohn and Rostoker 1954) finally appeared in the
 June 1, 1954, issue of the journal Physical Review. Therein, he and Rostoker (WK98)

 developed a theory for the energy band structure of electrons in solids harking

 back to my earlier experience with scattering, Green functions, and variational

 methods. We showed how to determine the band structure from a knowledge

 of purely geometric structure constants and a small number (~3) of scattering

 phase shifts of the potential in a single sphericalized cell.

 It happens that the same basic idea had been published several years earlier by the Dutch

 physicist Jan Korringa. However, Korringa (1947) included no numerical applications

 45 For 15 years after World War II ended, most solid-state physics research in the United States was funded

 by the Office of Naval Research. Most nuclear physics research was supported by the United States Atomic
 Energy Commission (Old 1961; Sapolsky 1990).

 46 WKP. January 12,1953, letter to Walter Kohn from R.A. Deller, Bell Telephone Laboratory; February

 13 letter to Walter Kohn from H. Tate, McGill University; February 24 letter to Walter Kohn from Edward

 Creutz, Carnegie Institute of Technology.

 47 The actual computing was performed by a "computress" named Alice Watson who operated a Friden
 Model STW-1 Electro-Mechanical Calculator. Although her equipment changed to an IBM 650 digital

 computer in 1956, she continued to do computing tasks for Kohn the entire time he worked at Carnegie
 Tech (AY 13).

 48 WKP. Final program of the July 1953 Gordon Research Conference on the Physics and Chemistry of
 Metals.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 797

 and his paper went largely unnoticed.49 Kohn and Rostoker illustrated their method

 by calculating the energy as a function of wave number for the 2s conduction band of

 lithium metal and comparing their results with previous calculations in the literature. It

 is entirely characteristic of Kohn that he did not take his band-structure formalism and

 begin applying it to one material after another.50 Instead, he made one use of his lithium

 results (Kohn 1954) and then proceeded to expand his personal research activities into

 other areas of solid-state physics. To understand the choices he made, we interrupt our

 narrative briefly to survey the research agenda of solid-state physics in the mid-1950s.

 Wartime developments in computers, instrumentation, and materials processing

 had a profound effect on the issues addressed by solid-state physicists at the mid-point

 of the twentieth century.51 In June 1954, the National Science Foundation and the

 American Society for Engineering Education sponsored a meeting at Carnegie Tech

 attended by representatives from 45 colleges and universities and several industrial

 and government laboratories. According to the conference co-chair, Professor Jack

 Goldman,52 the purpose of the meeting was to "make more definitive the state of

 knowledge of solid-state physics and the levels at which various parts of it may be

 expected to be integrated into engineering education" (Goldman 1957). To this end, the

 conferees identified six broad areas of active solid-state physics research: the structure

 of crystalline matter, metals and alloys, surfaces, magnetism, semiconductors and

 dielectrics, and non-crystalline materials.

 One needed to attend conferences reserved for specialists to learn the cutting edge

 issues in each area. Happily, the same purpose was soon served by the articles pub
 lished in Solid-State Physics, a series of volumes initiated by Frederick Seitz and

 David Turnbull in 1954 to provide "broad surveys of fields of advanced research that

 serve to inform and stimulate the more experienced investigator" (Seitz and Turn

 bull 1955). The inaugural volume contained articles devoted to five issues: the band

 structure problem, the properties of valence semiconductors, electron-electron inter

 actions, cohesion in solids, and the theory of order-disorder phase transitions. Kohn

 had already made a significant contribution to band-structure theory, and he now added

 to his repertoire research projects devoted to semiconductors and to the effects of the

 electron-electron interaction (soon relabeled many-body physics). The total energy

 49 Korringa (1994) relates that "computers were rare in the Netherlands in 1946 and a cost estimate [for a

 numerical application] exceeded the annual research budget of our theory group".

 50 Kohn left the development and application of the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method to others. It
 eventually became a standard method of band-structure calculation (Zabloudil et al. 2005).

 51 Hoddeson et al. (1992) is a history of solid-state physics up to about 1960. The autobiography of Seitz

 (1994) provides a broad view from the perspective of a major player in the development of solid-state
 physics as the discipline matured through the 1950s and 1960s.

 52 Jacob E. Goldman (1921-2011) was born in Brooklyn, New York and studied physics at Yeshiva Univer

 sity and the University of Pennsylvania. His expertise in magnetism led him to the Westinghouse Research

 Laboratory in 1945 before he joined the faculty of the Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1951. He moved

 to the nascent Scientific Research Laboratory of the Ford Motor Company in 1955 and eventually became

 head of all Ford's corporate research and development. He joined the Xerox corporation in 1969 and 1 year

 later founded their Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). The first modern personal computer and the first
 graphical user interface were invented at PARC a few years later (Markoff 2011).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 798 A. Zangwill

 Fig. 7 Joaquin Luttinger was
 Fig. 7 Joaquin Luttinger was
 Kohn's principal scientific
 Kohn's principal scientific
 collaborator in the 1950s.
 collaborator in the 1950s.

 Courtesy of Walter Kohn
 Courtesy of Walter Kohn

 isH*'" vf;fy y
 WW

 2% '22^1

 w—

 1

 -... •A-w'.'

 •■• J?

 (cohesion) problem became a central concern when he developed density functional
 theory a decade later.53

 Kohn became interested in semiconductors because his flirtation with permanent

 employment at Bell Telephone Laboratories led to a summer consulting arrangement
 that lasted from 1953 to 1966. His first summer project, a theoretical study of the
 damage done to germanium crystals after bombardment by energetic electrons, was

 motivated by experimental results obtained at Bell Labs by Walter Brown and Robert
 Fletcher (Brown et al. 1953). These experiments, in turn, were part of an enormous in

 house effort to investigate the properties of the elemental semiconductors germanium
 and silicon after the 1947 invention of the transistor at Bell Labs by John Bardeen,
 Walter Brattain, and William Shockley (Millman 1983). Kohn was happy to return to
 Bell Labs Summer after summer, both to gain access to exciting experimental results

 and for the opportunity to interact with senior theorists on the Bell Labs staff like
 Conyers Herring and Gregory Wannier and junior theorists closer to him in age like
 Peter Wolff and his Harvard classmate Philip Anderson. He would later remark that

 "I owe this institution my growing up from amateur to professional" (WK98).

 Walter's 1954 "summer vacation" at Bell Labs was particulary important because
 he began a long-lasting scientific collaboration with Joaquin Luttinger (Fig. 7), another

 53 Kohn never worked personally in the field of thermal phase transitions. Nevertheless, he often supported
 a postdoctoral fellow trained in statistical mechanics to work on this class of problems. See Domb (1996)
 for a history of this subject.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 799

 consultant to the semiconductor group.54 They worked together to create a rigorous

 "effective mass theory" for the electronic energy levels produced when impurity atoms

 are purposely substituted for germanium or silicon atoms in pure crystals of the latter.

 The crucial importance of these impurities and their quantum mechanical states to the

 extraordinary electrical properties of semiconductors had been explained qualitatively

 by William Shockley in his seminal treatise, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors

 (1950). However, careful electron spin resonance and cyclotron resonance experiments

 at Bell Labs and elsewhere demanded a quantitative theory. Not for the first time

 and not for the last time, Kohn combined the creation of a novel and sophisticated

 theory with variational calculations designed to produce numbers for comparison with

 measurements for specific material systems. That fall, Kohn and Luttinger completed

 three substantial papers in semiconductor physics (Luttinger and Kohn 1955; Kohn

 and Luttinger 1955a,b) and thereby finished in a virtual dead heat with Berkeley solid

 state theorist, Charles Kittel, who published similar work independently (Kittel and
 Mitchell 1954; Dresselhaus et al. 1955).55

 In the spring of 1955, Walter worked hard to convince the British theoreti

 cal solid-state physicist Harry Jones to accept an offer of a chaired position at
 Carnegie Tech. Jones had co-authored (with Nevill Mott) the influential book The

 Theory of the Properties of Metals and Alloys (1936), and he had spent the spring

 1954 semester as a visiting professor in Kohn's department. Kohn wrote to Jones

 and pointed out that "all of us in solid-state physics, as well as all the people in
 metallurgy, would be delighted to see you come here. With your field of inter
 est, I honestly think that probably no other school in this country could offer

 you better opportunities for creative work along research and teaching lines".56

 Jones ultimately declined for personal reasons. The undeterred Kohn pursued the
 physics of semiconductors and metals simultaneously and submitted two manu

 scripts to the Physical Review. The first paper, co-authored with his first Carnegie
 Tech Ph.D. student, Daniel Schechter, reported calculations for the wave func
 tions and energy levels associated with shallow (weakly bound) impurity states in
 germanium.57 The second paper reported a Knight shift calculation for metallic
 sodium with Teije Kjeldaas, a full-time employee of the Westinghouse Research

 54 Joaquin Mazdak Luttinger (1923-1997) earned his B.S. in physics at the Massachusetts Institute of

 Technology and remained there to complete a Ph.D. thesis (1947) in statistical physics under the supervision

 of Lazslo Tisza. He worked on quantum electrodynamics as the first American postdoctoral fellow of

 Wolfgang Pauli but reverted to problems in many-body theory, solid-state physics, and statistical mechanics
 for the test of his career as a professor, primarily at Columbia University (1960-1993) (Anderson et al.
 1997).

 55 The Bell Laboratories experimenter Robert Fletcher recalled that "Walter was a very kind and thoughtful

 person to work with. I never had the impression he looked down on us experimenters as some theorists

 are inclined to do" (RF13). Another Bell Laboratories experimenter who published papers related to the

 Kohn-Luttinger theory was Walter's old friend Josef Eisinger (Eisinger and Feher 1958).

 56 WKP. April 20,1955, letter from Walter Kohn to Hany Jones.

 57 Another graduate student, James Montague, never quite finished a thesis devoted to deep (strongly
 bound) impurity levels in semiconductors (LG13).

 *£} Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Laboratories in East Pittsburgh (Kohn and Schechter 1955; Kjeldaas and Kohn
 1956).58

 800 A. Zangwill

 For later reference, it is important to note that Kohn acted as an informal consultant

 to the transition-metal magnetism groups of his faculty colleagues Emerson Pugh and

 Jack Goldman. Goldman's Ph.D. student Anthony Arrott recalls Kohn's surprise when

 Arrott successfully used a simple energy band model to analyze his magnetic data for

 concentrated Cu-Ni alloys. At Arrott's oral thesis defense (AA13), Kohn asked him a

 question that foreshadowed his motivation to invent density functional theory lOyears

 later: "how can you use a band model when the potential felt by the electrons is not

 periodic?"

 As 1955 turned into 1956, Walter found himself thinking more and more about the

 effective mass equation he had derived with Luttinger for the energy levels of impurity

 states in silicon. Their "one-particle" method treated the impurity atom as unaware

 of its silicon host except for whatever influence could be captured by two numbers:

 an effective mass m* which parameterized the arrangement of atoms in the silicon

 crystal and an effective dielectric constant x* which parameterized the ability of the
 silicon conduction electrons to "screen" or "shield" the Coulomb potential produced

 by a positively charge impurity embedded in the semiconductor.59 Why then did the

 energy levels calculated using the effective mass equation agree so very well with the

 energy levels measured in the laboratory? Surely, he reasoned, it must be that "this

 equation can be derived from some very general properties of the entire many-electron

 wave function without any recourse to the one-particle picture" (Kohn 1957b). For the

 first time, Kohn attacked the quantum-mechanical "many-body problem" in solid-state

 physics where the repulsive Coulomb interaction between all pairs of electrons is taken

 seriously. Working alone, he managed to demonstrate his assertion for a hypothetical
 situation where the charge on the impurity nucleus exceeds that of the other nuclei

 by an infinitesimal amount. He announced this result in a comprehensive review of

 the Kohn-Luttinger theory written for Seitz and Turnbull's Solid-State Physics series

 (Kohn 1957a). A full account appeared later (Kohn 1957b).

 Meanwhile, back at Bell Labs, the resident theoretical physicists had successfully

 convinced the vice president for research, William Oliver Baker, to create (Anderson
 2011)

 a separate 'super-department' for theorists... with postdoctoral fellows, a rotating

 boss on whose identity we were consulted, sabbaticals, a travel budget under our

 58 Kjeldaas pursued his Ph.D. part time at the University of Pittsburgh. His 1959 thesis thanks Kohn and

 Westinghouse solid-state theorist Theodore Holstein for acting as co-supervisors (TK59). Westinghouse

 was a lively place for solid-state physics in the mid-1950s under the leadership of its Director of Science,
 Clarence Zener, himself a solid-state theorist. The theorists he recruited to complement Holstein included

 Edward Neufville Adams, Petros Argyres, William Mullins, and Yako Yafet. The experimenters hired by

 Zener included Raymond Bowers, Robert Keyes, Colman Goldberg, and John Rayne. Walter Kohn had

 a consulting arrangement with Westinghouse. Holstein, Adams, and Yafet occasionally taught classes at
 Carnegie Tech (AA13, VA13).

 59 By "screening" or "shielding," we mean that the electrons nearest to the positive charge are attracted to

 it and thereby partially neutralize the Coulomb force exerted by the positive charge on distant electrons and
 ions.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 801

 control, and a spectacular summer visitor program...One of the reasons for our

 success with management was the fact that for several years we had had Walter

 Kohn and Quin Luttinger as regular summer visitors and they had become so

 useful that our bosses desperately wanted to attract them permanently.

 The advent of a "spectacular summer visitor program" meant that an unusually large

 number of theoretical physicists passed through and interacted with Kohn and Lut

 tinger during their 1956 summer stay at the Labs.60 A hot topic was the effect on

 the properties of semiconductors when one systematically increased the number of

 impurities present. When the impurity concentration is low and the temperature is

 low, it was well known that electron scattering from impurities is the main source

 of a solid's electrical resistance. What happens when the concentration of impuri

 ties is high? Luttinger had been thinking about the general subject of electric cur

 rent flow in solids already in connection with his studies of the Hall effect in ferro

 magnets, and it was not difficult to convince Kohn to work with him to produce as

 rigorous a theory of electrical conductivity as they could.61 After all, Luttinger's

 understanding of the experimental facts for the Hall effect came directly from a

 review paper written by Kohn's Carnegie Tech colleagues Emerson Pugh and Nor

 man Rostoker (Pugh and Rostoker 1953). The fruits of that summer's labors were

 two long papers on the quantum theory of electrical transport in solids62 (Kohn and

 Luttinger 1957; Luttinger and Kohn 1958). In contrast to their effective mass the

 ory work, which more reflected Kohn's style to address important physical ques

 tions with intuition, a good idea, and mathematical elegance, the transport theory

 papers more reflected Luttinger's preference for general formalism and mathematical

 rigor. In this way, the two young theorists enlarged each others' perspectives of their
 craft.

 For Walter Kohn, professor of physics, the calendar change from 1956 to 1957

 meant little more than a change in his teaching assignment from statistical mechanics

 for physics majors to classical physics for engineers. However, for Walter Kohn, solid

 state physicist, the new year saw changes in his field that had a profound effect on his

 future research efforts. In the words of Canadian physicist Allan Griffin, 1957 was a

 "magic year" when "the way all theoretical physicists thought about interacting many

 body systems underwent a revolution" (AG07). The key event was the realization that

 the methods of quantum field theory could be applied with equal success to study the

 60 Visitors to the theory group that summer included Elihu Abrahams, Kerson Huang, David Pines, J.
 Robert Schneller, and Philippe Nozières (Anderson 1978).

 61 The Hall effect refers to a voltage that appears across a current-carrying sample when a magnetic field

 is applied in a direction perpendicular to the direction of current flow (Chien and Westgate 1980).

 62 Kohn and Luttinger did not ultimately address the problem of the effect of a large concentration of

 impurities on the electrical conductivity of a semiconductor. This was done by Anderson (1958). Simulta

 neous with Kohn and Luttinger's work on quantum transport, the Japanese physicist Ryogo Kubo proposed

 a theoretical approach to the same problem which ultimately became standard (Kubo 1957).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 802 A. Zangwill

 many-electron problem in solid-state physics.63 In particular, diagrammatic methods
 like those invented by Feynman (1949) to study quantum electrodynamics made it

 possible to define a perturbation theory that remained consistent as the number of

 particles in a system increased. Feynman diagrams posed no problem for a Harvard

 Ph.D. like Kohn who was both well trained in quantum mechanics and familiar with

 quantum field theory from Julian Schwinger's lectures. He also had a ready-made

 problem: his own desire to understand the success of the Kohn-Luttinger effective

 mass equation from a many-body point of view. A breakthrough paper by Goldstone

 (1957) provided all the technical details he needed.

 Walter became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1957, and he had

 arranged a sabbatical leave from Carnegie Tech for the 1957-1958 academic year.

 He spent the fall of 1957 at the Physics Department of the University of Pennsylvania,

 and it was there that he wrote up Kohn (1958), his first contribution to the many-body

 revolution—a diagrammatic analysis of the static dielectric constant of an insulator.

 At the end of this paper, Kohn acknowledges "stimulating conversations" with Keith

 Brueckner, a senior member of Penn's Physics Department whose own thinking about

 the quantum many-body problem had stimulated Goldstone's work.64 Brueckner, in

 turn, led an effort by his Penn colleagues to hire Kohn away from Carnegie Tech. A

 similar effort was mounted by the Physics Department of the University of Chicago.65

 Kohn took these overtures seriously, and Carnegie Tech responded by awarding him

 tenure and promoting him to the rank of Professor with a substantial increase in

 salary.66 Walter made his decision to return to Pittsburgh while completing his sabbati

 cal and spending the spring 1958 semester with Harry Jones and his group at the Depart

 ment of Mathematics of the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London.

 The many-body revolution introduced new ideas into solid-state physics like the

 quasi-particles of Landau (1956) and new objects for study like the one-particle and

 two-particle Green functions exploited by Galitskii and Migdal (1958).67 The phys
 ical and mathematical elegance of this subject caused some solid-state theorists to

 63 There is no definitive history of this revolution. Different points of view can be found in Pines (1961),

 Chapter 8 of Hoddeson et al. ( 1992), Gell-Mann ( 1996), Brueckner (2000), and Kaiser (2005). Perçus ( 1963)
 is the proceedings of a January 28-29,1957, meeting convened at the Stevens Institute of Technology "for

 the purpose of bringing together workers in the numerous rapidly moving fields of many-particle physics".

 The contributions to this volume (particularly the roundtable discussions) paint a vivid picture of the first

 months of the revolution. The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory of superconductivity appeared later the

 same year, but Bardeen et al. (1957) makes no explicit use of field theoretic methods.

 64 Keith Allen Brueckner (1924-) studied mathematics at the University of Minnesota before earning his

 Ph.D. in physics (1950) from the University of California (Berkeley) under the supervision of Robert Serber.

 As a professor at Indiana University and the University of Pennsylvania in the 1950s, Brueckner made many

 significant contributions to the theories of nuclear matter and the electron gas. In 1959, he became the first

 member of the Physics Department at the newly created University of California, San Diego. Brueckner

 divided his professional activities between academia, industry, and the government until his retirement from
 UCSD in 1991.

 65 WKP. October 7, 1957, letter from Frederick Reif to Walter Kohn.

 66 WKP. January 29,1958, letter from Carnegie Tech President J.C. Warner to Walter Kohn.

 67 The Green functions used in many-body theory are the ground-state expectation values (averages over

 the ground-state many-body wave function) of various quantum mechanical operators. The Green function

 for the Schrödinger partial differential equation, Eq. (2), is related to some of the Green functions used in

 many-body theory when all the forces between the particles are turned off.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 803

 focus their attention exclusively on problems where many-body effects dominate the

 physics.68 Kohn did not follow this particular path because not every problem that

 interested him demanded a many-body analysis. For example, a theorem due to Bloch

 ( 1928) demonstrated that the eigenfunctions and energy eigenvalues of the Schrödinger

 band for a spatially periodic system like a crystal have the form

 ^(r) = exp(ik ■ r)wk(r) and E(k), (5)

 where the three quantum numbers collected in the vector k = (kx, ky, kz) are real
 numbers confined to a finite volume of the three-dimensional k-space called the Bril

 louin zone, and the function Kk(r) has the spatial periodicity of the crystal. While at

 Imperial College, Kohn performed an extensive study of the properties of the Bloch

 solutions when k is a complex-valued vector. This allowed him to make precise state

 ments about the exponential decay of a class of spatially localized wave functions first

 introduced by Wannier (1937). In a separate project, Kohn analyzed the motion of

 Bloch electrons in a magnetic field with more rigor than had been done previously.

 He succeeded to show that an approximation for this problem first made by Peierls

 (1933) had a much broader range of validity than previously thought.

 Kohn's Imperial College projects in mathematical physics69 did not disengage him

 from the more practical aspects of solid-state physics. For example, he was invited
 to the 1958 International Conference on Semiconductors in Rochester, New York,

 to report his many-body analysis of the effective mass equation for shallow impurity

 states. While there, he attended a session devoted to the calculation of energy bands and

 listened to a talk by fellow theorist James Phillips. Kohn asked Phillips whether he was

 doing "physics or magic" because Phillips' "pseudopotential method" reproduced the

 results of much more elaborate band-structure calculations for silicon and germanium

 using only three parameters for each (Bassani and Tosi 1988). Similarly, Kohn paid

 careful attention when the phonon spectrum of a crystal was measured for the first
 time (Brockhouse and Stewart 1958) and also when the Fermi surface of a metal was

 measured for the first time (Pippard 1957; Gold 1958).70

 These experimental breakthroughs stimulated Walter's scientific imagination, and

 he soon completed a simple and elegant analysis which predicted that the phonon spec

 trum of a metal possesses observable "anomalies" which depend only on the existence

 and shape of the Fermi surface. More precisely, the Fermi surface locates a singularity

 in a linear response function which describes the ability of the conduction electrons

 to screen the ions which move during a lattice vibration. The short communication
 that described what came to be known as "Kohn anomalies" was one of four manu

 scripts he submitted for publication during the 1958-1959 academic year at Carnegie

 68 Samuel F. Edwards, another Schwinger Ph.D. student who switched from nuclear physics to solid-state

 physics, has remarked that "the Green function formalism is very good to write down solutions in abstract

 exact form, which gives unassailable answers when used in comparatively simple situations" (Edwards
 1998).

 69 Kohn became an Associate Editor of the Journal of Mathematical Physics in 1961.

 70 A phonon is a quantized lattice vibration in a crystal. The Fermi surface is the constant energy surface

 in the Bloch k-space for the most energetic electrons in a metal.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 804 A. Zangwill

 Tech (Kohn 1959a,b,c; Ambegaokar and Kohn 1959). Two longer papers described

 the results of the projects begun at Imperial College and the paper co-authored by his

 Ph.D. student Vinay Ambegaokar reported a new sum rule for insulators. The Kohn

 anomaly and Ambegaokar papers appeared in the same issue of Physical Review Let

 ters, a journal spun off from the Physical Review to provide "speedy publication" of

 "new discoveries of major importance and for significant contributions to highly active

 and rapidly changing lines of research in basic physics" (PRL64).

 Ambegaokar recalls that (Ambegaokar 2003, VA13)

 Before going on leave [to Pennsylvania], Walter advised me to take a second

 course in quantum mechanics taught by Gian-Carlo Wick even though I had not

 finished a first course.. .Upon his return [from England], he suggested a research

 project that was very much to my taste. We met for at least an hour a week

 and his supervision was both precise and constructive. He thought hard during

 our meetings to keep the project moving along.. .[Walter] could be formal as a

 person, but he opened up considerably with people he respected. He got me a

 summer job at Bell Labs and we played tennis together there frequently.

 Another student, James Langer, was an undergraduate physics major at Carnegie Tech

 from 1951 to 1955. Langer never took a formal course from Kohn, but in his senior

 year, "Walter somehow became my private instructor for a year-long supervised read

 ing course. We went through the first edition of Leonard Schiff's classic text Quantum

 Mechanics essentially cover to cover" (Langer 2003). Langer won a Marshall Schol

 arship to attend graduate school in Great Britain and Kohn directed him to Rudolf

 Peierls at the University of Birmingham.71 Langer earned his Ph.D. for a problem in

 nuclear physics and then returned to Carnegie Tech as an Instructor in the fall of 1958.

 For the next year, he and Seymour Vosko (a recent Ph.D. student of Gian-Carlo Wick)

 functioned as postdoctoral fellows in Kohn's theoretical solid-state physics group.

 The problem Kohn set for Langer and Vosko was the shielding of a positively

 charged impurity embedded in a metal host. This is the analog of the problem Walter

 had studied previously for the case of a dielectric host. Kohn's many-body perturbation

 theory calculation for the dielectric case confirmed the classical result that the Coulomb

 potential q/r at distance r from a point charge q in vacuum changes to q/icr when

 the point charge is embedded in an insulator with dielectric constant k. Mott (1936)

 studied the screening of a point charge in a metal in connection with a calculation

 of the electrical resistivity of dilute metal alloys. He used semi-classical Thomas

 Fermi theory (March 1957) and showed that the potential q/r in vacuum changes
 to (q/r)exp(-r/l) in a metal. The screening length I depends on the density of
 conduction electrons and takes the value 1-2 Â in a typical metal. Friedel (1958)

 revisited this problem using a scattering theory method and found that the disturbance

 of the electronic charge density at a distance r from the impurity charge, 8n(r), varied

 „ , , cos(2kFr + A) ^
 Sn(r) oc =■ , (6)

 ri

 71 In this way, Langer became the Peierls Ph.D. student Kohn would have been if he had not gone to
 Harvard to work with Julian Schwinger (WK13b).

 as

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 805

 where kp and A are two constants. The 1 /r3 decay of this function falls off much more

 slowly with distance than the exponential variation predicted by Mott's theory and thus

 implies that the effect of isolated impurities might not be completely screened at the

 position of nearby atoms. The oscillatory behavior in Eq. (6) is an intrinsically quantum

 effect. Kohn did not fully believe Friedel's result and therefore asked his postdocs

 to attack the problem themselves (WK13b). Much to his surprise, Langer and Vosko

 (1959) fully confirmed Friedel's formula using diagrammatic many-body perturbation

 theory.72 Kohn promptly asked Vosko to apply these results to a quantitative calculation

 of the magnitude of the nuclear magnetic resonance signal in copper metal when small

 amounts of impurity atoms are introduced (Kohn and Vosko 1960). Confirmation

 of the Kohn-Vosko theory came from comparison with experiments performed by
 Theodore Rowland at the Union Carbide Metals Company (Rowland 1960). Kohn
 knew Rowland from his Harvard days when Rowland was a Ph.D. student of Nicolaas

 Bloembergen.

 The summer of 1959 reunited Walter and Quin Luttinger at Bell Laboratories.

 Once again, the pair produced an interesting paper (Kohn and Luttinger 1960), and

 once again, Kohn grappled with an offer from Keith Brueckner to leave Carnegie

 Tech. This time, however, Brueckner was not soliciting on behalf of the University of

 Pennsylvania. He had resigned from Penn a few months previously, and his mission

 now was to convince Walter to help him create the Physics Department at the soon

 to-open University of California at La Jolla (later San Diego). Earlier in the year,

 Brueckner had flown Kohn to the beautiful site of the proposed campus to meet and

 hear the vision of its principal advocate, Roger Revelle, the Director of the Scripps

 Institute for Oceanography. The salary was attractive and La Jolla seemed like an ideal

 place to relocate his wife and two elementary school-aged daughters.73 Moreover, Ed

 Creutz, the man who had hired Kohn at Carnegie Tech and who was now Vice President

 of Research at the General Atomics Division of the General Dynamics Corporation

 in San Diego, had recently concluded a consulting contract with him. This time, the

 allure was too great and Walter agreed to sign on. His only condition was that Keith

 Brueckner must serve as chair of the new department (KB85).

 Walter's research group had grown to include three Ph.D. students and four postdoc

 toral fellows by the fall of 1959 when he submitted his resignation to the President of

 Carnegie Tech. His senior student, Vinay Ambegaokar, was one semester from gradu

 ation. His junior students, Larry Glasser and Edwin Woll, Jr., were not too far from the

 beginning of their research so Walter invited them to join him in La Jolla. Woll chose

 to accompany his advisor; Glasser remained in Pittsburgh and finished his degree with

 Assistant Professor J. Michael Radcliffe (LG13). Postdocs Hiroshi Hasegawa and

 Robert Howard had arrived the previous fall from Tokyo and Oxford, respectively,

 and worked together on a problem motivated by Kohn's experience with shallow

 donor states in semiconductors (Hasegawa 2003). Hasegawa accompanied Kohn to

 72 Langer and Vosko used a formulation of many-body perturbation theory due to Hubbard (1957).

 73 The regents of the University of California committed unprecedented financial resources so UCSD could

 recruit senior scientists like Kohn to its nascent faculty. In its first few years, 50 percent of new faculty

 hires at UCSD were made at the full professor level or above, as opposed to 15 percent for the University
 of California system as a whole (Kerr 2001).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 San Diego while Howard moved on to a permanent position at the National Bureau of

 Standards in Washington, DC. Postdocs Emile Daniel and Anthony Houghton were

 former Ph.D. students of Jacques Friedel in Paris and Geoffrey Chester (in the group

 of Rudolf Peierls) in Birmingham, respectively. Both began research projects in metal

 alloy physics before moving to the west coast. Kohn himself taught a graduate course

 in advanced solid-state physics and gave a talk on "The Electron Theory of Solids"

 at a one-day "Solid-State Symposium" in New York City sponsored by the American

 Institute of Physics for the benefit of science writers from national magazines and

 806 A. Zangwill

 newspapers.74

 Even before leaving Pittsburgh, Walter worked hard to recruit faculty members to

 his new Physics Department in San Diego. He had immediate luck with three Bell

 Laboratories scientists, the statistical mechanician Harry Suhl, the nuclear magnetic

 resonance experimenter George Feher, and the superconductivity experimenter Bernd
 Matthias.75 In an October 26, 1959, letter to Keith Brueckner, Kohn laments Quin

 Luttinger's decision to choose Columbia University over UCSD and suggests several

 solid-state and/or low-temperature physicists whom Brueckner should approach.76

 On the theoretical side, he proposed J. Robert Schrieffer, the junior author of a break

 through paper on the theory of superconductivity published in 1957, Volker Heine, a

 specialist in the electronic structure of metals from the University of Cambridge, and

 Philippe Nozières, an expert in many-body theory trained at Princeton by David Pines.

 On the experimental side, he suggested his old Harvard friend and magnetic resonance

 practitioner, Charles Slichter, and the liquid helium experts William Vinen and Russell

 Donnelly. As it turned out, none of these people joined the UCSD faculty.77

 Kohn's arrival in San Diego in January 1960 coincided with his election as a Fellow

 of the American Physical Society (APS), the professional organization of American

 physicists.78 Resettlement and administrative issues dominated his time at first, so

 Kohn used his students, postdocs, and short-term visitors to pursue a research agenda

 now focused primarily on the physics of metals and alloys.79 A new postdoctoral fel

 low, Stephen Nettel, studied the spatial arrangement of electron spins in the ground
 state of a homogeneous and non-interacting electron gas, a much-studied hypotheti

 cal system composed of a collection of mobile electrons (with their mutual Coulomb

 interaction turned off) distributed throughout a uniform and static distribution of elec

 74 The symposium was organized by Conyers Herring from Bell Telephone Laboratories. Besides Kohn,
 the lecturers were John Fisher from the General Electric Research Laboratory, Jack Goldman from (by

 then) the Ford Motor Company Research Laboratory, and Frank Herman from RCA Laboratories. WKP.

 October 21,1959, letter from Conyers Herring to Walter Kohn.

 75 Suhl and Feher arrived in San Diego in 1960. Matthias waited a year because "during the first year there

 will be too many administrative chores" (Feher 2002).

 76 WKR October 26,1959, letter from Walter Kohn to Keith Brueckner.

 77 Offers were also proffered to (and declined by) the French magnetic resonance expert, Anatole Abragam

 (Abragam 1989) and Kohn's old Harvard friend Ben Mottelson, a nuclear physicist at Bohr's Institute for

 Theoretical Physics. WKP. October 9,1959, letter from Keith Brueckner to Ben Mottelson.

 78 An APS Fellow is judged by his peers to have made "exceptional contributions to the physics enterprise".
 In 1960, the total number of Fellows was 1,653 out of a total society membership of 16,157 (AMP).

 79 A visiting French scientist, Jacques des Cloizeaux, arrived in the fall of 1960 and worked on a statistical

 mechanics problem.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 807

 trically neutralizing positive charge (Kohn and Nettel 1960). Emile Daniel and former

 postdoc Seymour Vosko used many-body perturbation theory to study the sharpness

 of the Fermi surface for a fully interacting electron gas at zero temperature, and Tony

 Houghton studied the specific heat and spin susceptibility of a dilute alloy (Daniel

 and Vosko 1960; Houghton 1961).80 The numerical calculations of Daniel and Vosko

 confirmed Quin Luttinger's analytic demonstration that electron-electron interactions

 do not destroy the sharpness of the Fermi surface of an electron gas. This result was

 reported by Luttinger at a (retrospectively famous) meeting attended by Kohn and

 Vosko on "The Fermi Surface" held at Cooperstown, New York on August 22-24,

 1960. (Luttinger 1960; Harrison and Webb 1960).

 The La Jolla campus of the University of California opened for business in the

 fall of 1960. There were no undergraduates (until 1964), but sixteen physics graduate

 students arrived and began taking classes. Walter Kohn taught a course from 4:30p.m.

 to 6:00p.m. on Thursdays and from 9:30a.m. to 11:00a.m. on Saturdays using the

 textbooks Thermodynamics by Callen (1960) and Elements of Statistical Mechanics

 by ter Haar (1954).81 On February 1, 1961, Kohn flew to New York City to attend

 the annual joint meeting of the American Physical Society and the American Asso

 ciation of Physics Teachers. He was there to accept the 1961 Oliver Buckley Solid

 State Physics Prize "for having extended and elucidated the foundations of the electron

 theory of solids" (Anonymous 1961). This prize, endowed in 1952 by Bell Telephone

 Laboratories and named in honor its former president and board chairman, is awarded

 each year by the APS to "recognize and encourage outstanding theoretical or experi

 mental contributions to solid-state physics". Some measure of the esteem carried by

 this honor may be judged from the fact that four of the eight persons who won the

 Buckley Prize before Kohn later won a Nobel Prize (William Shockley, John Bardeen,

 Clifford Shull, and Nicolaas Bloembergen).

 Sometime in the spring of 1961, Keith Brueckner announced that he was stepping

 down as the chair of the Physics Department after 1 year of service. He had accepted

 the position of vice president and technical director of the Institute for Defense Analy
 ses in Washington, DC (KB94). Therefore, against his expressed desire and much
 to his chagrin, Walter Kohn found himself in the position of chair for the 1961 fall

 semester. As a department head at a new university, Kohn enjoyed opportunities and

 faced challenges that do not ordinarily arise for administrators at established universi

 ties. He was permitted to hire a dozen new faculty members (which doubled the size of

 his department), but the offices and laboratories he could offer new recruits occupied

 temporary space that would soon revert to the Scripps Institution of Oceanography.

 One interesting hire was his friend Norman Rostoker, who had turned himself into a

 plasma physicist at General Atomics since he and Walter had collaborated at Carnegie

 Tech. The senior faculty members recruited by Brueckner and Kohn had excellent

 research records, but many came from industrial or government laboratories with no

 teaching experience. It was Walter's responsibility to ensure that competent instructors

 80 A "sharp" Fermi surface has the property that a quantum state labeled by the quantum number wave

 vector k is occupied by an electron if that wave vector lies inside the volume of the k-space enclosed by
 the Fermi surface and unoccupied if k lies outside that volume.

 81 The unusual hours were chosen for "the convenience of students employed in industry" (UCSDA).

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 808 A. Zangwill

 Fig. 8 Walter Kohn at age 39
 Fig. 8 Walter Kohn at age 39
 (1962). Courtesy of Walter Kohn
 (1962). Courtesy of Walter Kohn
 and the John Simon
 and the John Simon

 Guggenheim Foundation
 Guggenheim Foundation

 \

 staffed the courses offered to the first few classes of graduate students. At the same
 time, he maintained a research group of never less than five persons (graduate stu
 dents, postdoctoral fellows, and visitors), served as an Associate Editor of the Journal
 of Mathematical Physics, team-taught a course on "Advanced Solid State Physics,"

 presented a university-wide lecture on "New Viewpoints in the Theory of Matter," and
 submitted four research papers.82

 Within his group, Edwin Woll, Jr., Kohn's Ph.D. student from Carnegie Tech was

 making good progress with semi-quantitative calculations of Kohn's phonon anomaly
 in the metals aluminum, sodium, and lead. Walter also began working with Michael
 Greene and Max Luming, two Ph.D. candidates from the 1960 crop of UCSD graduate
 students, and Chanchal Majumdar, a student from the 1961 class. Greene was tasked

 to use scattering theory to compute the resistivity of liquid alkali metals. Max Luming

 involved himself in calculations of the orbital susceptibility of dilute metal alloys but
 switched to theoretical particle physics after the publication of Kohn and Luming
 (1963).83 Majumdar began a project on the theory of positron annihilation in metals.
 Overall, Kohn acquired a reputation among potential theory students as a supervisor
 with very high standards who could assign a thesis problem that might take a very
 long time to complete (PF13) (Fig. 8).

 At the beginning of the fall 1962 semester, Walter learned that his colleague Norman

 Kroll would take over as Physics chair beginning in the fall 1963 semester. Immedi
 ately, he made an application to the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation
 for funds to support a recuperative leave for the fall 1963 semester (Hohenberg et al.

 1990). His plan was to spend that time at the Physics Department of the École Normale
 Supérieure in Paris (GF62). This was an ideal place to get back to full-time research.
 It was also an ideal place to renew his personal and scientific ties with three specialists

 82 Kohn taught semiconductor physics and the transport and optical properties of metals for 5 weeks in the
 fall of 1962. His April 1962 campus-wide lecture was part of a series delivered by senior UCSD professors
 from various departments (LB13).

 83 Luming (later Luming Ren) switched his Ph.D. supervisor from Kohn to Assistant Professor David
 Wong because he felt that particle physics was "more fundamental" than solid-state physics (MR13).

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 809

 in his own field of theoretical solid-state physics: Jacques Friedel, Pierre-Gilles de

 Gennes, and Philippe Nozières.

 Kohn's fellowship application proposed that he would study the interaction of elec

 trons and phonons in metals (GF62). This was a hot topic. The collisions between

 electrons and the particle-like phonons had long been recognized as important for a
 proper description of the electrical conductivity of metals (Ziman 1960). However,

 only 5 years earlier, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and J. Robert Schrieffer had pro

 posed a many-electron wave function for a superconductor based on a model where

 the electron-phonon interaction mediates an effective attractive interaction between

 pairs of electrons with opposite spin (Bardeen et al. 1957). Moreover, barely a year

 earlier, neutron scattering experiments had confirmed Kohn's own prediction of anom

 alies in the phonon spectra of metals (Kohn 1959c). Accordingly, Kohn proposed to

 spend the fall of 1963 generalizing the theory of Kohn anomalies. For good measure,

 he also proposed to develop a theory of the effect of electron-phonon interactions on

 the optical properties of metals.

 The Guggenheim Foundation responded positively to Walter's application in the

 spring of 1963. This news must have been a great stimulant because he quickly com

 pleted a calculation which achieved "a new and more comprehensive characterization
 of the insulating state of matter" (Kohn 1964). The fundamental difference between

 the conducting state and the insulating state had been an issue for Kohn since his Bell

 Labs inspired work with Luttinger on electrical transport (Kohn and Luttinger 1957;

 Luttinger and Kohn 1958). Subsequent papers on the behavior of a point charge in
 a dielectric, the nature of Wannier's spatially localized states in solids, and the elec

 tromagnetic properties of insulators continued this theme (Kohn 1958,1959a; Ambe

 gaokar and Kohn 1960). His new work took seriously a suggestion by Nevill Mott

 (1949) that the many-body wave function of an insulator should be fundamentally

 different from the many-body wave function of a conductor. Kohn exploited a ground

 breaking paper that focused attention on the gauge principle for the electromagnetic
 vector potential in quantum mechanics (Aharonov and Böhm 1959) and used a char

 acteristically elegant method to calculate the electrical conductivity of a ring threaded

 by a line of magnetic flux. The result was a proof that the spatial organization of the

 electrons in an insulator corresponds to a many-body wave function that breaks up

 into disconnected regions that do not overlap with one another. The published paper,

 Kohn (1964), has been called a "a mine of ideas and methods" by no less an expert

 than Walter's old Harvard classmate and Bell Laboratories colleague Philip Anderson
 (PA99).84

 Now 40 years old, Walter Kohn was a mature solid-state physicist whose scientific

 talent and taste in problems had produced results that were highly valued by his peers.

 Two of those peers, David Pines and Charles Kittel, highlighted Kohn's work four

 and eight times, respectively, in their (now classic) 1963 graduate level textbooks

 Elementary Excitations in Solids and Quantum Theory of Solids. By the end of that

 84 Philip Warren Anderson (b. 1923) earned his Ph.D. in 1949 under the supervision of John van Vleck at

 Harvard University. He worked at Bell Telephone Laboratories before moving to Princeton University in
 1984. He shared the 1977 Nobel Prize in Physics with Nevill Mott and John Van Vleck for "fundamental

 theoretical investigations of the electronic structure of magnetic and disordered systems" (PA77).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 810 A. Zangwill

 summer, Walter's manuscript on the "Theory of the Insulating State" was ready for

 submission, and he had only to review some professional correspondence before he

 could depart for Paris. In retrospect, the most important letter on his desk came from

 Lu Jeu Sham, a graduating Ph.D. student from John Ziman's group at the University of

 Cambridge whom Kohn had earlier recruited to become a postdoctoral fellow. Kohn
 had written to Sham to inform him about his Paris sabbatical and to urge him to come

 to San Diego as originally planned. Kohn proposed that Sham work on liquid metals

 with graduate student Mike Greene until he (Kohn) returned to campus. The return

 letter from Sham agreed to this plan.85

 4 Alloys in Paris

 Walter Kohn's base of operations in Paris was the Ecole Normale Supérieure, one of the

 elite grandes écoles of the higher education system in France. His host was the 31 -year

 old Philippe Nozières, an expert in many-body theory who had just collaborated with

 Joaquin Luttinger to derive Landau's theory of the Fermi liquid using diagrammatic

 perturbation theory (Nozières and Luttinger 1962; Luttinger and Nozières 1962).86

 Walter began his research activities, but he did not work on the electron-phonon

 interaction as he had proposed to the Guggenheim Foundation. Some months earlier, he

 had changed his mind and decided to think more deeply about the electronic structure

 of disordered metal alloys. More precisely, he asked himself how one might best
 describe the behavior of the electrons in a bulk metal composed of different types
 of atoms where there is at least some randomness in the identities of the atoms that

 occupy the sites of the underlying periodic lattice.87

 Unlike most theoretical solid-state physicists in the United States, Kohn had fol

 lowed developments in alloy physics for more than a decade because of the intense

 experimental interest in this subject by his faculty colleagues in the Physics and Met

 allurgy Departments at Carnegie Tech. On the other hand, his personal contribution
 to the field consisted of only two published papers and both concerned dilute alloys

 like AxBi_x where the fraction x of A-type atoms dissolved in a host metal made
 of B-type atoms was very small (Kohn and Vosko 1960; Kohn and Luming 1963).
 He now turned his attention to concentrated alloys where the populations of A-type

 atoms and B-type atoms could be comparable. Philippe Nozières was not particulary

 interested in alloys (he was working on liquid helium at the time), but a short 30 km

 train ride took Kohn to the suburban campus of the University of Paris in Orsay where

 his old friend Jacques Friedel maintained his research group. Friedel was an acknowl

 85 WKP. June 10,1963, letter from Lu Jeu Sham to Walter Kohn.

 86 Philippe Nozières (b. 1932) graduated from the Ecole Normale Supérieure (ENS) in 1955 and earned

 his Ph.D. 2 years later from the University of Paris, albeit under the supervision of David Pines at Princeton

 University. He spent a decade at the ENS before moving to the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) in Grenoble.

 He also lectures at the Collège de France in his capacity (since 1983) as Professor of Statistical Physics
 (Nozières 2012).

 87 In July, Kohn had written to an editor at Academic Press confirming his interest to contribute to a book

 about "Impurities in Metals" and indicating that he would be "working in this field" during his stay in Paris.

 WKP. August 6,1963, letter from Alan R. Liss (Vice President, Academic Press, Inc.) to Walter Kohn.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 811

 edged expert in the theory of metals and alloys.88 Also present in Orsay at the time

 were André Guinier, an experimentalist renowned for his X-ray diffraction studies of

 alloys, and Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, a theorist working on a set of problems he would

 soon collect and discuss in his book, Superconductivity in Metals and Alloys (1966).89

 Kohn immersed himself in the literature of metals and alloys and soon discovered

 that two seemingly contradictory points of view dominated discussions of their elec

 tronic structure. I pause here to sketch the field as he found it, because his desire

 to reconcile these points of view was the immediate trigger for the creation of den

 sity functional theory. The fundamental problem was to calculate the eigenfunctions

 and energy eigenvalues for a binary alloy where A-type atoms replace a fraction of

 the atoms in a perfect B-type crystal. If the replaced B-type atoms are chosen ran

 domly, the resulting structure is no longer periodic and the Bloch theorem which

 underlies conventional band-structure theory is no longer valid.90 By the end of the

 1950s, approximate ways to analyze this situation had been proposed by Nordheim
 (1931), Jones (1934), and Friedel (1954). All of them acknowledge a debt to the emi

 nent English physical metallurgist William Hume-Rothery and his 1931 book, The
 Metallic State.

 The first half of Hume-Rothery (1931) reviews years of experimental effort to

 systematize the electric, thermoelectric, and thermionic properties of metals and

 alloys. The second half reviews the classical and quantum mechanical theories that

 had been devised to explain some of these properties. A typical result reported in
 The Metallic State was the observation that many disordered substitutional alloys

 A^Bi-j exhibit an electrical resistivity that varies with the A-type atom concentra

 tion as x{\ - x). Nordheim (1931) explained this by replacing the real alloy, where

 dissimilar potentials Va(t) and Vs(r) act on the valence electrons near lattice sites

 occupied by A-type atoms and B-type atoms, respectively, by a fictitious virtual crys

 tal where the valence electrons near every lattice site feel the same average potential,
 V(r) = xV^ir) + (1 - x)Vß{r). By construction, the potential energy function for
 the virtual crystal is periodic and any band-structure method becomes applicable to

 find the eigenfunctions and energy eigenvalues (Muto 1938).

 Jones (1934) was concerned with some empirical "rules" deduced by Hume
 Rothery which related the crystal structure of certain alloys to their "electron con
 centration," i.e., the ratio of the total number of valence electrons to the total number

 of atoms in the entire crystal. Jones focused on the dilute limit and made two indepen

 88 Jacques Friedel (b. 1921) is a fourth-generation French scientist who was educated at the École Polytech

 nique (1944-1946) and the École Nationale Supérieure des Mines (1946-1948) before earning his Ph.D. in

 1952 under the supervision of Nevill Mott at the University of Bristol. Friedel began his academic career at

 the Sorbonne, but moved in 1959 to the Orsay campus of the University of Paris, now the University of Paris

 Sud. Friedel's life-long interests in metallurgy and the physics of metals resulted in over 200 theoretical

 publications, most of them characterized by the use of simple models and elementary mathematics. Kohn

 and Friedel met at a July 1953 Gordon Conference in Laconia, New Hampshire devoted to the Chemistry

 and Physics of Metals (Kohn 2012).

 89 Pierre-Gilles de Gennes (1932-2007) changed fields after the publication of his superconductivity book

 and won the 1991 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the statistical physics of liquid crystals and
 polymers.

 90 Alloys of this kind are called disordered. The Bloch theorem remains valid for ordered alloys where the

 A-type atoms form a spatially periodic structure of their own.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 812 A. Zangwill

 Fig. 9 Jacques Friedel
 Fig. 9 Jacques Friedel
 pioneered a spatially local .
 pioneered a spatially local
 description of the electronic
 description of the electronic

 structure of alloys. Courtesy of
 structure of alloys. Courtesy of
 the AIP Emilio Segrè Visual llP^.
 the AIP Emilio Segrè Visual
 Archive In«
 Archive

 g^^-% ■'^1

 09

 dent assumptions. First, he used a nearly free electron description where the energy
 spectrum and wave functions of the host B-type metal was presumed to differ only
 slightly from the energy spectrum and wave functions of a collection of completely
 free electrons. Second, he made a rigid-band approximation which supposed that the
 sole effect of the A-type atoms was to contribute their valence electrons to the pre
 existing "sea" of valence electrons contributed by the B-type atoms. This implied
 that the electronic structure of the alloy was identical to the electronic structure of
 the host metal except that a few energy states were occupied (empty) in the alloy
 compared to the host if the valence of the A-type atoms was larger (smaller) than the
 valence of the B-type atoms.91 Using quantum mechanical perturbation theory, Jones

 estimated the change in total electronic energy when the Fermi surface of the rigid

 band alloy contacts the Brillouin zone boundary for different crystal structures. In this
 way, he was able to rationalize the Hume-Rothery's electron concentration rules in a

 semi-quantitative way.

 The virtual crystal and rigid-band approximations share a "delocalized" view of

 the electrons in a metal alloy. This means that each electron in the conduction band
 occupies an eigenstate whose Bloch-like wave function has a nonzero amplitude on
 every atomic site of the alloy [see the left side of Eq. (5)]. This perspective gained
 popularity among practitioners because its successes were detailed in the first two
 research monographs devoted exclusively to metal physics: The Theory of Metals
 (1936) by Alan Wilson and The Theory of the Properties of Metals and Alloys (1936)
 by Nevill Mott and Harry Jones.

 A rather different, "localized" point of view was developed by Friedel (1954)

 (Fig. 9). He considered an alloy where AZy is the valence difference between the
 solute A-type atoms and the solvent B-type atoms and recognized that each A-type

 91 This follows from the eigenstate occupation rules of quantum mechanics which dictate that states are
 populated by electrons in order of increasing energy beginning with the lowest.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 813

 atom with its valence electrons removed amounts to a point-like impurity with charge

 A Zy with respect to the host crystal. The screening of this impurity [discussed ear
 lier in connection with the work of Langer and Vosko (1959)] by the entire sea of

 conduction electrons implies that electronic charge density accumulates in the imme

 diate vicinity of the A-type atoms. The delocalized electrons of the host scatter from

 these local charge accumulations and Friedel used perturbation theory to show that the

 energy shift of each scattering state (with respect to the Fermi energy) was the same as

 the energy shift predicted by the rigid-band model. He went on to use this "local" per

 spective to rationalize other experimental trends summarized in Hume-Rothery's book.
 An even more localized, covalent bond approach to metals was advocated by Pauling
 (1949).

 The semi-quantitative nature of all existing theories of alloy electronic structure was

 criticized by John Slater at an October 1955 conference devoted to the theory of alloy

 phases.92 Speaking to an audience of physicists, physical chemists, metallurgists, and

 crystallographers, Slater opened the conference by remarking that (Slater 1956)

 The metallurgist expects the physicist to be able to apply wave mechanics to

 the problem of the cohesive energy of metals. By this one means the energy
 of the metal as a function of the positions of the nuclei...Unfortunately, the

 errors in our present calculations of the energies of the isolated atoms and of
 the atoms combined into a metallic crystal are both considerably larger than

 the energy difference between the two, which is the cohesive energy which we

 hope to find...This theory is not yet in a position to make calculations of the

 accuracy which the metallurgists need and which they have been led to believe

 that they have been getting. Metallurgists have been understandably anxious to

 get real guidance from physicists regarding their problems. A few papers writ

 ten by theoreticians have led them to think that this guidance could be actually

 given in a quantitatively satisfactory form. For instance, a large literature has

 grown up as a result of papers [published] in the middle 1930s by Jones...and
 Pauling has discussed metallic cohesion and ferromagnetism using methods that

 seem simple and quantitative. I wish to state my very firm opinion that these

 theories, as far as they pretend to be quantitative, are based on approxima
 tions which are not really justified. They may have qualitative truth in them,

 but they do not represent quantitative conclusions firmly based on fundamental

 theory.

 It is perhaps unsurprising that Slater's research group at the time was exploring the

 quantitative accuracy of his own "augmented plane wave" method for band-structure
 calculations (Slater 1953).

 92 John Clarke Slater (1900-1976) was the chair of the Physics Department at the Massachusetts Institute of

 Technology (MIT) from 1930 to 1951. He wrote an experimental Ph.D. thesis at Harvard and then traveled

 to Europe where he made several important theoretical contributions to the early development of quantum

 mechanics. Dissatisfaction with "formal theory" led him to develop a large research group at MIT devoted

 to solving the Schrödinger equation numerically to calculate the physical properties of atoms, molecules,

 and solids. It was Slater's book Introduction to Chemical Physics that was purchased and read by the young
 Walter Kohn while he awaited release from internment in wartime Canada (Morse 1982).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 814 A. Zangwill

 In Paris in the fall of 1963, Walter Kohn was in an excellent position to learn the lat

 est developments in both the localized and delocalized approaches to alloy theory. The

 preceding January, Jacques Friedel and André Guinier had completed editing Metallic

 Solid Solutions, a book which documented the proceedings of an international sym

 posium on the electronic and atomic structure of alloys held in Orsay in July 1962.93

 In one invited paper, Stanley Raimes of Imperial College noted that Fermi surface

 measurements for the noble metals invalidated the nearly free electron assumption

 used by Jones (1934), but did not quash the rigid-band approximation itself (Raimes

 1963). Similarly, an invited paper by Frank Blatt of Michigan State University asserted

 that a broad range of transport measurements showed that "the rigid-band model is a

 good approximation to the electronic structure of dilute alloys" (Blatt 1963). On the

 other hand, Blatt continued, "it is difficult to overstate the importance" of Friedel's

 local screening model for the interpretation of not only resistivity and thermoelectric

 data for alloys, but also for data obtained from measurements of impurity diffusion,

 positron annihilation, and the Knight shift". Friedel himself reported an extension of

 his previous work to the case of transition-metal atom impurities where screening

 occurs by the occupation of atomic-like orbitals spread out in energy into "virtual
 bound-state resonances" (Friedel 1963).

 The most general conclusion to be drawn from the papers collected in Metallic

 Solid Solutions was that some observations were best understood assuming that the

 conduction electrons of an alloy are delocalized through the volume of the crystal while

 other observations were best understood assuming that the most relevant electrons are

 localized in the immediate vicinity of the solute atoms. At least two prominent met

 allurgists regarded these points of view as complementary rather than contradictory.

 In the fourth edition of their Structure of Metals and Alloys, William Hume-Rothery

 and Geoffrey Vincent Ray nor write (Hume-Rothery and Ray nor 1962)

 The covalency interpretation and the Brillouin zone picture each express a part

 of the truth. In the case of the diamond structure, for example, the covalency

 theory.. .gives the more correct picture of the probable cloud density of valence

 electrons in the crystal. This concept by itself ignores the fact that electrons are

 free to move in the crystal, and this freedom is emphasized by the zone theories,

 which in their turn ignore the variation of the electron-cloud density in space.

 Both concepts are required to express the whole truth.

 The complementarity expressed by this paragraph was well known to many solid-state

 physicists, and particularly so to Walter Kohn who had published a fundamental paper

 on the relationship between the delocalized Bloch functions and the localized Wannier

 functions (Kohn 1959a). Kohn had also kept up with band-structure calculations and

 could well appreciate the point John Slater had made about the absence of quantitative

 calculations in alloy theory (Callaway and Kohn 1962).

 Kohn has written about his 1963 survey of the alloy literature on several occasions.

 His 1990 account, which is closest in time to the actual events, recalls the "rough

 93 The unedited proceedings of this conference were also published in the October 1962 issue of Journal

 de Physique et le Radium. Reading them may have been the trigger for Kohn to change the subject of his
 Paris research from the electron-phonon interaction to alloy physics.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 815

 and ready" rigid-band model and then recounts a calculation of the total energy of a

 disordered alloy (Hohenberg et al. 1990). This is interesting because the total energy of

 a real metal was not a focus of research at the time. Indeed, the only paper in Metallic

 Solid Solutions concerned with total energy begins with the statement (Cohen 1963),

 In the early history of the theory of metals, calculation of the cohesive energy

 was a central concern. Apart from very considerable development of the theory

 of the electron gas, recent effort, both experimental and theoretical, has been

 focused primarily on properties of one-electron character. In the present work,

 we have returned to the study of the cohesive energy of metals.

 The remainder of this paper, written by Walter's friend Morrel Cohen from the Univer

 sity of Chicago, displays an exact formula for the total energy of a uniform (constant

 density) electron gas due to Nozières and Pines and then generalizes it to the case of an

 arbitrary "non-uniform system". Both formulae involve an integral over a parameter

 k with the quantities in the integrand computed assuming a charge on the electron of

 ke. The limits of the integral extend from k = 0 (the non-interacting electron gas) to

 k = 1 (the fully interacting electron gas).

 In his 1990 reconstruction, Kohn wrote a similar integral to compute AE, the

 difference in total energy between a real A^Bi-* alloy and the same alloy in the

 virtual crystal approximation. If ZA and ZB are the atomic numbers of the A-type and

 B-type atoms, every ion in the virtual crystal has nuclear charge Z = xZA+( l-x)ZB.

 Then, replacing AZ = ZA - ZB by kAZ, Kohn evaluated the integral of dE/dk from

 k = 0 to k = 1 to second order in AZ (keeping Z fixed). The resulting expression for

 AE depended on two quantities only: the electron density distribution of the virtual

 crystal, n(r), and the electron density distribution of the real alloy, n(r). At this point,

 "the question occurred to Kohn whether a knowledge of n(r) alone determined—at

 least in principle—the total energy" (Hohenberg et al. 1990). In other words, could the

 many qualitative successes of the Friedel point of view, which put great emphasis on
 the space-varying electronic charge density inside an alloy, be elevated to show that

 the exact charge density uniquely predicts the exact total energy?94

 It is important to understand the revolutionary nature of this question. Notwith

 standing the work of Cohen mentioned above, most solid-state theorists in the early

 94 In later recollections, Kohn emphasizes the concept of charge transfer in alloys. His Nobel Prize autobi

 ography reports that he read some "metallurgical literature in which the concept of an effective charge e* of

 an atom in an alloy was prominent, which characterized in a rough way the transfer of charge between atomic

 cells" (WK98). His Nobel Prize lecture notes similarly that "there is a transfer of charge between...unit

 cells on account of their chemical differences. The electrostatic interaction energies of these charges are an

 important part of the total energy. Thus, in considering the energetics of this system, there was a natural

 emphasis [in the literature] on the electron density distribution n(r)" (Kohn 1999). Despite these remarks, 1

 have been unable to find any significant discussion of charge transfer or "effective charge" in the pre-1963

 literature of metallurgy or metal physics. Indeed, if they mention this type of charge transfer at all, review

 articles of the period consistently refer to the same two papers—one by Mott (1937) which concerns ordered

 alloys and one by Varley (1954) which demonstrates that the electrostatic energy associated with charge

 transfer is negligible in disordered alloys. On the other hand, less than 10 years after the events narrated here,

 charge transfer became an important variable in two proposed theories of binary alloy formation (Hodges

 and Stott 1972; Miedema et al. 1973). I have found no literature of the time that emphasizes the spatially

 varying electron density distribution n(r) in alloys except in the most qualitative terms (see the passage by
 Hume-Rothery and Raynor quoted earlier in this section).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 816 A. Zangwill

 1960s thought about the total energy of a solid along the lines laid out by Freder

 ick Seitz in his widely admired textbook, The Modern Theory of Solids (1940). One

 starts with the nuclear charge eZk and the fixed position R* of each of the M nuclei

 in the system. The Coulomb potential energy of interaction between pairs of nuclei

 is a classical quantity which poses no problem to compute. The remaining energy

 terms all contribute to the Schrödinger equation for the N-electron wave function: the

 kinetic energy of the electrons, the Coulomb potential energy of interaction between

 every pair of electrons, and the Coulomb potential energy of interaction between every

 electron and every nucleus.

 It will be convenient to define u(r) as the potential energy of interaction between

 an electron at the point r and all the fixed nuclei:

 M ry

 •m—'girncp <7>

 This potential energy appears in the Schrödinger equation, as do the operators for the

 electron kinetic energy and the electron-electron potential energy,

 j.2 IV .NN 2

 lm k=1 k=l m=l Tml

 - o-ÎZZïptt (8)

 The Schrödinger equation determines the Al-electron wave function, i/r (r i, T2,..., r#),

 and then the electron density distribution,

 "(')=/ \jr*{ r, r2,..., rN) \/r( r, r2 tn) dr2 ■ ■ ■ drN. (9)

 If we omit the classical ion-ion energy, which does not involve the electrons, the total

 energy is

 E = J n(T)v(r)dr+(^\f\ir) + {^\Û\xlr), (10)

 where the last two terms are expressed as averages (expectation values) with respect

 to the ground-state wave function.

 The conventional perspective outlined in the previous paragraph shows that the

 external potential, v(r), is the only term in the Schrödinger equation which distin

 guishes one alloy from another. Therefore, v(r) determines the wave function from

 the Schrödinger equation, which in turn determines the electron density n(r) from

 Eq. (9) and the total energy E from Eq. (10). From this point of view, the energy

 amounts to afunctional of the external potential. Of course, the accuracy of the com

 puted energy depends on the quality of the choice made for the form of the M-electron

 wave function used to solve the Schrödinger equation.

 Kohn now contemplated a radical inversion of this procedure. Was it possible that

 the total energy depended only on the electron density n(r)? That is, could the total

 energy be a functional of the density alone? If so, knowledge of n(r) was sufficient to

 determine (implicitly) the external potential, the ,/V-particle wave function, and all the

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 817

 ground-state properties, including the Green functions of many-body theory! This was

 a very deep question. Walter realized he was not doing alloy theory anymore (WK12).

 5 The work of Hohenberg and Kohn

 Kohn's proposition that the total energy of an electron system was a functional of the

 density seemed preposterous on the face of it. How could knowledge of the electron

 density, which is a function of 3 variables, be sufficient to compute the total energy

 when the last two terms in Eq. (10) depend explicitly on the many-electron wave

 function, which is a function of 3N Cartesian variables? Looking for support, Walter

 asked himself whether he knew any examples where complete knowledge of n(r)

 implied complete knowledge of u(r) (Hohenberg et al. 1990). One such example was

 the elementary Schrödinger equation,

 - ^vV(r) + b(r) - £Wr) = 0. (11)

 One can always choose V(r) real for this equation. Therefore, the electron density is

 n(r) = V2(r) and the inversion we seek is a matter of algebra:

 »(r) = £ + |i^. (12)

 2m V«(r)

 Unfortunately, Eq. (11) applies only to a one-particle system and thus does not shed

 any light on the many-body problem. A more relevant example known to Kohn was

 the Thomas-Fermi method, a semi-classical but self-consistent approximation to the

 quantum theory of a many-electron system with a non-uniform density n(r) (March

 1975; Zangwill 2013). Nevill Mott had used this method to calculate the screening of a

 point charge by the conduction electrons in a metal. For the problem considered here,

 Thomas-Fermi theory method shows that n(r) determines u(r) through the relation95

 ■»-'-UiP'«- »

 Encouraged by these examples, Kohn sought to prove that the ground-state electron

 density n{r) uniquely determines the external potential v(r). Such a simple result (if

 true) could not depend on the details of the many-electron wave function. Therefore, he

 looked for a very general idea to exploit and found it with the Rayleigh-Ritz variational

 principle (Hohenberg et al. 1990). The reader will recall that this was the first tool

 Walter had placed in his theoretical toolbox while still a student at the University of

 Toronto. The reductio ad absurdum proof is "disarmingly simple" (Parr and Yang
 1989).

 95

 The coefficient of the kinetic energy term in Eq. ( 13) includes the electron mass m and Planck's constant h.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 818 A. Zangwill

 Assume that a Hamiltonian (energy) operator H = v + T + Û produces a ground

 state energy Eq, a ground-state wave function V(ri,..., ryy) and an electron den

 sity n(r). Contrary to what we wish to prove, assume that another Hamiltonian

 H' — v1 + T + U produces a ground-state energy E'0, a ground-state wave func
 tion ir'(ri,..., tn), but the same electron density n(r). The idea is to use x/r' as a

 trial function in the variational principle for H in Eq. (1). Ignoring the possibility of

 degeneracy, this gives the strict inequality96

 E0<(ir'\H\f') = (ir'\H'\xl;') + (xff'\H-H'\xlr') = E,0+ j n(r)[t»(r) - t/(r)] dr.
 (I4)

 Similarly, we may use x[r as the trial function in the variational principle for H'. The

 result is the same as Eq. (14) with the primed and unprimed variables exchanged:

 E'0 < (x/r\H'W) = (xk\H\xlr) + mH'-H\xlf) = E0+Jn(r)[i/(r)-v(r)]dr. (15)

 Adding Eqs. (14)—(15) yields Eo + E'0 < E'0 + Eq, which is impossible. Hence, our
 assumption that two external potentials correspond to the same electron density is
 false.

 Kohn was exhilarated by his proof, but "it seemed such a remarkable result that I

 did not trust myself' (WK98). He looked around for help and found it in the person

 of Pierre Hohenberg (Fig. 10). Hohenberg had just arrived in Paris after completing a

 postdoctoral year doing many-body theory with Alexei Abrikosov and Lev Gor'kov in

 Moscow, but was having trouble getting the attention of Nozières, his new postdoctoral

 supervisor (PHI2). Walter proposed that they work together and Pierre agreed. Like

 Kohn's previous collaborators, Res Jost and Quin Luttinger, Hohenberg was a rather
 formal theoretical physicist. He had been trained at Harvard by Paul Martin and his

 1962 Ph.D. thesis, "Excitations in a dilute condensed Bose gas," used density matrix

 and Green function methods to provide microscopic justification for phenomenological

 theories that had been offered by Lev Landau and others to explain the properties of

 superfluid helium.

 Hohenberg's first task was a literature search to discover whether the theorem Kohn

 had proved was already known. Apparently not. However, it had been known for about

 a decade that a computation of the total energy of a system of nuclei and electrons did

 not really require complete knowledge of the entire A-particle wave function (Löwdin

 1959; McWeeny 1960; Coleman 1963). It was sufficient to specify a quantity derived

 from the wave function called the second-order density matrix.91 In principle, there

 exists a variational principle for the energy where the second-order density matrix is

 varied rather than the wave function. Unfortunately, it was not known what properties

 96 Later analysis showed that removing the assumption of no degeneracy does not invalidate the final result
 (Parr and Yang 1989).

 97 Another necessary quantity, the first-order density matrix, is derivable from the second-order density
 matrix.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 819

 Fig. 10 Pierre Hohenberg in
 Fig. 10 Pierre Hohenberg in
 1965, soon after his work with
 1965, soon after his work with

 Kohn on density functional
 Kohn on density functional

 theory. Courtesy of Pierre
 theory. Courtesy of Pierre
 Hohenberg
 Hohenberg

 the density matrix had to possess to ensure that it was derivable from an //-particle
 wave function. This became known as the 'W-representability problem".

 In a similar way, Kohn's theorem reminded Hohenberg of "formal work on station

 ary entropy and renormalization which had just been completed by Paul Martin and
 Cyrano de Dominicis, also working together in Paris" (Hohenberg et al. 1990). These
 authors had studied the grand partition function of an arbitrary many-body system and
 used the mathematical technique of Legendre transformations to effect the desired
 "renormalizations". The latter eliminated the functional dependence on any one-body

 potential (like the external potential above) in favor of functional dependence on a
 one-particle distribution function. It also eliminated the functional dependence on
 any two-particle potential (like the Coulomb interaction between pairs of electrons)
 in favor of functional dependence on a two particle distribution function (Dominicis
 1963; de Dominicis and Martin 1964). Fifty years later, Hohenberg and Kohn differ

 slightly in their recollection of whether Legendre transformations played any role in
 their work together. Kohn recalls that he and Hohenberg recognized that his theorem

 could be interpreted as a Legendre transformation only after the fact and notes that the

 final published paper makes no mention of it (WK13b). Hohenberg recalls that (PH12)

 we were certainly thinking in the language of Legendre transformations, but
 we did not need that idea in the end. It was characteristic of Walter's style to

 introduce [in print] only those theoretical ideas needed to solve the problem at
 hand.

 Martin had returned to Harvard, but de Dominicis worked at the Centre d'Etudes

 Nucléaires in nearby Saclay. According to Hohenberg, "it took a number of intense but
 informative discussions with de Dominicis and his colleague Roger Balian to convince

 them that the procedure worked with the density rather than the distribution function
 (Hohenberg et al. 1990)". Philippe Nozières finally joined the conversation when he

 *£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 learned of the larger theoretical issue that now engaged Hohenberg and Kohn. As he
 later recalled (PN 12),

 The three of us discussed it a lot. But I was not fully convinced. In my opinion,

 putting all the emphasis on the density did not account properly for exchange

 and correlations. I did not share the enthusiasm of Walter and Pierre and I stayed
 aside.

 820 A. Zangwill

 Accordingly, Hohenberg and Kohn proceeded on their own to the natural next step: a

 reformulation of the Rayleigh-Ritz variational principle in terms of the density rather

 than the many-body wave function.

 Kohn's theorem implies that the many-body wave function is a functional of the

 ground-state electron density n(r). The same is true of the exact kinetic energy T[n\

 and the exact electron-electron potential energy U[h\. Therefore, if

 F[n] = T[n] + U[n] (16)

 is the sum of these two, the total energy in Eq. (10) is

 E[n] = J n(r)u(r)dr + F[n]. (17)

 Now, let nr(r) > 0 be a trial density which produces the correct total number of elec

 trons, N = f nr(r) dr. By Kohn's theorem, this density determines its own external
 potential, Hamiltonian, and ground-state wave function i/t. In that case, the usual

 wave function variational principle expressed by Eq. (1) tells us that

 (^7"|H|^7") = JnT(r)v(r)dr + F[nr] = E[nj] > E[n]. (18)

 The variational principle in Eq. (18) establishes that the energy in Eq. (17) evaluated

 with the true ground-state density is minimal with respect to all other density functions

 for the same number of particles.

 The proofs given just above appear early in Hohenberg and Kohn (1964), the first

 foundational paper of density functional theory. In connection with Eq. (18), Hohen

 berg and Kohn (HK) use a footnote to warn the reader of a possible "v-representability

 problem" because "we cannot prove whether an arbitrary positive definite distribu

 tion n(r) which satisfies / n(r) dr = N can be realized for some external potential".
 They express confidence that all "except some pathological distributions" will have

 this property but the mere fact that they draw attention to this point demonstrates how

 carefully the authors looked for holes in their arguments.98

 HK make a point to remark that the functional F[n] in Eq. (16) is "universal" in the

 sense that it is valid for any number of particles and any external potential. Even more

 significant for later work, they define yet another functional G[n] by extracting from

 98 The term "v-representability problem" was coined in 1975. See Parr and Yang (1989) and Kryachko and

 Ludefla (1990) for extensive discussion of this issue.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 821

 F[n] the classical Coulomb energy of a system with charge density en(r). Doing this

 renders Eq. (17) in the form

 £[n] = J n(r)v(r)dr+y J J drdr' + G[n]. (19)

 The functional G[n] in Eq. (19) includes the exact kinetic energy of the electron system

 and all the potential energy associated with the electron-electron interaction that is not

 already counted by the classical electrostatic energy. Needless to say, HK could not

 write down G[n], Doing so would imply that they had solved the entire many-electron

 problem.

 The approach Hohenberg and Kohn took to analyze G[n] reflects the way Kohn

 chose to frame the final published paper. There is no mention of the alloy problem or

 even of any desire to re-formulate the electronic structure problem for solids. Instead,

 the title of the HK paper is simply "Inhomogeneous electron gas" and the first line of

 the abstract announces that "this paper deals with the ground state of an interacting

 electron gas in an external potential u(r)". The introduction goes on to note that "during

 the last decade, there has been considerable progress in understanding the properties
 of a homogeneous, interacting electron gas". A footnote refers the reader to David
 Pines' book Elementary Excitations in Solids (1963) for the details. HK then remind
 the reader about the Thomas-Fermi method,

 in which the electronic density n(r) plays a central role...This approach has

 been useful, up to now, for simple though crude descriptions of inhomogeneous

 systems like atoms and impurities in metals. Lately, there have been some impor

 tant advances along this second line of approach.. .The present paper represents
 a contribution in the same area.

 HK confirmed that the Thomas-Fermi model of electronic structure follows from

 Eq. (19) using an expression for G[n] which accounts approximately for the kinetic
 energy of the electrons but takes no account of the non-classical electron-electron

 potential energy. Specifically, the kinetic energy density at a point r of the real system

 is set equal to the kinetic energy density of an infinite gas of non-interacting electrons

 with a uniform density n — n(r). The latter is computed using elementary statistical
 mechanics and one finds (March 1975; Zangwill 2013)

 After inserting Eq. (20) into Eq. (19) to produce £tf[w]> the variational principle in

 Eq. (18) directs us to minimize £tf[«] with respect to density. This is done using

 Lagrange's method to ensure that the total particle number, N — f n(r) dr, remains
 constant. The final result is the Thomas-Fermi expression in Eq. (13).

 The Thomas-Fermi model never went out of fashion as a quick and easy way to

 gain qualitative information about atoms, molecules, solids, and plasmas. By 1957,

 the British solid-state physicist Norman March was able to publish a 100-page review

 article surveying the successes and failures of the model and its generalizations (March

 (20)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 822 A. Zangwill

 1957). Earlier, I labeled 1957 as the "magic year" when many-body Green functions

 and diagrammatic perturbation theory transformed the study of many-electron sys

 tems. Therefore, it is not surprising that several physicists—including Kohn's old

 postdoctoral colleague Sidney Borowitz—applied these methods with the aim to sys
 tematically generalize the Thomas-Fermi model to include the effects of electron

 correlation and spatial inhomogeneity (Baraff and Borowitz 1961 ; DuBois and Kivel

 son 1962). These papers are among the "important advances" noted by HK in the
 passage quoted just above."

 As trained solid-state physicists, HK knew that the entire history of research on

 the quantum mechanical many-electron problem could be interpreted as attempts to

 identify and quantify the physical effects described by G[n], For example, many
 years of approximate quantum mechanical calculations for atoms and molecules had

 established that the phenomenon of exchange—a consequence of the Pauli exclusion

 principle—contributes significantly to the potential energy part of G[n], Exchange

 reduces the Coulomb potential energy of a system by tending to keep electrons with

 parallel spin spatially separated. The remaining potential energy part of G[n] takes
 account of short-range correlation effects. Correlation also reduces the Coulomb

 potential energy by tending to keep all pairs of electrons spatially separated. The

 effect of correlation is largest for electrons with antiparallel spins because these pairs

 are not kept apart at all by the exchange interaction. I note for future reference that

 the venerable Hartree-Fock approximation takes account of the kinetic energy and the

 exchange energy exactly but (by definition) takes no account of the correlation energy
 (Seitz 1940; Löwdin 1959; Slater 1963).

 HK devoted the remainder of their time together to studying G[n\ for two cases:

 (1) an interacting electron gas with a nearly constant density; and (2) an interacting

 electron gas with a slowly varying density. For the nearly constant density case, HK
 wrote n(r) = no + n(r) with n(r)/no «C 1 and pointed out that G[n] admits a formal
 expansion in powers of n(r):

 G[n] = G[no]-F J AT(|r - r'|)n(r)n(r') drdr' H (21)

 K(|r - r'|) is a linear response function for the uniform and interacting electron

 gas which had been studied intensely by experts in many-body theory (Pines 1963).

 In particular, the derivative of its Fourier transform K(q) was known to diverge at

 a certain value of q. Walter knew this divergence well: it was responsible for the

 oscillatory algebraic form of the Friedel density disturbance formula in Eq. (6). It was

 also responsible for the "Kohn anomalies" in the phonon spectrum of metals. HK point

 this out and remark in passing that "the density oscillations in atoms which correspond

 to shell structure.. .are of the same general origin".

 99 It is curious that Hohenberg and Kohn do not refer to papers by Hubbard (1958), Bellemans and Leener

 (1961), and Jones et al. (1962), all of whom studied the energy of an electron gas in the presence of a lattice

 of positive charges using methods superior to the Thomas-Fermi approximation.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The divergence in K(q) disappears if one retains only a finite number of terms in its

 power series expansion. The corresponding expansion of Ä"(|r — r'|) reduces Eq. (21)

 The education of Walter Kohn 823

 to a gradient expansion,

 G[n] = G[«o] + a J n(r)dr + b J |Vn(r)|2 dr + • • • , (22)

 where a and b are constants related to K(q). Therefore, as HK pointed out, any
 "quantum oscillations" produced by the divergence in K{q) cannot be captured by

 any low-order gradient expansion of G[n] like Eq. (22). This explained the failures of

 the many generalizations of the Thomas-Fermi approximation which involved adding

 gradient terms.

 Finally, Hohenberg and Kohn focused on G[n] for a system with a slowly vary

 ing density function. This assumption precluded variations with short (spatial) wave

 lengths, but allowed for the possibility of substantial variations in the overall magnitude

 of the density. For this case, the appropriate gradient-type expansion is

 G[n]

 = Jgo(«(r))dr + Jg2(«(r))|Vn(r)|2dr + -- - , (23)

 where go and 82 are functions (not functional) of n(r). By specializing Eq. (23) to the

 previously studied case of a nearly uniform electron gas, HK were able to express these

 functions in terms of the properties of the uniform and interacting electron gas. For

 example, go(n) is the sum of the kinetic energy density, the exchange energy density,

 and the correlation energy density for an interacting electron gas with uniform density

 n. With this information, HK performed a partial (infinite) summation of the entire

 gradient expansion in Eq. (23). Their final expression had the great virtue of recovering

 the singularity in K (q) needed to describe quantum oscillations.

 Kohn left Paris in January 1964 and visited physicists in London, Cambridge, and

 Oxford before returning to California. He wrote up a first draft of a manuscript and

 sent it to Hohenberg for his review. Pierre made several suggestions, all of which were

 incorporated into the final version. The paper was sent off to the Physical Review in the

 second week of June 1964 and published in the November 9 issue. It is notable that the

 Concluding Remarks section does not remind the reader of the two theorems proved

 at the beginning of the paper. Instead, the authors remark that they "have developed a

 theory of the electronic ground state which is exact in two limiting cases". The impor

 tance Hohenberg and Kohn ascribed to the ability of their theory to capture quantum

 oscillations may be judged from the fact that their paper ends with the statement that

 "the most promising formulation of the theory.. .appears to be that obtained by partial

 summation of the gradient expansion". They say this despite warning the reader in

 the previous sentence that "actual electronic systems" have neither nearly constant

 densities nor slowly varying densities, i.e., the situations where the partial summation

 was expected to be valid.

 Any reader of Hohenberg and Kohn (1964) cannot help but be struck by its under
 stated and rather formal tone. The introduction is succinct, the basic theorems are

 proved quickly, most of the paper is taken up with the gradient expansions, and no

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 824 A. Zangwill

 applications are discussed or proposed. Earlier, I quoted Kohn to the effect that he

 understood that the basic theorem which drives the paper was "remarkable". If so, he

 and Hohenberg made a conscious decision not to emphasize the truly revolutionary

 idea at its core: that the ground-state electron density, in principle, determines all the

 properties of an electronic system. That being said, we learn from their 1990 reminis

 cence that the authors spent at least a little time talking about applications (Hohenberg

 et al. 1990):

 The question arose as to what the method might be good for, and Kohn suggested

 that one could try using it to improve current techniques for calculating the

 band structure of solids. Hohenberg's immediate reaction was to say, "But band

 structure calculations are horribly complicated, isn't that the sort of stuff better

 left to professionals?" To this, Kohn simply replied, "Young man, I am the Kohn
 of Kohn and Rostoker (1954)!"

 A recommendation from Kohn helped Hohenberg win a job at Bell Telephone

 laboratories in the fall of 1964. Recently, he recalled that "I gave a talk on my Paris

 work during my first few months at Bell Labs. Phil Anderson, Bill McMillan, and
 Phil Platzman were in the audience, and there was no enthusiasm. They correctly

 understood that our results would not help them solve the difficult many-body problems

 they were struggling with" (PHI2). In the event, Hohenberg turned to hydrodynamics

 and phase transitions as topics for research and worked productively in those areas

 over a 30-year career at Bell. He was elected to the US National Academy of Sciences

 in 1989 and moved to Yale University in 1995 to accept the position of Deputy Provost

 for Science and Technology. Since 2004, he has served at New York University as a

 professor of physics and Vice Provost for Research.

 6 The work of Kohn and Sham

 Kohn returned to La Jolla in early 1964 "to find a group of postdocs and visitors eagerly

 awaiting a first-hand account of the work" (Hohenberg et al. 1990). According to one

 of those postdocs, Vittorio Celli (VC 13),

 Walter gave a full departmental colloquium rather than just a technical seminar

 after his return from Paris. Keith Brueckner (who had returned from Washington

 and was Dean at the time) said that colloquia were usually reserved for "foreign

 stars" but that today we have "our own star" to give a talk. I remember think

 ing that the theory with Hohenberg was cute but would not have many conse

 quences. I certainly did not think it compared in significance with the many-body

 calculations for the electron gas that had been obtained by Brueckner and his
 collaborators.

 Kohn proposed to another postdoc, N. David Mermin, that he exploit his knowledge

 of statistical mechanics to generalize the Hohenberg-Kohn results to nonzero temper

 ature. Mermin realized almost immediately that "a strange variational principle for

 the free energy that I had formulated for an utterly unrelated purpose" was perfectly

 suited for the job. As a result, "it took me less than an hour to check that the HK proof

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 825

 Fig. 11 Lu Jeu Sham (circa
 Fig. 11 Lu Jeu Sham (circa
 early 1980s) was apostdoc with 11 ' fiff WÊÊ
 early 1980s) was a postdoc with
 Walter Kohn from 1963 to 1966. R Irai"
 Walter Kohn from 1963 to 1966.
 Courtesy of Lu Jeu Sham J\ SIP jH.' rv®
 Courtesy of Lu Jeu Sham

 went through" almost without change (Mermin 2003). Kohn was skeptical, but the
 simplicity of the proof could not be assailed. On the other hand, the significance of
 Mermin's work was not very clear and he was disinclined to write it up. It took six
 months, his imminent departure from La Jolla, and Kohn's insistence that "it someday

 might be important" for the manuscript of Mermin (1965) to get written (DM13).

 Kohn's colloquium featuring the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems generated skepticism
 from several of the many-body theorists who were in La Jolla to work with Keith
 Brueckner. Most notably, "Nobuyuki Fukuda, visiting from the University of Tokyo,

 constructed counter example after counter-example purporting to demonstrate the non

 uniqueness of the potential given a density distribution. The job of resolving these fell
 to Lu Jeu Sham" (Hohenberg et al. 1990) (Fig. 11).

 Lu Sham was the graduating Ph.D. student to whom Kohn had written requesting
 that he begin his postdoctoral fellowship at UCSD while Kohn was still in Paris.
 Sham, a native of Hong Kong, arrived in San Diego by way of Imperial College and
 Cambridge University where he had earned, respectively, an undergraduate degree in

 mathematics and a graduate degree in physics. His 1963 Ph.D. thesis, "The electron
 phonon interaction," was supervised by John Ziman, a distinguished theorist whose
 books, Electrons and Phonons (1960) and Principles of the Theory of Solids (1964),

 helped train a generation of solid-state physicists. In La Jolla, Sham used the months
 before Kohn returned to write a paper on the phonon spectrum of sodium metal. This

 quantitative calculation used a pseudo-potential for the sodium ionic potential and a
 self-consistent modification of the Hartree-Fock method to take approximate account
 of correlation effects which act to screen (reduce) the exchange interaction (Sham
 1965).

 Quantum density oscillations were much on Walter's mind when he related the

 details of his Paris experience to Sham. He was acutely aware that no oscillations
 would emerge from Eq. (22), the most natural choice for G[n] when the external
 potential was a slowly varying function of position. Therefore, in the same letter
 where Walter informed Pierre Hohenberg that the HK manuscript had been submitted

 for publication, he related that "Lu Sham and I have started looking at situations
 like a heavy atom where one has a localized and rapidly varying potential".100 In

 100

 WKP. June 15, 1964, letter from Walter Kohn to Pierre Hohenberg.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 826 A. Zangwill

 principle, their goal was to develop a general theory of quantum density oscillations

 for use in situations where the electron density is strongly non-uniform. In practice,

 they developed a method to find the leading quantum corrections to the Thomas

 Fermi electron density for a collection of non-interacting electrons moving in a one
 dimensional potential. The published paper, Kohn and Sham (1965a), reports the
 results of an elegant Green function calculation which related the electron density

 (which did exhibit the desired quantum oscillations) to the potential in a way which

 generalized Eq. (13). Unfortunately, the extension of their method to three-dimensional

 periodic potentials presented a daunting numerical challenge which did not lend itself

 to practical calculations for real solids. Accordingly, Kohn and Sham dropped this line

 of investigation and moved in a different direction, albeit one still motivated by the

 basic results obtained by Hohenberg and Kohn.101

 By the late fall of 1964, Kohn was thinking about alternative ways to transform the

 theory he and Hohenberg had developed into a practical scheme for atomic, molecular,

 and solid-state calculations. Happily, he was very well acquainted with an approximate

 approach to the many-electron problem that was notably superior to the Thomas-Fermi

 method, at least for the case of atoms. This was a theory proposed by Douglas Hartree

 in 1928 which exploited the then just-published Schrödinger equation in a heuristic

 way to calculate the orbital wave functions <f>k(r), the electron binding energies e*, and

 the charge density n{r) of an /V-electron atom (Park 2009; Zangwill 2013). Hartree's

 theory transcended Thomas-Fermi theory primarily by its use of the exact quantum

 mechanical expression for the kinetic energy of independent electrons. The Hartree

 equations which define the theory for an atom with nuclear charge Z — N are

 - —V2(pk + [Ueff(r) ~ ek] (pkir) = 0, k = 1,... N, (24)

 hz

 2m

 where

 , n(r')
 üeff(r) = v(r) + e2 / dr'"'" '(25)
 rrir=7

 and u(r) = —Ze2/r. The electron density n(r) in Eq. (25) is calculated assuming that

 the electrons occupy that N lowest energy eigenfunctions of the Schrödinger equation

 in Eq. (24). Therefore, if k = 1, 2,..., N labels these N lowest energy orbitals,

 n(r) = \<pk(r)|2. (26)

 N

 k= 1

 The effective potential energy function in Eq. (25) shows that every electron interacts

 with the charge of the "external" nucleus and with the charge of the entire atomic

 101 The Web of Science database (Accessed January 2014) lists 230 citations to the quantum density

 oscillations paper, Kohn and Sham (1965a). A review of these citations shows that the vast majority of the

 citing papers (>90 %) seem unaware of its actual content. They incorrectly cite it along with Hohenberg and
 Kohn (1964) and Kohn and Sham (1965b) as one of the foundational papers of density functional theory.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 827

 electron cloud taken as a whole.102 Hartree stressed that these equations must be

 solved self-consistently. That is, an iterative numerical method is required to ensure

 that the (pk(r) generated by Eq. (24) are the same as the <pk (r) used in Eq. (26) to

 construct the particle density n(r).

 Slater (1930) and Fock (1930) provided a rigorous derivation of the Hartree

 equations. They used the variational principle in Eq. (1) and evaluated the total
 energy using a many-electron wave function of the form V(ri> r2>.... tn) =
 01 (>*l)02 (i"2) • • • 0v(r/v)- Minimizing this energy with respect to different choices

 for the (pic functions generates the Hartree equations. Slater and Fock also evaluated

 the total energy using a more sophisticated many-body wave function (today called a

 Slater determinant) which combines the same N orbital functions <pk in such a way

 that the Pauli exclusion principle is obeyed automatically. With this choice, mini

 mizing the total energy with respect to choices for the <pk functions generates what

 are called the Hartree-Fock equations. Hartree-Fock theory is superior to Hartree

 theory because the kinetic energy and the exchange energy are treated exactly. Unfor

 tunately, the Hartree-Fock equations are significantly harder to solve than the Hartree

 equations.

 Kohn suggested to Sham that he try to derive the Hartree equations from the

 Hohenberg-Kohn formalism. Walter had good reason to believe this could be done

 (WK01, WK12). On the one hand, his work with Hohenberg had established the central

 role of the electron density n(r) for a complete description of any electronic system.

 On the other hand, the Hartree equations could be read as a self-consistent scheme to

 deduce an approximate expression for n(r). Therefore, it should be possible to derive

 the Hartree equations as an example of the HK variational principle. Specifically, the

 variational minimization of some approximate form of the total energy functional E [n]

 should lead to Hartree's equations. Sham set to work with enthusiasm.

 Kohn and Sham recognized that the Hartree method regards each electron as moving

 independently in an effective potential veff(r) which does not recognize the individual

 identity of the other electrons. Consistent with this, the kinetic energy implied by

 Eq. (24) is correct only for independent and non-interacting electrons. This was the

 key to progress because the Hohenberg-Kohn analysis implied that the kinetic energy

 of a strictly non-interacting system of electrons is also a functional of the density. If

 we call this functional Ts[n], ordinary quantum mechanics specifies that103

 102 In the actual equations written by Haitree ( 1928), each electron feels the classical electrostatic potential

 produced by every electron except itself. Therefore, in contrast to Eq. (25), each electron in Hartree's theory

 feels a slightly different electrostatic potential.

 103 The correctness of Eq. (27) requires that the functions 0, and <pj be orthonormal, which means that the
 integral J <p*(r) <t>j (r) dr is one when i = j and zero when i j.

 » , r h2

 Tsln] = X / <PtV
 k=\J

 2m V2

 &(r)dr. (27)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 828 A. Zangwill

 The path was now open for Sham to derive the Hartree equations from a density

 functional point of view. He chose the approximate total energy functional

 EH[n] = Ts[n] +J v(r)n(r)dr+ C—J J drdr', (28)

 and minimized it with respect to a density assumed to have the form in Eq. (26). The

 latter transforms the density variation of the first term in Eq. (28) into variations with

 respect to the 4>k functions. The density variation of the remaining terms in Eq. (28)

 is straightforward, and the final result is exactly the Hartree equations (24) and (25).

 Kohn and Sham (KS) now knew how to move forward with the general many

 electron problem. Motivated by Eq. (28), they defined a functional Exc[n] by the

 partition G[n] = Ts[n] + Exc[n], This puts the exact total energy functional in the
 form

 E[n] = E„[n] + Exc[n]. (29)

 The great virtue of Eq. (29) is that it has exactly the same structure as Eq. (28),
 even if we revert to Eq. (7) for v(r). Therefore, the interacting electron density n(r)

 which minimizes the original total energy in Eq. (10) is precisely equal to the non
 interacting electron density n(r) which minimizes Eq. (29). Carrying out the latter

 minimization explicitly produces the Kohn-Sham equations, which are identical to

 the Hartree equations Eqs. (24) and (26) with Eq. (25) replaced by

 feff(r) = v(r) + e2 [ dr' \ + vxc(r) (30)

 J |r-r'|

 where

 v,e(r) = , ■ (31)

 t N &Exc[ti\
 8n(r)

 The exchange-correlation potential energy, vxc(r), obtained in Eq. (31) from the func

 tional derivative of Exc[n], is a function of r and not a functional of n(r). Therefore,

 according to KS, a numerical procedure no more difficult that Hartree's original method

 is sufficient to compute the ground-state electron density and thus the ground-state

 total energy of an arbitrary many-electron system subject to an external potential. If

 Exc[n] was known exactly, one could calculate n(r) and E[n] exactly as well.

 The "exchange-correlation" energy functional Exc[n] in Eq. (29) is similar to G[n]

 in Eq. (19) in the sense that it accounts for all the energy associated with the Coulomb

 interaction between electrons not already counted by the classical Coulomb self

 energy. However, while G[n] had also to account for the total kinetic energy of the

 real interacting electron system [called T[n] in Eq. (16)], Exc[n] has only to account

 for the difference between the kinetic energy of an interacting electron system and the

 kinetic energy of a non-interacting electron system with exactly the same density n(r).

 Of course, the exact and universal functional Exc[n] is no better known than G[n] for

 the interacting electron problem.

 Unlike the Hartree-Fock theory sketched earlier, the foregoing derivation of the

 Hartree-like Kohn-Sham equations does not introduce a many-electron wave function

 Ê Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 829

 at any stage. Instead, Kohn and Sham replace the true interacting electron system

 with a non-interacting electron reference system which has exactly the same ground

 state electron density. The wave function of the reference system is unambiguously

 Hartree-like, so it is correct to use the exact kinetic energy for non-interacting electrons

 in Eq. (27) and represent the density function as in Eq. (26). On the other hand, the

 eigenfunctions fa (r) and the eigenvalues e* in Eq. (24) have no direct physical meaning

 for the true interacting electron system.

 Finally, Kohn and Sham proposed an approximation for Exc[n] which has come to

 be known as the local density approximation (LDA). Namely,

 Exc[n] = J n(r) exc(n(r))dr, (32)

 where exc(n ) is the exchange and correlation energy per electron of a fully interacting

 electron gas with uniform density n. Hohenberg and Kohn had introduced a similar

 approximation for G[n] in their paper, and it was reasonable for Kohn and Sham to

 "regard exc(n) as known from theories of the homogeneous electron gas".104 When

 Eq. (32) is used for Exc[n], the exchange-correlation potential in Eq. (31) becomes

 tftc(r) = j- Inexc(n)]. (33)

 dn

 The foregoing results were reported in a short manuscript, "Exchange and correla

 tion effects in an inhomogeneous gas" which Kohn and Sham submitted to Physical

 Review Letters in May of 1965. Samuel Goudsmit, one of the editors of Physical

 Review Letters at that time, informed Sham by letter that the Kohn-Sham manu

 script "deserves publication as an Article in the Physical Review, but it is not of

 such urgency to warrant speedy publication in Physical Review Letters" (SG65). The

 authors responded by withdrawing the manuscript and, 3 weeks later, submitted to the
 Physical Review a longer and more detailed paper with a new title, "Self-consistent
 equations including exchange and correlation effects". The published version, Kohn

 and Sham (1965b) is the second foundational paper of density functional theory. It

 is also one of the most highly cited papers in the history of physics.105 Interestingly,

 it was only at the page-proof stage of the longer paper that the authors realized that

 their Hartree-like equations with Eq. (31) represented a formally exact statement of

 the complete many-body problem (LS 14). For that reason, Eq. (31) appears only in a
 "Note Added in Proof' while Eq. (33) appears in the main exposition.

 Kohn and Sham knew it was straightforward to use Eq. (33) to write down an

 explicit and analytic formula for vxc(r) and incorporate it seamlessly into existing
 computer programs to calculate the electronic structure of atoms, molecules, and

 solids. Briefly, the separation exc{n) = ex(n) + ec(n) known for the interacting and

 104 The local density approximation for G[n] retains only the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (23).

 105 The Web of Science database (accessed January 2014) lists 21,372 citations to Kohn and Sham (1965b).

 Only four physics-related papers have more citations, and all four of them are density functional papers
 which owe their existence to the Kohn-Sham paper. See also the bibliometric studies of Redner (2005) and
 Marx (2007).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 uniform electron gas implies that the exchange-correlation potential Eq. (33) separates

 similarly into u^c(r) = ux(r) + vc(r). The exact exchange energy density, €x(n), had

 been calculated years earlier by Dirac ( 1930) for the purpose of improving the Thomas

 Fermi approximation. Using Dirac's formula, KS reported their result for the LDA

 exchange potential:106

 830 A. Zangwill

 Ox, LDA (r) = -*T

 —n(r)
 71

 1/3

 This expression was consequential at the time because, when Eq. (34) replaces Uxc(r)

 in Eq. (30), the Kohn-Sham equations become almost identical to a set of equations

 John Slater had proposed in 1951 as a local approximation to the non-local Hartree

 Fock equations. I say "almost" identical because the ad hoc local exchange potential

 proposed by Slater (1951) was

 Ox,Slater(r) — —

 1/3

 3 2

 '3
 —n(r)
 it

 (34)

 (35)

 KS argue for the correctness of their proposed exchange potential, and it is notable that

 the abstract of Kohn and Sham (1965b) devotes a sentence to announcing the factor

 of 3/2 difference between Eqs. (34) and (35). The authors' motivation to do this was

 surely their awareness that the so-called "Hartree-Fock-Slater" method was in wide

 use by physicists performing band-structure calculations for real solids (Callaway
 1958; Herman 1964).

 The Kohn-Sham equations [with and without the local density approximation for

 t/tc(r)] are the reason for the enduring importance of Kohn and Sham (1965b). The
 paper itself differs in tone from Hohenberg and Kohn (1964) in the sense that the
 abstract notion of an "inhomogeneous electron gas" disappears from the title and from

 most of the text. Instead, there is the practical promise of "self-consistent equations"

 appropriate to "real systems (atoms, molecules, solids, etc.) [where] the electronic

 density is non-uniform". The introduction is even more specific and makes the point
 that

 most theoretical many-body studies have been concerned with elementary exci

 tations and as a result there has been little progress in the theory of cohesive

 energies, elastic constants, etc. of real metals and alloys. The methods proposed

 here offer the hope of new progress in the latter area.

 That being said, KS did not themselves report any calculations of the cohesive energy

 or elastic constants (or any other measurable quantity) for any "real" electronic system.

 Indeed, they did not even bother to write down an explicit form for the correlation

 part of vxc(r) in the local density approximation. This was a straightforward exercise

 for anyone familiar with the electron gas literature. As for the LDA itself, KS remark

 that it should "give a good representation of exchange and correlation effects...for

 106 Kohn and Sham were unaware that the Hungarian physicist Rezsö Gâspâr had derived Eq. (34) 10 years

 earlier by similarly computing the variational derivative of Dirac's exchange energy with a local density
 approximation (Gâspâr 1954).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 831

 metals, alloys, and small-gap insulators". On the other hand, they warn the reader that

 the LDA should have "no validity [at] the 'surface' of atoms and the overlap regions

 of molecules.. .We do not expect an accurate description of chemical binding".

 Walter left for his annual visit to Bell Labs after the June 1965 submission of the

 longer Kohn-Sham manuscript. He collaborated with Quin Luttinger as usual and

 their efforts produced a prediction for a new mechanism for superconductivity based

 on a presumed oscillatory interaction between pairs of electrons (Kohn and Luttinger

 1965). Meanwhile, back in La Jolla, Lu Sham began work on two density functional

 projects. One of these, which became the final paper he and Kohn would publish

 together, examined the one-body Green function of many-body theory (Sham and

 Kohn 1966). It was important for them to study this quantity because its properties

 determine the energy, lifetime, and spatial extent of single-particle-like excitations out

 of the ground state of a many-body system. At the same time, the Hohenberg-Kohn

 theory implies that the Green function itself is as a functional of the ground-state

 electron density.

 Sham, who did most of the calculations, demanded that the Green function satisfy

 the requirements of particle-number conservation and charge neutrality and deduced

 thereby that an electron at a point r in an atom, molecule, or solid responds to the

 electrostatic potential at that point and to exchange and correlation effects which

 depend on the electron density distribution in the immediate vicinity of r only. For

 a slowly varying density, this conclusion justifies a local density approximation for

 the Green function, which in turn provides an approximation for the energy spectrum

 and an independent justification for using the LDA with the Kohn-Sham equations to

 calculate the ground-state electron density n(r).

 Sham's second post-Kohn-Sham density functional project was done in collabo

 ration with Bok Yin (Philip) Tong, a 30-year-old graduate student who had begun to

 work with Kohn. Their goal was to solve the Kohn-Sham equations numerically for
 several atoms and ions. Luckily for them, Frank Herman and Sherwood Skillman had

 just published a computer program which solved the Hartee-Fock-Slater equations for

 atoms (Herman and Skillman 1963). Tong and Sham needed only to replace Eq. (35)

 by Eq. (34) in the program and add some code for the correlation part of uxc(r) in the

 LDA. For this, they used an interpolation formula for the correlation energy derived

 from the information given in Pines (1963). The published paper, Tong and Sham

 (1966), focused on total energies, total energy differences, and charge densities. The

 final results with correlation omitted were gratifying, giving "slightly better results for

 energies and substantially better results for densities than Slater's method". The cor

 relation correction worsened the results, "presumably because the electronic density

 in atoms has too rapid a spatial variation".

 Lu Sham published three articles unrelated to density functional theory before

 beginning an Assistant Professorship at the University of California at Irvine in the

 fall of 1966. Two years later, he accepted an offer to return to La Jolla as an Associate

 Professor. He was promoted to Professor in 1975, served as a Dean from 1985 to 1989,

 and is currently Emeritus Professor of Physics. He was elected to the US National

 Academy of Sciences in 1998. At UCSD, Sham developed a broad research program

 with a particular expertise in the theory of the electronic and optical properties of

 semiconductor heterostructures. However, the twenty papers he published on density

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 £) Springer

 832 A. Zangwill

 functional theory over the years show that he never completely abandoned the main

 subject of his postdoctoral work.

 Walter Kohn remained at San Diego until 1979, when he accepted the position as

 founding Director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics (ITP), a research facility

 established and supported by the US National Science Foundation at the University

 of California at Santa Barbara. He served as Director for 5 years and continued as a

 Professor of Physics at UCSB until 1991 when he gained Emeritus status. Kohn and

 his collaborators published over 150 papers between 1965 and 2006. One-third of

 these explore some aspect of density functional theory, particulary its application to

 solid surfaces. An equal number of papers concern Kohn's pre-DFT interests including

 disordered states of matter, superconductivity, Bloch and Wannier functions, scattering

 theory, and the transition between the conducting and insulating states of matter. Kohn

 was elected to the National Academy of Sciences (1969) and was a recipient of a
 National Medal of Science (1998) before winning a share of the 1998 Nobel Prize in

 Chemistry.

 7 Discussion and conclusion

 In March 2001, Kohn addressed a symposium on "The History of the Electronic
 Structure of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids" at a meeting of the American Physical

 Society. With an audience well schooled to interpret the lower case Greek letter e

 as an infinitesimally small quantity, Walter was understood immediately when he

 characterized the initial reception of density functional theory as "+ e by theoretical

 physicists and zero by theoretical chemists" (WK01). The meager reaction by physi
 cists reflected the fact that Kohn's theory did not directly address the "big" issues

 that occupied many solid-state physicists at the time: superconductivity, the Kondo

 effect, superfluid helium, disorder-induced localization, the metal-insulator transition,

 and quasi-one-dimensional conductors. The positive response was limited mostly to
 band-structure theorists who were well positioned to carry out the numerical work

 needed to solve the Kohn-Sham equations for real materials.107 The lack of response

 (or negative response) from chemists stemmed mostly from their near-universal belief

 that no theory of electronic structure based on the particle density alone could possi

 bly be correct. In a future publication, I will trace the evolving response of both the

 physics and chemistry communities to DFT. For the present, it suffices to sketch very

 briefly the path which led from virtually no response by chemists to a Nobel Prize in

 Chemistry.

 An important point mentioned earlier is that a computer program written to solve the

 local exchange potential equations of the Hartree-Fock-Slater (HFS) method (Slater
 1951) was easily adapted to solve the Kohn-Sham equations in the local density

 approximation. Therefore, after the 1965 publication of the Kohn-Sham paper, sys

 tematic calculations for atoms began to reveal that Eq. (34) was superior to Eq. (35) as

 107 Despite the warning in Sham and Kohn (1966) that the e* parameters should not be interpreted as one

 electron energies, "the temptation to use [them] as band structures in solids proved irresistible" (Hohenberg
 et al. 1990).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 833

 a local approximation to the exact, non-local exchange potential (Herman et al. 1969).
 HFS and LDA calculations for molecules and solids were more difficult to evaluate

 because computational exigencies encouraged the use of a "muffin-tin approximation"

 where the effective potential in Eq. (30) was replaced by its spherical average inside

 a set of touching spheres centered at the atoms. A constant potential was used outside

 the spheres.

 Beginning in the 1970s, a small group of scientists committed themselves to carry

 ing out HFS and LDA calculations for small molecules without imposing the muffin-tin

 (or any other) constraint on the self-consistent potentials (Baerends et al. 1973; Gun

 narsson and Harris 1977; Becke 1982). Over time, HFS calculations disappeared in

 favor of LDA calculations and (with a few notable exceptions) the basic conclusion

 was that one obtained reasonable binding energies and predictions for molecular struc

 tures that agreed well with experiment (Jones 2012). On the other hand, the LDA was

 not capable of the kind of "chemical accuracy" (±2kcal/mole) that the best ab ini

 tio methods of traditional quantum chemistry could achieve. Then, in the 1980s, efforts

 to go beyond the local density approximation led to the proposal and testing of various

 non-local approximations for the exchange and correlation functional (Langreth and
 Mehl 1983; Perdew 1986; Becke 1988; Lee et al. 1988). These, so-called "general
 ized gradient approximations" (GGA) replaced the electron gas exchange-correlation

 energy density in Eq. (32) with much more complicated functions of both the local

 density n(r) and the local density gradient Vn(r).108 Systematic Kohn-Sham calcu

 lations for atoms and molecules using GGA, particulary a hybrid approach introduced

 by Becke (1993), quickly began to approach chemical accuracy.

 A turning point occurred in 1991 at the Vllth International Congress of Quantum

 Chemistry in Menton, France (WK13b). John Pople gave the final talk and summarized

 the achievements of "G2" theory, his most comprehensive ab initio attempt to improve

 the Hartree-Fock approximation using perturbation theory (Curtiss et al. 1991). On

 the other hand, earlier in the week, the Congress had given its triennial "outstanding

 young scientist" award to Axel Becke for his manifestly non-ab-initio work with DFT.

 Specifically, "for unique advances in numerical methods in density functional theory

 as applied to molecules, and for important developments in the understanding of the

 exchange-correlation functional that enters density functional theory".109 Pople made

 a point in his talk to remark that he found Becke's results "stimulating and intriguing"
 (JP91).

 Barely a year later, Pople's group published a systematic comparison of the best
 quantum chemical calculations with DFT calculations performed using a variety
 of exchange-correlation potentials for 32 molecules. They concluded that the most

 sophisticated non-local functionals "outperformed correlated ab initio methods, which

 are computationally more expensive. Good agreement with experiment was obtained

 with a small basis set" (Johnson et al. 1992). DFT was promptly incorporated into

 Pople's widely used GAUSSIAN computer program, and, with this endorsement, the

 popularity of DFT calculations among chemists began to grow exponentially (see

 108 The generalized gradient approximations go far beyond the simple gradient expansions analyzed by
 HK and KS.

 109 Awards of the LAQMS.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 834 A. Zangwill

 16000

 14000

 12000

 10000

 6000

 4000

 2000

 </»
 ft
 0J
 Q.
 fO
 û_

 V
 0)
 ja
 E
 3
 z

 H
 O  8000

 Pople Endorsement

 Nobel Prize

 ft
 iiUl

 I
 iiiiiiiiiiiii

 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

 Year

 Fig. 12 Numbers of papers that mention DFT as found by the Web of Science

 Fig. 12 and Ref.110). Accordingly, when the Nobel Chemistry Committee decided it

 was time to honor quantum chemistry with a Prize, it was not difficult for them to split

 the award between John Pople and Walter Kohn.

 At the beginning of this paper, I suggested that density functional theory might be
 unknown today if Walter Kohn had not created it in the mid-1960s. Such a counterfac

 tual claim can never be proved. However, it is interesting to examine the evidence that

 supports it. We do this with full awareness of a long tradition which examines great
 scientific discoveries from the personalistic and naturalistic points of view (Boring
 1950). The former focuses on the specific attributes of an individual whose "excep
 tional insight may lead to an original discovery which has not been anticipated by
 others and which is relatively independent of the times". The latter posits that "the

 Zeitgeist (scientific climate of the time) determines the great discovery and that he who

 makes the discovery is great merely because the times employed him". Here, I begin

 with the Zeitgeist of electronic structure theory in Kohn's lifetime and then turn to his
 particularism for the case of DFT.

 The modern concept of the electronic structure of atoms, molecules, and solids

 began when the old quantum theory of Bohr gave way to the new quantum theory of

 Schrödinger (Jammer 1966). From 1925 to 1960, at least 1,000 papers in the scientific
 literature concerned themselves with the "many-electron" problem.111 One thousand

 more papers focused on this topic between 1961 and 1965. The abstracts of these papers

 reveal five principal approaches to this issue: the Thomas-Fermi method, electron gas
 models, many-electron wave function methods, density matrix methods, and quantum

 field theory methods. Of these, only the approximate Thomas-Fermi method singles

 out the ground-state electron density n(r) as the primary quantity for study. Attempts
 to build "quantum corrections" into the Thomas-Fermi model were current in the
 early 1960s, but none suggested that the theory could be "exactified" to reveal the

 110 Redner (2005) and Marx (2007) are two bibliometric studies which discuss DFT.

 111 Data collected from Google Scholar in January 2014. The true number of papers is higher because not
 all authors used the term "many-electron" in their writing.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 835

 density as a truly fundamental quantity. A paper inspired by Friedel's alloy work,

 which ignores correlation and derives a formal perturbation series for the density in

 term of the external potential, is perhaps closest in this regard (March and Murray
 1961).

 In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the ground-state electron density was not very

 interesting to many theoretical solid-state physicists. They focused instead on the

 excited states of solids and the powerful new methods of quantum field theory which

 made their study possible (Hoddeson et al. 1992). Those who did appreciate the gen

 eral importance of the charge density—primarily the practitioners of band-structure

 calculations—saw no reason and had no motivation to elevate it to the lofty status

 of the many-electron wave function (Herman 1958; Pincherle 1960). The latter atti

 tude was shared by the quantum chemistry community who devoted enormous efforts

 to solving the Schrödinger equation for molecules with greater and greater accuracy

 (Barden and Schaeffer 2000; Gavroglu and Simöes 2012). An interesting exception is

 the Canadian Richard Bader, perhaps the greatest champion of n(r) among theoretical

 chemists. Just a year before the publication of Hohenberg and Kohn (1964), he wrote
 (Bader and Jones 1963):

 The manner in which the electron density is disposed in a molecule has not

 received the attention its importance would seem to merit. Unlike the energy

 of a molecular system, which requires a knowledge of the second-order density

 matrix for its evaluation, many of the observable properties of a molecule are

 determined in whole or in part by the simple three-dimensional electron density
 distribution.

 Despite his fondness for the density, even Bader could not deny the primacy of the

 second-order density matrix (Löwdin 1959). This was the rock-solid quantum chemical

 view that Hohenberg had discovered in Paris when he reviewed the literature of many

 electron theory.

 To my knowledge, the only work in the pre-1964 electronic structure literature

 where the electron density plays a fundamental role is a one-page paper by the dis
 tinguished theoretical chemist, Wilson (1962). Wilson asks the rhetorical question,

 "Does there exist some procedure for calculating n(r) [for an IV-electron system]
 which avoids altogether the use of 3N dimensional space?" He then uses a device

 mentioned earlier (see Sect. 4) and defines n(r, X) to be the exact ground-state elec

 tron density of a many-electron system where the charge of every electron is taken
 to be Xe rather than e. Using just a few lines of calculation, Wilson shows that the

 total energy E in Eq. (10) can be written as an integral from k = 0 to X = 1 of the

 sum of the classical Coulomb potentials produced by n(r, X) at the positions of all the
 nuclei.112

 From the foregoing, I conclude that no scientists before Walter Kohn in 1963 were

 even vaguely thinking about using the ground-state charge density as a fundamental

 112 According to Musher (1966), Wilson's method goes back to Pauli.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 836 A. Zangwill

 quantity from which to build an exact theory of a many-electron system.113 The idea

 was not "in the air," and all eyes were riveted either on the many-electron wave function,

 the first- and second-order density matrices, or the Green functions of many-body

 field theory. The Zeitgeist of electronic structure theory was simply not moving in the

 direction of the electron density function for some particulary well-prepared scientist

 to exploit and earn the accolades of discovery.

 I now turn to Kohn himself. Section IV detailed how Walter chose to focus his fall

 1963 sabbatical leave on a problem that was not under active investigation by many of

 his theoretical colleagues. Namely, how might one calculate the electronic structure

 of a three-dimensional disordered metal alloy, a system with no underlying spatial

 periodicity?114 His study of the metallurgy and metal physics literature inspired him

 to ask whether the electron density n(r) was sufficient to completely characterize a

 many-electron system. It must be admitted that Kohn was a product of his scientific

 milieu as much as any other electronic structure theorist working at the time. Therefore,

 the mere fact that this question came to his mind and he took it seriously must be

 regarded as a legitimate "eureka moment" which few are privileged to experience.

 That being said, I wish to argue further that his particular history, style of research,

 and scientific tastes made him unusually well suited to exploit this insight and create

 from it the edifice of density functional theory.

 Two aspects of Kohn's pre-college years (surveyed in Sect. 2) bear on the nar

 row question of his future life as a physicist. First, the cataclysm of the Anschluss
 put the budding classics scholar into contact with Emil Nohel and Victor Sab
 bath, two high school teachers whose passion for their subjects converted him to

 an enthusiastic student of mathematics and physics. Second, the camp schools Kohn

 attended while interned in Canada exposed him to sophisticated one-on-one instruction

 from professional scientists. A pedagogical experience of this kind is barely imagin
 able at a conventional high school, then or now. In a normal setting, there is little

 chance that the teenaged Kohn would have encountered (much less devoured) books
 like Hardy's A Course in Pure Mathematics and Slater's Introduction to Chemical

 Physics.115

 Walter's undergraduate and master's level classroom experiences at the University

 of Toronto were probably typical of first-rate academic institutions at the time. What

 113 Dirac (1930) states that "the whole state of the atom is completely described simply by this electric

 density; it is not necessary to specify the individual three-dimensional wave functions that make up the total

 electric density". However, it is clear from context that the word "density" is used here to mean the quantum

 mechanical density matrix. In the last section of the paper, Dirac identifies the approximations required to

 reduce his density matrix description to a classical scalar density description. The result is a generalization

 of the Thomas-Fermi approximation.

 114 Early work on this problem published by Korringa (1958) and Beeby (1964) blossomed into a full-scale

 theory of the electronic structure of disordered alloys in the late 1960s and early 1970s (Ehrenreich and
 Schwartz 1976).

 115 It is impossible to know how the frightful loss of his home and parents to Nazi terror motivated Kohn

 to succeed in later life. A statistical study of Viennese children who had similar experiences during World

 War II and then emigrated to America shows that those who entered the sciences achieved success (by

 conventional measures) more than twice as often as native-bom American scientists of the same generation.

 The study quotes several participants who said "they felt a great responsibility to make the most of their
 lives because their survival was such a rare and unlikely event". (Sonnert and Holton 2006).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 837

 was not typical was the unusually high caliber of the individuals who mentored him and

 who (because of their own professional interests) repeatedly emphasized variational

 principles for both general proofs and for detailed numerical calculations. It is true

 that all well-trained theoretical physicists learn about variational principles and many

 use them occasionally in their professional work. However, very few physicists who

 learn about them as undergraduates go on to work with a doctoral supervisor like

 Julian Schwinger who attacked almost every problem from a variational point of

 view, and then write a thesis where variational principles are used (again) both to

 prove a general result and to obtain numerical results for a specific quantum situation.

 Fundamental and numerical variational calculations appear over and over again in

 Kohn's solid-state work at Carnegie Tech and Bell Labs through the 1950s. It is little

 wonder that he turned quickly to this powerful tool when he sought to prove the

 first Hohenberg-Kohn theorem, which states that the many-body wave function and

 everything calculable from it are functionals of the ground-state electron density n(r).

 The second Hohenberg-Kohn theorem, which states that the total energy takes its

 minimum value when n(r) is the exact ground-state density, is explicitly a variational
 result.

 The Hohenberg-Kohn paper is austere, elegant, and deep. Like several other papers
 in his oeuvre, it demonstrates a characteristic of his work that a Kohn-watcher of

 50 years tenure summarized in this way (Langer 2003):

 He always has loved mathematical elegance, but he reserves it for situations

 where it is truly necessary. His emphasis [is always] on the most important

 physical questions and the ways in which they could be answered with insight
 and confidence.

 This observation is interesting and important, but it does not distinguish Kohn from a

 number of other theoretical physicists with a taste for proving theorems. However, I

 believe it is unlikely that any of them would have had either the interest or the inclina

 tion to derive the Kohn-Sham equations and suggest the local density approximation

 for practical calculations. To make this case, I have surveyed the publications of the
 most active theoretical solid-state physicists working between 1950 and 1980. As a

 matter of personal taste, three broad activities engage them: formal calculations and
 proofs of theorems, analyses of model Hamiltonians, and numerical calculations for

 specific materials systems. If an individual was active in more than one of these, it
 was most often the first and second activities or the second and third activities. Kohn

 is unusual among his peers simply because he followed up a paper which asks and

 answers a deep theoretical question with a paper which constructs a practical tool to

 perform calculations for specific systems.

 Kohn's own early research history demonstrates a willingness to compute actual

 numbers for direct comparison with experiment. The Kohn-Sham equations are the

 vehicle for this activity in the context of electronic structure theory. In practice, Kohn

 turned over much of the explicit numerical work on DFT to his students and postdocs,

 but there is complete agreement among this cohort that he never regarded this activity

 as a less important part of his group's research. This is the reason that a senior quantum

 chemist could remark that Kohn is "the least arrogant of the deep physicists" in the

 sense that he does not "give a lower standing to those parts of physics that deal

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 838 A. Zangwill

 rmWm*=m

 i If3 J I-'
 ■  j . ■ £4l
 ii 1 _K

 mkJ

 p

 Fig. 13 The physicist Walter Kohn learns a new trade after winning one-half the 1998 Nobel Prize in
 Chemistry. Drawing by Peter Melier. Courtesy of Walter Kohn

 with the complexities of phenomena governed by known laws" (Baerends 2003).
 The "complexities" mentioned here are discovered only by carrying out numerical
 computations for specific systems using the "known laws" described by the Kohn
 Sham formalism.

 In summary, Walter Kohn earned one-half of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
 by asking himself a simple (yet deep) scientific question about the electronic structure
 of matter. He answered that question in an elegant and thought-provoking manner
 and then exploited his result to re-formulate the quantum many-electron problem
 in a manner which made calculations for real systems computationally cheap and
 surprisingly accurate. These things may have been achieved by someone else if Kohn

 and his postdoctoral associates had not done so in the years 1963-1965, but that person

 would probably look very much like Walter Kohn himself (Fig. 13).

 Acknowledgments First and foremost, I thank Walter Kohn, who graciously granted me two interviews,
 answered my follow-up questions by email, and gave me access to several private documents and pho
 tographs. Prof. Kohn's administrative assistant, Ms. Chris Seaton, deserves special mention for her unfailing
 help. I am also grateful to Pierre Hohenberg and Lu Jeu Sham, who shared with me both their memories and
 their personal photographs. Dozens of people communicated with me about their experiences with Kohn
 and his work and I collectively thank all of them here. Ms. Pia Otte provided excellent translations from Ger
 man into English and I acknowledge Andre Bernard (John Simon Guggenheim Foundation), Carlo Siochi
 (University of Toronto), Gregory Giannakis (McGill University), and Felicity Pors (Niels Bohr Archive)
 for sending me copies of original documents. The staffs of the Department of Special Collections of the
 Library of the University of California at Santa Barbara and of the Vancouver Holocaust Education Centre
 provided essential help. Special thanks go to my Georgia Tech colleague, Glenn Smith, who read every
 word and offered many helpful suggestions.

 Appendix: Unpublished and archival sources

 AA13 Anthony Arrott interview. July 19, 2103.

 AG07 Griffin, A. Many-body physics in the 1960s: a golden age. A talk given at the

 symposium "50years of Condensed Matter Physics". June 16, 2007. http://
 www.lassp.cornell.edu/lassp_data/LASSP/50YearsCMP-VA2007.pdf

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The education of Walter Kohn 839

 AMP American Physical Society, http://www.aps.org

 AY13 Correspondence with Alice Carroll Young. May 2, 2013.

 CDW13 Program of the 1951 Summer School of Theoretical Physics, Les Houches,

 France. Courtesy of Prof. Cécile deWitt, University of Texas.

 CS 13 Correspondence with C. Siochi, University of Toronto Alumni Relations

 Officer for the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. March 20, 2013.

 DM13 Correspondence with David Mermin. February 12, 2013.

 GF62 John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. Application letter of Walter

 Kohn. 1962. Used by permission of the Foundation and Walter Kohn.

 GFF46 Geoffroy, PR. 1946. Report on the Magnetometer Survey of the property

 of Dante Red Lake Gold Mines Ltd. File 52N04N9958.pdf of the Ontario

 Ministry of Northern Development and Mines.

 GG13 Correspondence with G. Giannakis, McGill University Archives. August 6,

 2013.

 HF13 Correspondence with Allen Horsley, Rose Shelton Horsley Cruz and Lucile

 Horsley Blanchard, children of Caperton B. Horsley, founder of the Sutton

 Horsley Co. June 2013.

 IAQMS International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science. http://www.iaqms.

 JE 13 Josef Eisinger interview. July 24, 2013.
 JF13 Correspondence with Jon Ford, Head Teacher, Imberhorne Secondary

 School, East Grinstead, England. June 19, 2013.

 JP91 Pople, J. A. 1991. The computation of molecular energies. Video recording

 of an invited talk to the Vllth International Congress of Quantum Chemistry.

 Courtesy of Prof. Axel Becke.

 KB85 Brueckner, K. 1985. Early Development of the UCLJ Physics Department,

 pp. 5-9 in: Proceedings of the La Jolla Physics Symposium, UCLJ 1960

 1965. http://physics.ucsd.edu/dept/department_history.pdf

 KB94 Brueckner, K. 1994. First years at the University of California at San Diego,

 1959 to 1965. http://libraries.ucsd.edU/historyofucsd/#iw_bruecknerfirst

 org.

 years

 KH99 Hanta, K. 1999. From exile to excellence: an interview with Nobel prize lau

 reate Walter Kohn. Austria Kultur 9 (1). http://www.auslandsdienst.at/de/

 projekt/pressearchiv-1999/austria-kultur-vol-9-no 1 -januaryfebruary-1999
 exile-excellence-interview

 LB 13 Correspondence with Louis W. Bruch. April 10 2013.

 LG13 Larry Glasser interview. August 6, 2013.

 LS14 Correspondence with Lu Jeu Sham. January 10 2014.

 MR 13 Max Luming Ren interview. July 20,2013.

 NBA Niels Bohr Archive. Copenhagen.

 NPC Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1998. http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/

 chemistry/laureates/1998

 NR13 Norman Rostoker interview. July 23,2013.

 PA77 Philip Anderson Nobel Prize autobiography, http://www.nobelprize.org/

 nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1977/anderson-bio.html

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springe

 840 A. Zangwill

 PA99 Philip W. Anderson interview conducted by Alexei Kojevnikov. May 29,

 1999. Niels Bohr Library and Archives, College Park, MD.

 PF13 Peter J. Feibelman interview. June 28,2013.

 PHI2 Pierre Hohenberg interview. July 19, 2012.

 PNI2 Correspondence with Philippe Nozières. July 6 2012.

 PRL64 Memorandum from the Editors of Physical Review Letters. October 1964.

 RF13 Robert Fletcher interview. October 30 2013.

 RS51 Silverman, R.A. 1951. The Fermi Energy of Metallic Lithium. Ph.D. thesis.

 Harvard University.

 SG65 Letter from S.A. Goudsmit to L.J. Sham. May 28 1965. Courtesy of Lu Jeu

 TK59 Kjeldaas, T. 1959. Theory of Ultrasonic Cyclotron Resonance in Metals at

 Low Temperature. Ph.D. Thesis. University of Pittsburgh.

 UCSDA University of California San Diego Archives. News Release. September 15

 Sham.

 1960.

 VA13 Vinay Ambegaokar interview. May 12, 2013.

 VC13 Vittorio Celli interview. February 8, 2013.

 WKOOa Walter Kohn interview conducted by N. Hollander. Nobel Voices Video

 History Project. 2000. Archives Center. Smithsonian National Museum of

 Natural History.

 WKOOb Letter of August 23,2000, from Walter Kohn to the Principal of the Imber

 horne Secondary School, East Grinstead, England. Courtesy of Jon Ford.

 WK01 A personal account of the history of density functional theory. Session S3

 (History of electronic structure theory in atoms, molecules, and solids),

 American Physical Society annual meeting, March 14, 2001, Seattle, WA.
 Sound recording AV 2001 -374z used with the permission of the Niels Bohr
 Library and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD
 20740, USA.

 WK03 A fireside chat with Nobel Laureate Professor Walter Kohn. An August

 15, 2003, broadcast by the University of California Television. http://www.

 youtube.com/watch ?v=VDNNiKdtyhg.

 WK12 Walter Kohn interview. December 18, 2012.

 WK13a Walter Kohn interview conducted by Nina Krieger. March 3, 2013. Intern

 ment Project of the Vancouver Holocaust Education Centre.

 WK13b Walter Kohn interview. October 8, 2013.

 WK98 Walter Kohn Nobel Prize autobiography, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_

 prizes/chemistry/laureates/1998/kohn-autobio.html

 WKP Walter Kohn Papers. University of California, Santa Barbara.

 Abragam, A. 1989. Time reversal. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Abrikosov, A.A., L.P. Gorkov, and I.E. Dzyaloshinski. 1963. Methods of quantum field theory in statistical

 physics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

 Adhikari, S.K. 1998. Variational principles and the numerical solution of scattering problems. New York:

 References

 Wiley.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aharonov, Y., and D. Böhm. 1959. Significance of electromagnetic potentials in the quantum theory. Physical

 The education of Walter Kohn 841

 Review 115:485-491.

 Allin, E.J. 1981. Physics at the University of Toronto 1843-1980. Toronto: University Press.

 Ambegaokar, V. 2003. Walter Kohn as PhD advisor. In Walter Kohn—personal stories and anecdotes told

 by friends and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 1-2. Berlin: Springer.

 Ambegaokar, V., and W. Kohn. 1959. Connection between true effective mass and optical absorption in

 Ambegaokar, V., and W. Kohn. 1960. Electromagnetic properties of insulators. Physical Review 117:

 insulators. Physical Review Letters 2: 385.

 423-431.

 Anderson, P.W. 1958. Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices. Physical Review 109:1492-1505.
 Anderson, P.W. 1978. Local moments and localized states. Reviews of Modem Physics 50:191-201.
 Anderson, P.W. 1987. John Hasbrouk Van Vleck. In Biographical Memoir. Washington, DC: National

 Academy of Sciences Press.

 Anderson, P.W. 2011. Physics at Bell Labs, 1949-1984. In More and different: Notes from a thoughtful

 curmudgeon, 73-80. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific.

 Anderson, P.W., R.M. Friedberg, and W. Kohn. 1997. Joaquin M. Luttinger. Physics Today 50(12): 89-90.
 Anonymous. 1961. APS-AAPT Annual Joint Meeting in New York. Physics Today 14(3): 52-56

 Aronszajn, N., and A. Weinstein. 1942. On the unified theory of eigenvalues of plates and membranes.

 American Journal of Mathematics 64: 623-645.

 Auger, M.F. 2005. Prisoners on the home front: German POW's and "enemy aliens" in southern Quebec,

 1940-1946. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.

 Bader, R.F.W., and G.A. Jones. 1963. Electron density distributions in hydride molecules. The ammonia

 molecule. Journal of Chemical Physics 38: 2791-2802.

 Baerends, E.J. 2003. Walter Kohn, the chemist. In Walter Kohn—personal stories and anecdotes told by

 friends and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 20-22. Berlin: Springer.

 Baerends, E.J., D.E. Ellis, and P. Ros. 1973. Self-consistent molecular Hartree-Fock-Slater calculations I.

 The computational procedure. Chemical Physics 2: 41-51.

 Baraff, G.A., and S. Borowitz. 1961. Green's function method for quantum corrections to the Thomas-Fermi

 model of the atom. Physical Review 121:1704-1713.

 Bardeen, J„ L.N. Cooper, and J.R. Schrieffer. 1957. Theory of superconductivity. Physical Review 108:

 1175-1204.

 Chemistry 72:1405-1423.

 Barden, C.J., and H.F. Schaeffer III. 2000. Quantum chemistry in the 21st century. Pure and Applied

 Bassani, F., and M. Tosi. 1988. Theoretical research in the physics of solids. In The origins of solid state

 physics in Italy: 1945-1960, ed. G. Giuliani, 129-136. Bologna: Italian Physical Society.

 Baym, G. 1969. Lectures on quantum mechanics. Menlo Park: Benjamin Cummings,
 Becke, A.D. 1982. Numerical Hartree-Fock-Slater calculations on diatomic molecules. Journal of Chemical

 Becke, A.D. 1988. Density functional exchange energy approximation with correct asymptotic behavior.

 Physics 76: 6037-6045.

 Physical Review A 38: 3098-3100.

 Physics 98: 5648-5652.

 Becke, A.D. 1993. Density functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange. Journal of Chemical

 Beeby, J.L. 1964. Electronic structure of alloys. Physical Review 135: A130-A143.

 Bellemans, A., and M. De Leener. 1961. Ground-state energy of an electron gas in a lattice of positive point

 charges. Physical Review Letters 6: 603-604.

 Beller, S. 1989. Vienna and the jews: 1867-1938. Cambridge: University Press.

 Berkley, G.E. 1988. Vienna and its jews. Cambridge, MA: Abt Books.

 Blatt, F.J. 1963. Transport properties in dilute alloys. In Metallic solid solutions, ed. J. Friedel, and A.

 Guinier, H-l-II-11. New York: Benjamin.

 Bloch, F. 1928. Über die Quantenmechanik der Elektronen in Kristallgittern. Zeitschrift ßr Physik 52:

 Boring, E.G. 1950. Great men and scientific progress. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society

 Borowitz, S., and W. Kohn. 1949. On the electromagnetic properties of nucléons. Physical Review 76:

 555-600.

 94:339-351.

 818-827.

 Brockhouse, B.N., and A.T. Stewart. 1958. Normal modes of aluminum by neutron spectroscopy. Reviews

 of Modem Physics 30:236-249.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 Brown, W.L., R.C. Fletcher, and K.A. Wright. 1953. Annealing of bombardment damage in germanium:

 Experimental. Physical Review 92: 591-596.

 Brueckner, K. 2000. Highlights of many-body physics. In Recent progress in many-body theories, ed. R.F.

 Bishop, K.A. Gernoth, N.R. Walet, and Y. Xian, 25-29. Singapore: World Scientific.

 Callaway, J. 1958. Energy bands in solids. In Solid state physics, vol. 7, ed. F. Seitz, and D. Turnbull,

 842 A. Zangwill

 99-212. New York: Academic.

 Callaway, J., and W. Kohn. 1962. Electron wave functions in metallic lithium. Physical Review 127: 1913.
 Callen, H.B. 1960. Thermodynamics. New York: Wiley.

 Cesarini, D., and T. Kushner. 1993. The internment of aliens in twentieth century Britain. London: Frank

 Cass & Co., Ltd.

 Chien, C.L., and C.R. Westgate. 1980. The Hall effect and its applications. New York: Plenum.
 Cohen, M.H. 1963. Interatomic interactions in metals. In Metallic solid solutions, ed. J. Friedel, and A.

 Guinier, XI-l-XI-9. New York: Benjamin.

 Coleman, A.J. 1963. Structure of fermion density matrices. Reviews of Modern Physics 35: 668-687.
 Crawford, T.D., S.S. Wesolowski, E.F. Valeev, R.A. King, M.L. Leininger, and H.F. Schaefer III. 2001. The

 past, present, and future of quantum chemistry. In Chemistry for the 21st century, ed. E. Keinan, and I.
 Schechter, 219-246. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

 Curio, C. 2004. Invisible children: The selection and integration strategies of relief organizations. Shofar

 Curtiss, L.A., K. Raghavachari, G.W. Trucks, and J. A. Pople. 1991. Gaussian-2 theory for molecular energies

 of first- and second-row compounds. Journal of Chemical Physics 94: 7221-7230.

 Daniel, E., and S.H. Vosko. 1960. Momentum distribution of an interaction electron gas. Physical Review

 23: 41-56.

 120: 2041-2044.

 De Witt, B.S. 1951. Theoretical physics. Physics Today 4(12): 22-23.
 Diaz, J.B. 1978. Alexander Weinstein selecta. London: Pitman.

 Dirac, P.A.M. 1930. Note on exchange phenomena in the Thomas atom. Proceedings of the Cambridge

 Philosophical Society 26: 376-385.

 Dirac, P.A.M. 1935. The principles of quantum mechanics, 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Domb, C. 1996. The critical point: A historical introduction to the modern theory of critical phenomena.

 London: Taylor and Francis.

 de Beauregard Robinson, G. 1979. The Mathematics Department in the University of Toronto 1827-1978.

 Toronto: Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto.

 de Dominicis, C. 1963. Variational statistical mechanics in terms of 'observables' for normal and superfluid

 systems. Journal of Mathematical Physics 4: 255-265.

 de Dominicis, C. and P.C. Martin. 1964. Stationary entropy principle and renormalization in normal and

 superfluid systems. Journal of Mathematical Physics 5:14-30.

 de Gennes, P.G. 1966. Superconductivity in metals and alloys. Reading, MA: Benjamin.
 DuBois, D.F., and M.G. Kivelson. 1962. Quasi-classical theory of electron correlation in atoms. Physical

 Review 127: 1182-1192.

 Dresselhaus, G., A.F. Kip, and C. Kittel. 1955. Cyclotron resonance of electrons and holes in silicon and

 germanium crystals. Physical Review 98: 368-384.

 Duff, G.F.D. 1969. Arthur Francis Chesterfield Stevenson. 1899-1968. Proceedings of the Royal Society of

 Edwards, S.F. 1998. Reminiscences. In Nevill Mott: Reminiscences and appreciations, ed. E.A. David,

 Canada Series TV 8: 104-107.

 203-204. London: Taylor and Francis.

 Ehrenreich, H., and L.M. Schwartz. 1976. The electronic structure of alloys. In Solids state physics, vol.

 31, ed. H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz, and D. Tumbull, 149-286. New York: Academic.

 Eisinger, J., and G. Feher. 1958. Hfs anomaly of Sb121 and Sb123 determined by the electron nuclear double

 resonance technique. Physical Review 109: 1172-1183.

 Eisinger, J. 2011. Einstein on the road. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

 Ehrlich, G. 2003. Reunion in history. In Walter Kohn: Personal stories and anecdotes told by friends and

 collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 60-62. Berlin: Springer.

 Enz, C.P. 2002. No time to be brief: A scientific biography of Wolfgang Pauli. Oxford: University Press.

 Faddeev, L. 1965. Mathematical aspects of the three body problem in quantum scattering theory. Jerusalem:

 Israel Program for Scientific Translations.

 Fast, V.K. 2011. Children's exodus: A history of the Kindertransport. London: I.B. Tauris.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Feher, G. 2002. The creation of the physics department. Chronicles: Newsletter of the UCSD Emeriti

 Feldberg, W.S. 1960. Bruno Mendel. 1897-1959. Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 6:

 The education of Walter Kohn 843

 Association 2(2): 6-8.

 190-199.

 York: Springer.

 54: 401-424.

 Fernandez, B. 2013. Unravelling the mystery of the atomic nucleus: A sixty year journey 1896-1956. New

 Feynman, R.P. 1949. Space-time approach to quantum electrodynamics. Physical Review 76: 769-789.

 Florides, P.S. 2008. John Lighton Synge. 1897-1995. Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society

 Fock, V. 1930. Approximate methods for the solution of the quantum mechanical many-body problem.

 Zeitschrift fir Physik 61:126-148. (in German).

 Frank, P. 1947. Einstein: His life and times. New Yoik: Alfred A. Knopf.

 Friedel, J. 1954. Electronic structure of primary solid solutions. Advances in Physics 3: 446-507.
 Friedel, J. 1958. Metallic alloys. Supplemento delNuovo Cimento 7: 287-311.
 Friedel, J. 1963. The concept of the virtual bound state. In Metallic solid solutions, ed. J. Friedel, and A.

 Guinier, XIX-l-XIX-22. New York: Benjamin.

 Friedel, J., and A. Guinier. 1963. Metallic solid solutions. New York: Benjamin.

 Frisch, O.R. 1979. What little I remember. Cambridge: University Press.

 Galitskii, V.M., and A.B. Migdal. 1958. Application of quantum field theory methods to the many-body

 problem. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 34:139-150.

 Gâspâr, R. 1954. About an approximation to the Hartree-Fock potential through a universal potential

 function. Acta Physica Hungarica 3: 263-286. (in German).

 Gavroglu, K., and A. Simöes. 2012. Neither physics nor chemistry: A history of quantum chemistry. Cam

 Gell-Mann, M. 1996. Reminiscences. Philosophical Magazine 74: 431-434.

 Gilman, P., and L. Gilman. 1980. Collar the lot: How Britain interned and expelled its wartime refugees.

 bridge, MA: MIT Press.

 London: Quartet Books.

 Gold, A.V. 1958. An experimental determination of the Fermi surface in lead. Philosophical Transactions

 of the Royal Society A 251: 85-112.

 Goldman, J.E. 1957. The science of engineering materials. New York: Wiley.

 Goldstone, J. 1957. Derivation of Brueckner many-body theory. Proceedings of the Royal Society A 239:

 267-279.

 Gunnarsson, O., and J. Harris. 1977. Density functional theory and molecular bonding. I. First-row diatomic

 molecules. Journal of Chemical Physics 67: 3970-3979.

 Handy, N.C., and H.F. Schaefer III. 1990. Forty years quantum chemistry. An international conference in

 honor of Professor John A. Pople. Journal of Physical Chemistry 94: 5417-5430.
 Hardy, G.H. 1938. A course in pure mathematics, 7th ed. Cambridge: University Press.
 Harrison, W.A., and Mi. Webb. 1960. The Fermi surface. New York: Wiley.

 Hartree, D.R. 1928. The wave mechanics of an atom with a non-Coulomb central field. Part I. Proceedings

 of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 24: 89-110.

 Hasegawa, H. 2003. Walter Kohn in Japan. In Walter Kohn: Personal stories and anecdotes told by friends

 and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 93-95. Berlin: Springer.

 Herman, F. 1958. Theoretical investigation of the electronic energy band structure of solids. Reviews of

 Modern Physics 30: 102-121.

 Paris: Dunod.

 Herman, F. 1964. Recent progress in energy band theory. In Physics of semiconductors, ed. M. Hulin, 3-22.

 Herman, F., and S. Skillman. 1963. Atomic structure calculations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

 Herman, F., Van Dyke, J.P., and I.B. Ortenburger. 1969. Improved statistical exchange approximation for

 inhomogeneous many-electron systems. Physical Review Letters 22:807-811.

 Hinman, G., and D. Rose. 2010. Edward Chester Creutz. In Biographical Memoir. Washington, DC: National

 Academy of Sciences Press.

 Hoddeson, L., E. Braun, J. Teichmann, and S. Weart. 1992. Out of the crystal maze: Chapters from the

 history of solid-state physics. New York: Oxford University Press.

 Hodges, C.H., and M.J. Stott. 1972. Theory of electrochemical effects in alloys. Philosophical Magazine

 26: 375-392.

 Hohenberg, P., and W. Kohn. 1964. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical Review 136: B864-B871.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 844 A. Zangwill

 in Quantum Chemistry 21: 7-26.

 Chemistry of Solids 20: 289-293.

 Hohenberg, P.C., W. Kohn, and L.J. Sham. 1990. The beginnings and some thoughts on the future. Advances

 Houghton, A. 1961. Specific heat and spin susceptibility of dilute alloys. Journal of the Physics and

 Hubbard, J. 1957. The description of collective motions in terms of many-body perturbation theory. Pro

 ceedings of the Royal Society (London) A 239: 539-560.

 Hubbard, i. 1958. The description of collective motions in terms of many-body perturbation theory HI.

 The extension of the theory to the non-uniform gas. Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) A 244:
 199-211.

 Metals.

 225-234.

 Ireland Press.

 Hulthén, L. 1946. The variational principle for continuous spectra: In Dixième Congreès des Mathématiciens

 Scandinaves Copenhagen, 201-206. Julius Gjellerups Forlag.

 Hume-Rothery, W. 1931. The metallic state. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Hume-Rothery, W., and G.V. Raynor. 1962. The structure of metals and alloys, 4th ed. London: Institute of

 Infeld, L. 1978. Why I left Canada, 2nd ed. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

 Jammer, M. 1966. The conceptual development of quantum mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Johnson, B.G., P.M.W. Gill, and J.A. Pople. 1992. Preliminary results on the performance of a family of

 density functional methods. Journal of Chemical Physics 97: 7846-7848.

 Jones, H. 1934. The theory of alloys in the y-phase. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 144:

 Jones, R.0.2012. Density functional theory: A personal view. In Strongly correlated systems: Theoretical

 methods ed. M. Avella and F. Mancini, 1-28. Berlin: Springer.

 Jones, T. 1988. Both sides of the wire: The Fredericton Internment Camp, vol. 1. Fredericton, NB: New

 Jones, W., N.H. March, and S. Sampanthar. 1962. The energy and the Dirac density matrix of a non-uniform

 electron gas. Physics Letters 1: 303-304.

 Jost, R., and W. Kohn. 1952a. Construction of a potential from a phase shift. Physical Review 87:977-992.

 Jost, R., and W. Kohn. 1952b. Equivalent potentials. Physical Review 88: 382-385.
 Jost, R., and W. Kohn. 1953. On the relation between phase shift energy levels and the potential. Det

 Kongelige Danske Videnskarbernes Selskab Matematisk-fysiske Meddelelser 27: 1-19.

 Kaiser, D. 2005. Drawing theories apart: The dispersion ofFeynman diagrams in postwar physics. Chicago:

 Kerr, C. 2001. The gold and the blue: A personal memoir of the University of California, 1949-1967.

 Academic Triumphs, vol. 1. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Kittel, C„ and A.H. Mitchell. 1954. Theory of donor and acceptor states in silicon and germanium. Physical

 University Press.

 Review 96: 1488-1493.

 Kittel, C. 1963. Quantum theory of solids. New York: Wiley.
 Kjeldaas, T., and W. Kohn. 1956. Interaction of conduction electrons and nuclear magnetic moments in

 metallic sodium. Physical Review 101: 66-67.

 Klein, F., and A. Sommerfeld. 1898. Über die Theorie des Kreisels. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Koch, E. 1980. Deemed suspect: A wartime blunder. Toronto: Methuen.

 Kohn, W. 1945. The spherical gyrocompass. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics 3: 87-88.

 Kohn, W. 1946. Contour integration in the theory of the spherical pendulum and the heavy symmetrical

 top. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 59: 107-131.

 Kohn, W. 1947. Two applications of the variational method to quantum mechanics. Physical Review 71:

 Kohn, W. 1948. Variational methods in nuclear collision problems. Physical Review 74:1763-1772.

 Kohn, W. 1952a. Validity of Born expansions. Physical Review 87: 539-540.

 Kohn, W. 1952b. Variational methods for periodic lattices. Physical Review 87:472-481.
 Kohn, W. 1954. Interaction of conduction electrons and nuclear magnetic moments in metallic lithium.

 Physical Review 96: 590-592.

 Kohn, W. 1957a. Shallow impurity states in Si and Ge. In Solid state physics ed. F. Seitz and D. Turnbull,

 Kohn, W. 1957b. Effective mass theory in solids from a many-particle point of view. Physical Review 105:

 Kohn, W. 1958. Interaction of charged particles in a dielectric. Physical Review 110: 857-864.

 Kohn, W. 1959a. Analytic properties of Bloch waves and Wannier functions. Physical Review 115:809-821.

 635-637.

 257-320.

 509-516.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Kohn, W. 1959b. Theory of Bloch electrons in a magnetic field: The effective Hamiltonian. Physical Review

 The education of Walter Kohn 845

 Kohn, W. 1959c. Image of the Fermi surface in the vibration spectrum of a metal. Physical Review Letters

 115:1460-1478.

 2: 393-394.

 Kohn, W. 1964. Theory of the insulating state. Physical Review 133: A171-A181.

 Kohn, W. 1996. Tribute to Julian Schwinger. In Julian Schwinger: The physicist, the teacher, and the man

 ed. Y. Jack Ng, 61-64. Singapore. World Scientific.

 Kohn, W. 1999. Nobel lecture: Electronic structure of matter-wave functions and density functionals.

 Kohn, W. 2004. My honored teachers in Vienna. In Österreichs Umgang mit dem Nationalsozialismus, ed.

 Reviews of Modem Physics 71: 1253-1266.

 F. Stadler, 43-50. Wien: Springer.

 Kohn, W. 2012. Congratulation. Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism 25: 551.

 Kohn, W., and N. Bloembergen. 1950. Remarks on the nuclear resonance shift in metallic lithium. Physical

 Kohn, W., and M. Luming. 1963. Orbital susceptibility of dilute alloys. Journal of the Physics and Chemistry

 Kohn, W„ and J.M. Luttinger. 1955a. Hyperfine splitting of donor states in silicon. Physical Review 97:

 Kohn, W., and J.M. Luttinger. 1955b. Theory of donor states in silicon. Physical Review 98: 915-922.

 Kohn, W., and J.M. Luttinger. 1957. Quantum theory of electrical transport phenomena. Physical Review

 Kohn, W., and J.M. Luttinger. 1960. Ground state of a many-fermion system. Physical Review 118:41-45.

 Kohn, W„ and J.M. Luttinger. 1965. New mechanism for superconductivity. Physical Review Letters 15:

 Review 80: 913.

 of Solids 24: 851-862.

 883-888.

 108: 590-611.

 524-526.

 8-9.

 Kohn, W., and S.J. Nettel. 1960. Giant fluctuations in a degenerate fermi gas. Physical Review Letters 5:

 Kohn, W., and N. Rostoker. 1954. Solution of the Schrödinger equation in periodic lattices with an application

 to metallic lithium. Physical Review 94:1111-1120.

 Kohn, W., D. Ruelle, and A. Wightman. 1992. Res Jost. Physics Today 45:120-121.
 Kohn, W., and D. Schechter. 1955. Theory of acceptor levels in germanium. Physical Review 99:1903-1904.

 Kohn, W., and L.J. Sham. 1965a. Quantum density oscillations in an inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical

 Kohn, W., and L.J. Sham. 1965b. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects.

 Review 137: A1697-A1705.

 Physical Review 140: A1133-A1138.

 Kohn, W., and S.H. Vosko. 1960. Theory of nuclear resonance intensity in dilute alloys. Physical Review

 Korringa, J. 1947. On the calculation of the energy of a Bloch wave in a metal. Physica 13: 392-400.

 Korringa, J. 1958. Dispersion theory for electrons in a random lattice with applications to the electronic

 structure of alloys. Journal of the Physics and Chemistry of Solids 7: 252-258.

 Korringa, J. 1994. Early history of multiple scattering theory for ordered systems. Physics Reports 238:

 119:912-918.

 341-360.

 Kryachko, E.S., and C.V. Ludefia. 1990. Energy density functional theory of many-electron systems. Dor

 drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

 Kubo, R. 1957. Statistical mechanical theory of irreversible processes. I. Journal of the Physical Society of

 Landau, L.D. 1956. The theory of a Fermi liquid. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 30:

 Langer, J.S. 2003. Reminiscences on the occasion of Walter Kohn's 80th birthday. In Walter Kohn: Personal

 stories and anecdotes told by friends and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 124-126.

 Japan 12: 570-586.

 1058-1064. (in Russian).

 Berlin: Springer.

 Langer, J.S., and S.H. Vosko. 1959. The shielding of a fixed charge in a high-density electron gas. Journal

 of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 12: 196-205.

 Langreth, D.C., and M.J. Mehl. 1983. Beyond the local density approximation in calculations of ground

 state electronic properties. Physical Review B 28:1809-1834.

 Lee, C., W. Yang, and R.G. Pan. 1988. Development of the Colle-Salvetti correlation energy into a density

 functional of the electron density. Physical Review A 37: 785-789.

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Löwdin, P.-O. 1959. Correlation problem in many-electron quantum mechanics. Advances in Chemical

 Luttinger, J.M. 1960. Fermi surface and some simple equilibrium properties of a system of interaction

 fermions. Physical Review 119: 1153-1163.

 Luttinger, J.M., and W. Kohn. 1955. Motion of electrons and holes in perturbed periodic fields. Physical

 846 A. Zangwill

 Physics 2: 207-322.

 Review 97: 869-883.

 1892-1909.

 Luttinger, J.M., and W. Kohn. 1958. Quantum theory of electrical phenomena. II. Physical Review 109:

 Luttinger, J.M., and P. Nozières. 1962. Derivation of the Landau theory of Fermi liquids. II. Equilibrium

 properties and transport equation. Physical Review 127: 1431-1440.

 March, N.H. 1957. The Thomas-Fermi approximation in quantum mechanics. Advances in Physics 6:

 March, N.H. 1975. Self-consistent fields in atoms: Hartree and Thomas-Fermi atoms. Oxford: Pergamon

 March, N.H., and A.M. Murray. 1961. Self-consistent perturbation treatment of impurities and imperfections

 in metals. Proceedings of the Royal Society A 261: 119-133.

 Markoff, J. 2011. Jacob E. Goldman, founder of Xerox lab dies at 90. New York Times December 23 2011 :

 1-101.

 Press.

 B17.

 Martin, P.C., and S.L. Glashow. 1995. Julian Schwinger: Prodigy, problem solver, pioneering physicist.

 Marx, W. 2007. Dornröschen Und Mauerblümchen: Nachzügler und vergessene Arbeiten in der Physik.

 Physics Today 48(10): 40-46.

 Physik in unserer Zeit 38(1): 34-39.

 McWeeny, R. 1960. Some recent advances in density matrix theory. Reviews of Modern Physics 32:335-369.

 Mehra, J„ and K.A. Milton. 2000. Climbing the mountain: The scientific biography of Julian Schwinger.

 Mermin, N.D. 1965. Thermal properties of the inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical Review 137: A1441

 Oxford: University Press.

 A14443.

 Mermin, N.D. 2003. Memorable moments with Walter Kohn. In Walter Kohn: Personal stories and anec

 dotes told by friends and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 155-159. Berlin: Springer.

 Miedema, A.R., F.R. de Boer, and PF. de Chatel. 1973. Empirical description of the role of electronegativity

 in alloy formation. Journal of Physics F: Metal Physics 3: 1558-1576.

 Millman, S. 1983. A history of engineering and science in the Bell system: Physical science (1935-1980).

 Murray Hill, NJ: Bell Telephone Laboratories.

 Morse, P.M. 1982. John Clarke Slater. In Biographical Memoir. Washington, DC: National Academy of

 Mott, N.F. 1936. The electrical resistance of dilute solid solutions. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philo

 Sciences Press.

 sophical Society 32: 281-290.

 Mott, N.F. 1937. The energy of the superlattice in ß brass. Proceedings of the Physical Society 49:258-263.

 Mott, N.F. 1949. The basis of the electron theory of metals, with special reference to the transition metals.

 Proceedings of the Physical Society (London) 62: 416-422.

 Mott, N.F., and H. Jones. 1936. The theory of the properties of metals and alloys. Oxford: University Press.

 Musher, J.I. 1966. Comment on some theorems of quantum chemistry. American Journal of Physics 34:

 Muto, T. 1938. On the electronic structure of alloys. Scientific Papers of the Institute of Physical and

 Chemical Research (Tokyo) 34: 377-390.

 Nesbet, R.K. 2003. Variational principles and methods in theoretical physics and chemistry. Cambridge:

 267-268.

 University Press.

 Neuhaus, H. 2003. A class with class. In Walter Kohn: Personal stories and anecdotes told by friends and

 collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler and P. Weinberger, 173-176. Berlin: Springer.

 Nordheim, L.H. 1931. Zur electronentheorie der metalle II. Annalen der Physik 9: 641-678.

 Nozières, P. 2012. Sixty years of condensed matter physics: An everlasting adventure. Annual Reviews of

 Nozières, P., and J.M. Luttinger. 1962. Derivation of the Landau theory of Fermi liquids I. Formal prelimi

 Condensed Matter Physics 3: 1-7.

 naries. Physical Review 127: 1423-1431.

 Old, B.S. 1961. The evolution of the Office of Naval Research. Physics Today 14(8): 30-35.

 Pais, A. 1982. Subtle is the Lord: The science and life of Albert Einstein. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Pais, A. 1996. Res Jost. In Das Märchen vom Elfenbeinernen Turm: Reden und Aufsätze, ed. K. Hepp, 1-9.

 Berlin: Springer.

 Park, B.S. 2003. The 'hyperbola of quantum chemistry': The changing practice and identity of a scientific

 discipline in the early years of electronic digital computers, 1945-65. Annals of Science 60: 219-247.

 Park, B.S. 2009. Between accuracy and manageability: Computational imperatives in quantum chemistry.

 The education of Walter Kohn 847

 791.

 S230.

 151-157.

 Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences 39: 32-62.

 Parr, R.G., and W. Yang. 1989. Density-functional theory of atoms and molecules. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Pauling, L. 1949. A resonating-valence-bond theory of metals and intermetallic compounds. Proceedings

 of the Royal Society of London A 196: 343-262.

 Peierls, R. 1933. Zur theorie des diamagnetismus von leitungselektronen. Zeitschrift für Physik. 80: 763

 Perçus, J.K. 1963. The many-body problem. New York: Interscience.

 Perdew, J.P. 1986. Density functional approximation for the correlation energy of the inhomogeneous

 electron gas. Physical Review B 33: 8822-8824.

 Pincherle, L. 1960. Band structure calculations in solids. Reports on Progress in Physics 23: 355-394.

 Pines, D. 1961. The many-body problem. Reading, MA: Benjamin.

 Pines, D. 1963. Elementary excitations in solids. New York: Benjamin.

 Pippard, A.B. 1957. An experimental determination of the Fermi surface in copper. Philosophical Trans

 actions of the Royal Society A 250: 325-357.

 Pople, J.A. 1965. Two-dimensional chart of quantum chemistry. Journal of Chemical Physics 43: S229

 Powell, C.F., and G.P.S. Occhialini. 1947. Nuclear physics in photographs. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Pugh, E.M., and N. Rostoker. 1953. Hall effect in ferromagnetic materials. Reviews of Modern Physics 25:

 Raimes, S. 1963. The rigid-band model. In Metallic solid solutions, ed. J. Friedel, and A. Guinier, X-l-X

 1-9. New York: Benjamin.

 Redner, S. 2005. Citation statistics from 110 years of physical review. Physics Today 58(6): 49-54.

 Rostoker, N. 2003.1 am happy that the R stands for Rostoker. In Walter Kohn: Personal stories and anecdotes

 told by friends and collaborators, ed. M. Scheffler, and P. Weinberger, 206-207. Berlin: Springer.

 Rowland, T.J. 1960. Nuclear magnetic resonance in copper alloys: Electron distribution around solute atoms.

 Physical Review 119: 900-912.

 Rozental, S. 1967. The forties and the fifties. In Niels Bohr: His life and work as seen by his friends and

 colleagues, ed. S. Rozental, 149-190. Amsterdam: North Holland.

 Rürup, R., and M. Schüring. 2008. Schicksale und Karrieren: Gedenkbuch ßr die von den National

 sozialisten aus der Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft vertriebenen Forscherinnen und Forscher. Gottingen:
 Wallstein.

 Sapolsky, H.M. 1990. Science and the Navy: The history of the office of naval research. Princeton: University

 Schwinger, J. 1947. A variational principle for scattering problems. Physical Review 72: 742.

 Schweber, S.S. 1994. QED and the men who made it: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga. Prince

 Press.

 ton: University Press.

 SDUT. 2010. Lois M. Kohn. Obituary. San Diego Union Tribune, January 22, 2010.
 Seitz, F. 1940. The modern theory of solids. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Seitz, F. 1994. On the frontier: My life in science. New York: American Institute of Physics Press.
 Seitz, F., and D. Turnbull. 1955. Solid state physics, vol. 1. New York: Academic.

 Sham, L.J. 1965. A calculation of the phonon frequencies in sodium. Proceedings of the Royal Society of

 Sham, L.J., and W. Kohn. 1966. One-particle properties of an inhomogeneous interacting electron gas.

 London A 283: 33-49.

 Physical Review 145: 561-567.

 Shockley, W. 1950. Electrons and holes in semiconductors. Princeton: Van Nostrand Co.

 Silverman, R., and W. Kohn. 1950. On the cohesive energy of metallic lithium. Physical Review 80:912-913.

 Slater, J.C. 1930. Note on Hartree's method. Physical Review 35: 210-211.

 Slater, J.C. 1939. Introduction to chemical physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Slater, J.C. 1951. A simplification of the Hartree-Fock method. Physical Review 81: 385-390.

 Slater, J.C. 1953. An augmented plane wave method for the periodic potential problem. Physical Review

 92: 603-608.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 848 A. Zangwill

 American Society for Metals.

 Modern Physics 35: 484-487.

 Palgrave Macmillan.

 Slater, J.C. 1956. Band theory of bonding in metals. In Theory of alloy phases, 1-12. Cleveland, OH:

 Slater, J.C. 1963. The electronic structure of atoms: The Hartree-Fock method and correlation. Reviews of

 Sonnert, G., and G. Holton. 2006. What happened to the children who fled Nazi persecution. New York:

 Stevenson, A.F., and M.F. Crawford. 1938. A lower limit for the theoretical energy of the normal state of

 helium. Physical Review 54: 375-379.

 Swaminathan, S. 2000. Obituary of Fritz Rothberger. CMS Notes de la SMC 32(5): 29.

 ter Haar, D. 1954. Elements of statistical mechanics. New York: Rinehart.

 Tong, B. Y., and L .J. Sham. 1966. Application of a self-consistent scheme including exchange and correlation

 effects in atoms. Physical Review 144: 1-4.

 von Meyenn, K. 1989. Physics in the making in Pauli's Zürich. In Physics in the making, ed. A. Sarlemijn,

 and M.J. Sparnaay, 93-130. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 Varley, J.H.O. 1954. The calculation of heats of formation of binary alloys. Philosophical Magazine 45:

 887-916.

 191-197.

 49: 521-523.

 2233.

 Wannier, G.H. 1937. The structure of electronic excitation levels in insulating crystals. Physical Review 52:

 Weinstein, A. 1941. Les vibrations et le calcul des variations. Portugaliae Mathematica 2: 36-55.
 Weinstein, A. 1942. The spherical pendulum and complex integration. American Mathematical Monthly

 Wilson, A.H. 1936. The theory of metals. Cambridge: University Press.
 Wilson, E.B. 1962. Four-dimensional electron density function. Journal of Chemical Physics 36: 2232

 Zabloudil, J., R. Hammerling, P. Weinberger, and L. Szunyogh. 2005. Electron scattering in solid matter.

 Zangwill, A. 2013. Hartree and Thomas: The forefathers of density functional theory. Archive for History

 Berlin: Springer.

 of Exact Sciences 67: 331-348.

 Ziman, J. 1960. Electrons andphonons. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Ziman, J. 1964. Principles of the theory of solids. Cambridge: University Press.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:53:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

