 

 

 

 

The Sociology of Science in Its Place: Comment on Shapere
Author(s): Stephen Turner
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring, 1986), pp. 15-18
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690396
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:51 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Sociology of Science in Its Place: Comment on Shapere

 Stephen Turner
 University of South Florida

 Explanations explain differences, or contrasts.
 To ask a why question is to frame, implicitly, a
 contrast-space, a "why this rather than that" (or
 some set of "thats").1 The dominant strategy of the
 sociology of science at the eve of the emergence
 of the "Strong Programme" was to construct con-
 trast spaces by applying to science explanatory cat-
 egories which had proven their value in the study
 of other aspects of social life, such as politics and
 "stratification." The extension was made possible by
 virtue of the manifest fact that scientists, qua mem-
 bers of the "scientific community," are often par-
 ticipants in institutions, and hold institutional posi-
 tions where they must make decisions and take ac-
 tions which have consequences for other scientists:
 they act as editors, as members of committees which
 review grant proposals, hire and tenure faculty,
 select recipients for scientific awards, elect officers of
 scientific organizations, participate in decisions about
 investments in research technology, and, of course,
 make decisions about what research to do-often on

 behalf of other scientists working in the same lab or
 unit.

 Community and institutional practices were the
 easy cases, for actual contrasts fell readily to hand.
 There were various differences-national, histori-
 cal, disciplinary, between institutional settings, and
 in decision-making practices, and even more con-
 veniently, a great many differences in aggregate pat-
 terns, e.g., of citation, co-citation, and noncitation,
 which could be conveniently counted and correlated
 with familiar demographic variables, as well as with
 newly invented ones, such as "professional age."

 There was, however, no natural extension of this

 strategy to the subject matter of scientific belief and
 practice proper. It is a de facto characteristic of
 both fully developed scientific theories and advanced
 scientific practices that they are-unlike religious or

 Author Address: Center for Interdisciplinary Studies in Culture
 and Society, University of South Florida, 140 Seventh Avenue
 South, St. Petersburg, Florida 33701 USA

 An earlier version of these comments was read at the tenth an-

 nual meeting of the Society for Social Studies of Science, Troy,
 New York, October 26, 1985, as commentary on Dudley Shapere's
 "External and Internal Factors in the Development of Science,"
 this issue, pp. 1-9.

 political doctrines and practices-without a usably
 wide range of genuine competitors. At the present
 time, for example, there is no set of full-blown alter-
 native theories of elementary particles. In science,
 the best theory becomes pretty unambiguously the
 best, so much so that, as Shapere says, it can be
 treated by later physicists as part of the given. Nor
 are there comparisons to be found outside of science.
 The person on the street has no elaborate opinions
 on the subject. Nothing that makes for a serious
 comparison may be found in the cosmologies of
 either Melanesians or Presbyterians. The problems
 which most scientific theories address are themselves
 "problems" only within the framework of traditions
 of a very limited community.

 Creating Contrast-spaces

 The evident implication of this is that, brave

 sloganeering about "the extension of sociological
 analysis to all forms of social activity" notwithstand-
 ing, the sociologist interested in scientific belief and
 practice is faced with a serious problem of con-
 structing contrast spaces within which to apply a
 "sociological" explanation. Responses to this practi-
 cal problem have taken several forms. Latour and
 Woolgar (1979, pp. 37,43) invited us to enter the
 laboratory in the frame of mind of an anthropologist
 entering a remote community: this was a distanc-
 ing device, which gave them a newly seen set of
 facts, such as inscription practices (pp. 45-53), to
 describe. Pinch (1985) did in a very explicit way what
 other sociologists of science have done implicitly:
 took descriptions of a particular scientific episode
 as they would be given by philosophers of science,
 then reconstrued the episode using a different
 vocabulary which made no explanatory appeals to
 the philosopher's concepts-truth, rationality, suc-
 cess, and progress. Scientists' own accounts of
 their work, which also often make such appeals, or
 use such terms as "discovery," can be employed to
 produce similar contrasts. As Pickering puts it, we
 can "attempt to understand the process of scientific
 development, and the judgments entailed in it, in
 contemporary rather than retrospective terms" (1984,
 p. 8). In scientists' own accounts, the judgments

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES e Vol. 4, No. 1 * 15

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 of the scientist are "retrospectively legitimated by
 reference to the reality of theoretical entities and
 phenomena" (1984, p. 13).

 The contrasts here are no longer actual contrasts,
 but rather contrasting descriptions. One might
 simply treat them as incarnations of the problem
 of many descriptions, and decline to suppose that
 there is any point to a "decision" between them.2
 However, much of the writing which employs these
 idioms has proceeded by making the naive essen-
 tialist claim that "this is the way science is, really."
 In general, as Shapere observes, these efforts do
 not seem persuasive. Shapere thus draws the moral
 that sociologists ought to get out of the business of
 offering overarching interpretations of science, and
 attend to cases. Where one can construct an in-

 what I will call "sub-beliefs," will often vary between
 persons whose backgrounds vary, as will their deci-
 sions on how to invest their efforts.3

 Scientists' expectations and strategies vary
 biographically, and the variations may result from
 familiar "external" facts, such as differences in
 organizational constraints, resources, and oppor-
 tunities. The rational strategy for a scientist mak-
 ing a decision to pursue an idea, in the face of un-
 certainty, differ from that of scientists with other cir-
 cumstances, endowments, costs, prior expectations
 and commitments, and so on. Thus these sub-beliefs

 escape the difficulty of noncomparability. Moreover,
 their role in the process of belief-formation in science
 threatens the traditional internal-external distinction

 terpretation of a given scientific episode in, e.g.,
 "negotiation" terms, the episode can invariably be
 construed, with suitable adjustments, in the idiom
 of the other traditions. Pace Shapere, this indicates
 not that sociology of science should attend to cases
 more carefully but that these conflicts of interpreta-
 tion cannot be decided on the basis of the histori-

 cal record: the factual characterizations will simply
 reproduce the "overarching" disputes. If the claim
 of the sociology of science to a place in the explana-
 tion of the cognitive parts of science rested solely
 on these quasi-philosophical grounds, one might
 proceed against it by meta-philosophical arguments
 designed to show that the overarching claims behind
 various sociologies of science are incoherent or ab-
 surd. But it is questionable whether the claims of
 the sociology of science to a place other than that as-
 signed to it by Shapere rest solely on these grounds.

 itself, for they cannot be readily collapsed into either
 category. Even with Shapere's historicized version
 of the distinction the difficulty remains, and this has
 implications for both his historical conclusions and
 his methodological morals.

 Shapere suggests that there is a "process of in-
 ternalization" by which hypotheses, methods, and
 the like come to be taken as given. The exis-
 tence of such a process, he further suggests, has
 had the historical effect of freeing science from
 external influences (p. 8). Thus he is ready to
 concede that in the old days, external influences-
 meaning "philosophical, political, economic, so-
 cial, psychological" considerations-"shaped or even
 determined" "the hypotheses proposed, the prob-
 lems conceived, the standards applied, and so forth"
 (p. 8). 4 But he claims that this does not happen in
 modern physics, because these are no longer relevant
 "considerations" or "appeals" within physics. To
 deny this, as he puts it, is to "ignore the substance
 of the subject." If "internal" considerations are
 taken to be those which science has "internalized"

 Beliefs and Sub-beliefs

 Pickering's use of the term "judgment" is sug-
 gestive. To the extent that sociologists take as a
 topic what Pickering calls judgments and research
 strategies (i.e., prospective bets on what in the fal-
 lible world of new techniques and new experimental
 results-and of hunches and general methodological
 prejudices-is to be expected to become the subject of
 scientific consensus), they are freed of the constraint
 of the de facto noncomparability which holds for the
 best scientific beliefs, and therefore freed from the

 necessity of merely comparing divergent, hotly con-
 tested, descriptions. Indeed, a whole world of actual
 contrasts opens up. Particular cognitive and practi-
 cal skills, for example, may become constitutive of
 scientific competence in a given area and therefore
 become "universal." But before they do, they will
 be characteristic of particular local settings, particular
 kinds of personal biographies, or particular kinds of
 natural endowments. Judgments and expectations,

 in the sense of making them into givens, this thesis
 comes down to the claim that the only things that
 (nowadays) influence hypothesis selection, prob-
 lem conceptualization, and methodological standard-
 setting are "obtained from" (p. 7) what has pre-
 viously been established as "given."

 One need not defend any ambitious overarching
 interpretation of science to find this claim to be im-
 plausible. Taking it in a naive, literal sense, it is
 simply false. A scientist (editor of a sub-series in one
 of the top ten physics journals) recently remarked
 to me that "today science is technology-driven." By
 this he meant that problems in his area arise from
 opportunities created by new platforms and new
 instrumentation-which in his area happen usually
 to be designed by engineers, not physicists, and are
 often constructed for nonscientific purposes, as for
 example the LORAN navigation system was. Does
 Shapere really mean to deny the independent effects
 of technology?5 Does he mean to deny that scientists'

 16 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 expectations about the most promising lines of ap-
 proach are influenced by the prospect of employing
 particular technologies? Does he mean to claim that
 there is some radical difference between the effects
 of this kind of "external" influence on scientists' ex-
 pectations and the effects of those influences which
 arise biographically, such as possession of particular
 cognitive skills?

 Sociological claims on these topics are distinctly
 less controversial than those which arise directly
 from the attempt to construct an overarching
 sociological interpretation of science that competes
 with scientists' self-descriptions or with the conven-
 tional philosophy of science. This raises a possibility.
 Even if one concedes that theories which are de facto
 taken to be the best theories, or have become part of
 the given, are the best, there nonetheless remains a
 large range of variation on purely internal grounds
 in prospective judgments and expectations. If these
 variations have any causal relevance to the cognitive
 development of science, then conceding the part of
 Shapere's argument that bears on overarching inter-
 pretations has little effect on the causal purport of
 the sociology of science. Making the weaker claim
 preserves most of the specific explanatory claims of
 the cognitive sociology of science.

 A picture might help explain this. Prospectively,
 science proceeds in a way analogous to crossing a
 stream by going from rock to rock. We choose to step
 on the rocks that can give us a firm footing and from
 which we can move on to other rocks that give us a
 firm footing as well and which move us in the general
 direction of the other side. We might make wrong
 choices-get on a rock and discover that it cannot be
 made firm; or get on a rock and discover that, firm or

 not, we have no place to go forward. Our judgments
 determine the rocks we get on, the path we take, but
 that path could have been different. Retrospectively,
 when we have gone from most promising to most
 promising, we have gone from best to best. But our
 judgments about what was most promising at any
 given point could have been wrong. The rocks we
 disdained could have made our footing firmer and
 led to better subsequent rocks, or perhaps simply to
 a different series.

 It is difficult for us to see that different decisions

 might have been made. Whewell formulated the

 general historiographic reasons for this difficulty in
 Novum Organon Renovatum.

 The very essence of [scientific triumphs is that
 they lead us to regard the views we reject as
 not only false, but inconceivable. And hence
 we are led rather to look back upon the van-
 quished with contempt than upon the victors
 with gratitude. .. . We have a latent persuasion
 that we in their place should have been wiser
 and more clear-sighted;-that we should have

 taken the right side, and given our assent at
 once to the truth.

 Yet in reality, such a persuasion is a mere delu-
 sion.... How many ingenious men in the
 last century rejected the Newtonian Attraction
 as an impossible chimera! How many more,
 equally intelligent, have, in the same manner,
 in our own time, rejected, I do not now mean
 as false, but as inconceivable, the doctrine of
 Luminiferous Undulations! To err in this way is
 the lot, not only of men in general, but of men
 of great endowments and very sincere love of
 truth (1858, pp. 32-4).

 Whewell's point applies a fortiori to judgments and
 other sub-beliefs. Only by failing to grant elementary
 interpretive charity to those whose ideas were not
 followed up, corrected, and improved can we per-
 suade ourselves that the only reasonable judgments
 in science were those which were followed up, cor-
 rected, and improved.6

 As Whewell understands, our retrospective
 standpoint typically places a shroud of unintel-
 ligibility over defeated ideas. On occasion, however,
 science develops in a way that enables us to see
 how things might have gone if other judgments and
 choices had been made. Current ideas in cosmology
 depend on determinations of the properties of fos-
 sil radiation, a topic which could have been studied
 more aggressively. As Jeremy Bernstein has recently
 suggested, this was a matter of expectations:

 the most important reason was that the whole
 field of cosmology was not taken very seriously
 by the scientific community. It was one of those
 circular things. It was not taken seriously be-
 cause of the lack of crucial data, and there was
 a lack of crucial data because it was not taken
 seriously (1985/86, p. 14).

 This implies that what has been believed about
 the universe was different from what would have
 been believed had different choices been made-and

 again, this is the consideration relevant to Shapere's
 historicized notion of internalization.

 Judgments of what is promising are often socially
 distributed. The Pearson-Bateson dispute, at least in
 the earliest stages, i.e., before experimental evidence
 of segregation had accumulated to the point that
 the other biometers began defecting, makes sense
 as a consequence of the distribution of statistical
 skills. What was successful in statistical genetics,
 and gave Pearson good reasons for thinking that
 this was the most promising direction for genetics
 as a whole, could only be understood by those with
 statistical expertise similar to his. In 1903, these
 were local skills, the product of a local tradition.
 Most biologists of the time, who did not share that
 tradition, also did not share his optimism, and in-
 vested their efforts differently. If Pearson's expec-

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 4, No. 1 0 17

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 tations, rather than those of his opponents, had be-
 come the beneficiary of the investments of contem-
 porary genetics, genetics would have continued to
 develop. But what would have been taken as given,
 or "internalized" in Shapere's sense, would have
 been very different from what is in the textbooks we
 all learned our genetics from.7

 The "battles" of contemporary science are con-
 ducted in a highly organized community where deci-
 sions are made on the basis of scientists' judgments,
 which are organized in various ways. Judgments,
 expectations, and opinions about what ought to be
 done are sometimes socially variable. The poten-
 tial causal relevance of this variation derives from
 the banal truth that theories won't become "best

 theories," in many areas of science, unless scientists
 make decisions which enable the theory to develop-
 decisions to create technological opportunities, deci-
 sions to invest in the people who have the skills,
 and so on. Shapere's historical thesis implies the
 diminishing relevance of "external" considerations,
 and therefore of the causal relevance of sociological
 facts. Only by persuading ourselves that science al-
 ways makes optimal choices can we comfortably ac-
 cept the claim that socially variable prospective judg-
 ments have little or no effect on what becomes part
 of the given at any given historical moment. There is
 precious little reason to believe anything of the sort.8

 NOTES

 conflicting with, the direction that would be taken if internal con-

 siderations alone were operative (p. 8).

 This phrasing suggests that a unilinear image of the develop-

 ment of science, an image which would fit comfortably into the
 thought of a Buckle or Spencer, lies behind Shapere's advice:
 sociology is given the place of dealing with that which interferes
 with some supposed natural teleological development of science
 explicated by the philosophy of science proper.

 5. In the case of many technological decisions, one needs little
 imagination to see that there are consequences stemming from
 what gets "internalized" in Shapere's historicized sense. The
 content of the textbook geophysics of oceans and atmospheres
 at this particular moment is different, in the most banal and un-
 problematic sense, from what it would have been had different
 political decisions about the space program been made in the
 sixties, and what it would have been without the LORAN system.
 6. Perhaps unsurprisingly, one of the "sociological" analyses
 Shapere apparently accepts is one I have questioned on the
 grounds of interpretive uncharity (1981): Forman's analysis of
 German physicists' rejection of a causality in the Weimar-era
 (1971).

 7. For the purposes of this argument, all that needs to be
 shown by this example is that both Pearson and his opponents
 rationally believed that their views held the promise of further de-
 velopment, or had reasonable grounds for doubting the promise
 of their opponents' approach. Only a drastic failure of interpretive
 charity would prevent this concession. Provine (1971) established
 the relevant point, that the biometric view was open to develop-
 ment. Whether the debate between Mendelians and biometers

 was a genuine case of incommensurability is a disputed issue (cf.
 Mackenzie and Barnes, 1979, Roll-Hansen, 1983), but this dispute
 is not strictly relevant to my point here.

 8. Indeed, because of the omnipresence of highly organized
 decisional processes in contemporary science, these elements of
 the realm of decision, which cannot be reduced to Shapere's cat-
 egory of "internal" considerations, may be as significant today as
 they have ever been.

 1. This notion has been elaborated for the social sciences by

 REFERENCES

 Alan Garfinkel (1981, pp. 21-48. Cf. Putnam, 1978, pp. 41-5).

 Bernstein, Jeremy. "The Birth of Modern Cosmology." The

 2. There is a long sociological tradition, founded on long
 philosophical traditions, which supports the idea that some of
 these descriptions are true in some special, essentialist, sense, and
 that the others can be either dismissed or sublated. Sometimes

 this has been taken--e.g., by Marxists battling "false conscious-
 ness"-as the goal of inquiry itself. The inspiration for this
 particular notion is to be found in Marx's philosophical tutor:
 similarly for the concepts of the sociological study of belief.
 Pragmatism, by way of Mead, is the source for the "symbolic
 interactionists" who invented the notion of negotiated order,
 Husserl was the source of Alfred Schutz's phenomenological
 sociology, the direct inspiration of the idea of "the social construc-
 tion of reality," and of Garfinkel's ethnomethodology. It should
 surprise no one that redescriptions originating in these traditions
 reproduce the conflicts between essentialism and positivism.

 3. By introducing this term I do not mean to suggest that
 any precise line may be drawn between a sub-belief (any of the
 many things that might lead to slightly stronger preference for
 one expectation over another) and a confirmed belief-something
 "internalized" in Shapere's sense. Indeed, the final point in this
 paper draws its forces from the notion that the choices that shape
 the contents of the cognitive side of scientific research depend
 on a mix of hunches, expectations, things taken as given, and so
 forth. The less determinate the line between these categories, the
 more difficult it is to escape the implications of the point.

 4. Shapere advises sociologists to concern themselves with

 cases where extrascientific considerations . . . combine with
 internal ones to direct science, sometimes aiding, sometimes

 and Son, 1958.

 American Scholar 55(1985/86): 7-18.

 Forman, Paul. "Weimar Culture, Causality, and Quantam

 Theory, 1918-1927: Adaptation by German Physicists and
 Mathematicians to a Hostile Intellectual Environment." Historical

 Studies in the Physical Sciences 3(1971):1ff.

 Garfinkel, Alan. Forms of Explanation: Rethinking the Questions in

 Social Theory. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981.

 Latour, Bruno and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory Life: The Social

 Construction of Scientific Facts. Beverly Hills: Sage, 1979.

 MacKenzie, D. and B. Barnes. "Scientific Judgement: The
 Biometry-Mendelism Controversy." In B. Barnes and S. Shapin,
 eds., Natural Order. Beverly Hills: Sage, 1979, 191-210.

 Pickering, Andrew. Constructing Quarks. Chicago: University of

 Chicago Press, 1984.

 Pinch, Trevor. "Theory Testing in Science." Philosophy of the

 Social Sciences 15(1985): 167-187.

 Provine, W. B. The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics.

 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971.

 Putnam, Hilary. Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London:

 Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978.

 Roll-Hansen, Nils. "The Death of Spontaneous Generation and

 the Birth of the Gene: Two Case Studies of Relativism." Social

 Studies of Science 13(1983): 481-519.

 Turner, Stephen P. "Interpretive Charity, Durkheim, and the
 'Strong Programme' in the Sociology of Science." Philosophy of the
 Social Sciences 11(1981): 231-243.

 Whewell, William. Novum Organon Renovatum. London: Parker

 18 e SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 4

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:51:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

