 

 

 

 

The early application of the calculus to the inverse square force problem
Author(s): M. Nauenberg
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 3 (May 2010), pp. 269-300
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342419
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:40 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:269-300
 DOI 1 0. 1 007/s00407-009-0056-z

 The early application of the calculus to the inverse
 square force problem

 M. Nauenberg

 Received: 10 December 2009 / Published online: 3 February 2010
 © The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

 Abstract The translation of Newton's geometrical Propositions in the Principia
 into the language of the differential calculus in the form developed by Leibniz and his
 followers has been the subject of many scholarly articles and books. One of the most

 vexing problems in this translation concerns the transition from the discrete polygonal

 orbits and force impulses in Prop. 1 to the continuous orbits and forces in Prop. 6.
 Newton justified this transition by lemma 1 on prime and ultimate ratios which was
 a concrete formulation of a limit, but it took another century before this concept was

 established on a rigorous mathematical basis. This difficulty was mirrored in the newly

 developed calculus which dealt with differentials that vanish in this limit, and there-

 fore were considered to be fictional quantities by some mathematicians. Despite these

 problems, early practitioners of the differential calculus like Jacob Hermann, Pierre

 Varignon, and Johann Bernoulli succeeded without apparent difficulties in applying
 the differential calculus to the solution of the fundamental problem of orbital motion

 under the action of inverse square central forces. By following their calculations and

 describing some essential details that have been ignored in the past, I clarify the reason

 why the lack of rigor in establishing the continuum limit was not a practical problem.

 1 Introduction

 At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the differential calculus in the form devel-

 oped by Leibniz was applied by his most prominent followers, Jacob Hermann, Pierre

 Varignon, and Johann Bernoulli, to the fundamental problem of planetary motion - to

 Communicated by Niccolò Guicciardini.

 M. Nauenberg (И)
 Physics Department, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
 e-mail: michael@physics.ucsc.edu

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 270 M. Nauenberg

 describe the orbit of planets under the assumption that their motion is determined by

 an attractive force towards the Sun that varies inversely with the square of the distance.

 In 1679, Robert Hooke (Nauenberg 2005) wrote to Isaac Newton asking him

 ...and particularly if you will let me know your thoughts of that of compound-

 ing the celestiali motions of the planetts of a direct motion by the tangent & an
 attractive motion towards the centrali body (Newton 1960)

 In the Principia , Newton took a great step forward by extending the application of
 Euclidean geometry to the concept of force impulses which he represented by line

 segments that in a limit have vanishing small magnitude,1 leading to the emergence of
 a finite and continuous force. Such evanescent quantities appeared already in Greek

 geometry, in the method of exhaustion which, for example, was applied by Archime-

 des to obtain a rigorous relations between the circumference and the area of a circle,

 as well as bounds for these quantities that he calculated algebraically.2

 Shortly after the publication of the Principia in 1687, Leibniz applied Prop. 1 to

 derive the now well-known differential equation of motion for central forces in polar

 coordinates. Then he gave an analytic proof that for elliptical orbital motion satisfying

 Kepler's area law, the resulting force depends inversely on the square of the distance

 from the center,3 in accordance with Newton's geometric proof in Prop. 11. Leibniz

 stimulated Johann Bernoulli and Pierre Varignon to apply the differential calculus to
 the solution of propositions in the Principia , and Jacob Hermann (1710a, 1710b)4

 used Cartesian coordinates instead of Leibniz's polar coordinates to show that under
 the action of inverse square forces, the orbit is a conic section. In Prop. 1, Newton
 described the orbit for a general central force by a polygon, see Fig. 1, which Her-

 mann interpreted to be a sequence of chords of a continuous curve, see Fig. 2. He
 represented the Cartesian components of these cords by first-order differentials, and

 found that the components of Newton's line segments for the force impulses in Prop.
 1, introduced geometrically in the Principia , were second-order differentials.5 Given

 1 In the seventeenth century, the concept of a differential or infinitesimal quantity was not well defined.
 Newton observed that

 Fermat in his method de maximis et minimis & Gregory in his method of Tangents & Newton (in his

 method) of the first and last ratios use the letter о to signify a quantity not infinitely but indefinitely
 small & in this methods of tangents uses the letters a & e to become infinitely little... (Newton
 1968).

 The most colorful characterization of infinitesimals was given by Bishop George Berkeley, who called them
 "the ghost of departed quantities" (Boyer 1989).

 2 Archimedes showed that the circumference с of a circle is proportional to its diameter d, and that the
 area is proportional to the square of the diameter. He also calculated lower and upper bounds for the ratio
 c/d = 7Г, namely, 223/71 < л < 22/7.

 Leibniz claimed that when he carried out his derivation he had not seen the Principia but only a review

 that had appeared in the Acta Eruditorum. It has been shown, however, that Leibniz's had obtained his

 heavily annotate copy of the Principia before the publication of his work (Bertoloni Meli 1991).

 4 Hermann had been a student of Jacob Bernoulli in Basel where he learned the calculus in Leibniz's
 notation.

 5 Whiteside claimed, however, that the sides of the polygons in Prop. 1 are second-order differentials
 (Newton 1974), but his incorrect analysis has been warmly endorsed by I. B. Cohen in his Guide to

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 27 1

 any dependence of the force impulse with the distance from the center of force, Her-

 mann obtained an exact algebraic relation of this second-order differential in terms of

 quadratic terms of the first-order differentials which mirrored Newton's geometrical

 relation. For the case that the force impulses vary inversely with the square of the
 distance, he solved his algebraic relation between finite differentials approximately

 by applying the rules of the differential calculus developed by Newton and Leibniz. It

 will be shown that a detailed study of Hermann's work is an excellent introduction to

 the calculus of differentials and its application to the solution of dynamical problems

 as it was practiced in the early part of the eighteenth century.

 In his response to Hermann, Bernoulli (1710) criticized his approach, claiming

 that it was inadequate (Guicciardini 1999), and then he presented a different analytic

 method to evaluate the orbit for general central forces that was based on Newton's Prop.

 41 integral. In a subsequent treatment, he also gave an alternate differential method

 based on Prop. 6 which will be shown to be equivalent to Hermann's treatment, except
 that in contrast with Hermann's use of Cartesian coordinates, Bernoulli, like Leibniz

 before him, made use of polar coordinates. Guicciardini has remarked that Bernoulli's

 evaluation of the integral in Prop. 41 for the case of an inverse square force was "the
 outcome of a protracted and successful research on the application of Liebniz's calcu-
 lus, most notably differential equations, to natural philosophy" (Guicciardini 2008).
 But in contrast to Herman, who based his method on the differential calculus, Bernoulli

 evaluated the integral in Prop. 41 for the case of inverse square forces by methods of

 algebra and geometry that were already familiar to mathematicians in the seventeenth
 century including Fermat, Huygens, Newton, and Pascal (Boyer 1989; Kline 1972).
 In the next section, I discuss Herman's analysis in Cartesian coordinates in some

 detail, because it is the simplest and most straightforward application of the differential

 calculus to the solution of the problem of planetary motion formulated geometrically
 in Newton's Principia . A new result that emerges from this discussion is the con-

 nection of Hermann's first integral to Newton's geometrical construction in Prop. 17.
 In Sect. 2, 1 describe the corresponding derivation in polar coordinates by Leibniz's

 which apparently even Newton had some difficulties to understand.6 In Sect. 3, 1 dis-

 cuss the analysis of Bernoulli and Varignon who also represented differentials in polar

 coordinates, but instead of treating the force by a sequence of discrete impulses, they

 based their treatment on a representation of a continuous force in terms of the radius
 of curvature of the orbit which had been obtained in differential form by Bernoulli.7

 The method employed by Bernoulli and Varignon, was based on an expression for
 the force in terms of the radius of curve communicated by d'Moivre to Bernoulli in
 1706. Newton, who had derived this expression earlier, included it in the 1713 edi-

 Footnote 5 continued

 Newton's Principia (Cohen 1999). Evidently, in the eighteenth century, Newton's limiting procedures were
 better understood than in our present time. A detail discussion of Prop. 1 is given in reference (Nauenberg
 2003).

 ^ Newton claimed erroneously that Leibniz had made an error in handling second-order differentials in his
 equation.

 7 Bernoulli's differential expression for the curvature first appeared in section 78 of L'Hospital textbook
 of the calculus Analyse des Infiniment Petits pour L'Intelligence des Lignes Courbes.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 272 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 1 Newton's diagram for
 Prop. 1 , Book 1 of the Principia

 tion of the Principia , in a revised version of Prop. 6 that contained several additional
 corollaries. In Sect. 4, 1 discuss Bernoulli's solution based on Prop. 41, and describe
 a geometrical representation which he developed to present his result, followed by a
 proof that this representation corresponds to the algebraic equation for conic sections

 in Cartesian coordinates.8 Section 5 contains some conclusions followed by Appendix
 1 on the early derivation of the fundamental theorem of the calculus, and Appendix

 2 on a succint derivation with the aid of vector calculus of the results in the previous
 sections.

 2 Hermann's solution for the inverse square force problem

 Hermann's solution (1710a, 1710b) of the inverse problem of dynamics - given a
 central force to obtain all the orbits satisfying Kepler's area law - was based on the

 representation in Cartesian coordinates of Newton's geometrical construction in Prop.
 1, Book 1 of the Principia , and on the application of the differential calculus.9 In
 Prop. 1, Newton gave a proof that under the action of a continuous central force, a

 body moves in a planar orbit, and the "areas describe by radii drawn to the center of

 force are proportional to the times". Newton started the proof of this proposition by

 assuming that the force consisted of a sequence of impulses in a plane directed towards

 a common center at equal time intervals. Then, in between impulses, the motion takes

 place along straight lines with constant velocity shown in his diagram, Fig. 1., as the

 polygon with sides AB , ВС , etc. At each vertex of this polygon, Newton compounded

 8 For another discussion of the contributions of Leibniz, Bernoulli, Hermann, and Varignon to the inverse
 problem of central forces, see references Guicciardini (1999), Aitón (1962), and Aitón (1954).

 9 The source of Hermann's diagram has been either neglected (Mazzone and Roero 1997; Bernoulli 2008)
 or errorneously assumed to be based on Prop. 6 of the Principia (Guicciardini 1999; Wilson 1994).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 273

 Fig. 2 Herman's geometrical
 construction for an orbit for

 central forces

 the previous velocity with the instantaneous change of velocity due to a force impulse

 directed towards the center at S. For example, in Fig. 1 the effect of an impulse at В
 is described by a short line С с parallel to BS , where с is the position at the end of

 the time interval in the absence of the impulse, found by extending the line AB by an
 equal length Be. Then Newton showed that the area of the triangles A SB and BSC
 are equal, and repeated this construction in sequence at each vertex of the polygon.10
 He considered a continuous force to be the limiting case of a discrete sequence of such

 impulses as the time interval between these impulses becomes vanishingly small. Cor-

 respondingly, the areas of the triangles which are proportional to these time must also

 become vanishingly small. In order to indicate how such a limit could be approached
 geometrically, Newton referred to Lemma 3, Cor. 4 which presupposed the existence

 of a continuous curve such that the vertices of the polygon lie on the curve and the

 sides of the polygon are the chords of arcs of this curve. In this case, for each time
 interval, the magnitude of the displacements due to the force impulses are uniquely

 determined. In Lemma 1 1 , Newton gave a proof that for such a limit to exist, the curve
 must have a finite radius of curvature.

 In his diagram, Fig. 2, Hermann reproduced the first two vertices of the polygon

 in Prop. 1, but he turned the counter clockwise direction of rotation on this polygon
 around the center of force at S into a clockwise rotation. To represent Newton's geo-

 metrical construction algebraically, Hermann introduced Cartesian coordinates, and
 obtained an expression for the force impulse E D in terms of a second-order differen-
 tial. It will be shown that Hermann's equations are exact algebraic relations between

 differentials, but that his two-step integration procedure to solve these equations for

 the case of an inverse square force involve approximations in that higher order differ-

 entials are neglected, in accordance with the rules of the differential calculus rules.
 These rules were formulated in the same form by Newton and by Leibniz.11

 10 Since the time interval to travel along Be and ВС are the same, it appears that the time interval to travel

 along Cc must vanish. To consider the continuum limit, however, Newton treated this time interval as a
 second-order differential.

 1 1 By 1669, Newton had developed the differential form of the calculus, but his manuscript where circu-

 lated only privately by John Collins and were not published until 1711. Excerpts from the letter that Newton

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 274 M. Nauenberg

 In his letter to Bernoulli, Hermann did not mention the origin of his geometrical

 representation of central forces, Fig. 2, but in a more detailed article in the Giornale
 de' Letterati ď Italia (Hermann 1710b), he acknowledged that it came from Newton's

 Prop. 1. By including in his diagram an orbital curve which was absent in Newton's
 diagram, Hermann showed explicitly how to obtain a continuous force as a limit of
 force impulses when the triangles associated with this construction are made vanish-

 ingly small. 12 Hermann's method is equivalent to an earlier derivation by Leibniz, also
 based on Prop. I,13 who used polar coordinates in his derivation of a second-order

 differential equation for central forces. In his response letter to Hermann, Bernoulli

 also obtained Leibniz's differential equation in polar coordinates, but this derivation,

 which I will discuss below, was straightforward because it was based on a differential

 expression for the radius of curvature that he had obtained previously.

 In Hermann's diagram, which consists of a segment of three consecutive vertices

 of the diagram associated with Prop. 1, the curve ABC D represents an orbit, the
 center of force is at 5, and the line LE is obtained by extending the chord between
 two nearby points В and С on this curve on one side to Ey where СЕ = С В, and
 on the other side to L at the intersection of LE with a horizontal line LI. The line

 LI is the a>axis for a Cartesian coordinate system x , у , with the origin at 5, which
 intersect the curve ABC D at A. In this Cartesian representation, the coordinates of
 С and В are x - 5/, у = С/, and x - dx, у - dy , respectively, where dx, d у are
 first-order differentials dx = В H and dy = CH. The radial line CS completes the
 triangle С SB, and its area in terms of the Cartesian coordinates can be shown to
 be ('/2)(ydx - xdy). In Prop. 1, Newton gave a geometrical proof that under the
 action of a central force, with center at 5, this area is proportional to the time inter-
 val dt for a body to move from В to C. Following Newton's demonstration, in the
 absence of a force, a body would move, from С to E during a second equal time
 interval dt. But when a force impulse towards S occurs at B, the next location of the

 body is at D on the curve ABC D , where its location is obtained by drawing from
 E a line DE that is parallel to С S intersecting the curve. According to Prop. 1, the

 length of the segment DE is a measure of the magnitude of the central force impulse

 Footnote 1 1 continued

 sent to Leibniz via Oldenburg and further material sent by Newton appeared in volume 2 of Wallis's Opera
 (1693) (Guicciardini 2009). Some of the principal concepts, however appeared in Lemmas in Sect. 1, Book
 1, and in Lemma 2, Book 2 of the Principia. Leibniz published his first results in 1684 in the Acta Erudi-

 torum, and he had contacts with the Johann and Jacob Bernoulli who promoted the early dissemination of
 the calculus in the Continent.

 12 In Newton's words, "Now let the number of triangles be increased and their width decreased indefinitely,
 and their ultimate perimeter ADF will (by lemma 3, corol. 4) be a curved line". In Hermann's diagram,
 Fig. 2, this limit "curved line " is ABCD> the center of force is at 5, the central force impulse at В is DE,
 and two of Newton's triangles of equal area are ВС S and CDS. In the diagram associated with Prop. 1, a
 limit curve is not drawn, but its existence is implied by Newton's reference to lemma 2, corol. 4. Indeed,

 such a curve is essential to specify Newton's geometrical construction when "'the number of triangles be
 increased. . .indefinitely" (Nauenberg 2003). Although the necessity for assuming such a curve escaped the
 attention of contemporary commentators of Prop. 1, it was recognized first by Leibniz and then by Herman
 in his diagram which represents the essential features of this proposition.

 13 Leibniz claimed that he had obtained his result before he had seen a copy of the Principia , but his
 heavily annotated copy of Newton's has been found to pre-date his work (Bertoloni Meli 1991; Leibniz
 1973), demonstrating a remarkable lack of candor on his part.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 275

 at В , and the object of Hermann's diagram was to express this magnitude in terms
 of differentials. Representing the Cartesian coordinates of D by x + dx', у + d yf,
 where dx' = CK, and dyf = D К , the line segments D F and E F = representing
 the Cartesian components of D E are determined by the second-order differentials
 D F = -ddx = dx - dx', and EF = -ddy = d y - dy'.14 It is important to rec-

 ognize that in contrast with the first-order differentials dx, dy , where either one or a
 combination of the two can be chosen as an arbitrary small quantity, the subsequent

 differentials dxf , dy' are both determined, when a curve ABC D is assumed to be given.

 Hence, the second-order differentials ddx, ddy also depend on the magnitude of these

 first-order differentials.15 Geometrically, this dependence is evident from Herman's

 diagram, Fig. 2, which shows that the position of D on the curve ABC D depends
 on the value chosen initially for x and dx. The object of the differential calculus is

 to find this curve given, the dependence of the central force / on the distance CS,

 e.g., for an inverse square force, / ос 1/CS2. By similarity of the triangles EDF and
 CSI ,

 ED = ddx-x2+y2. (1)

 X

 Assuming that the orbital curve A BC D has a finite curvature , Newton gave a proof
 in Lemma 1 1 of Book 1 of the Principia that the magnitude of the force impulse E D

 depends quadratically on the length ВС - y/dx 2 + dy2. Since the time interval dt
 is proportional to the area of the triangle CBS = (1/2) | xdy - ydx' , which depend
 linearly on dx and dy , the ratio ED/dt 2 has a finite limit when dx, dy become van-

 ishingly small. In Prop. 6, Newton defined a continuous force / by the relation (see
 Fig. 4)

 r QR n'

 a (SP x QT)2

 where QR = (1/2 )ED and SP x QT corresponds to twice the area of the triangle
 CBS, in the limit that the triangle CBS becomes vanishingly small. Substituting Her-
 mann's second-order differential expression for ED, Eq. 1, in Newton's relation for

 the force, Eq. 2, leads to an expression for the force

 - ddaV x2 + y2 ' (3)

 a x(ydx - xdy)2 '

 where the minus sign appears when / is an attractive central force.

 14 In section IV of the Analyse des Infiniment Petits , second-order differentials are defined as the difference
 between two consecutive first-order differentials, in accordance with Hermann's application.

 15 At this stage, it should become clear why Hermann's analysis required three adjacent vertices from the

 polygon in Prop. 1 , because a second-order differential like ddx is determined by the difference of two

 adjacent first-order differentials, dx and àx' .

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 For an inverse square force, / oc 1 /( x 2 + y2), Herman then obtained an equation

 276 M. Nauenberg

 for the second-order differential ddx in the form

 x(ydx - xdy)2

 _ a(x2 + y2)3/2 ( >

 where a is a constant with the dimensions of length, introduced to convert Newton's

 proportionality relation for force, Eq.2 into an equality.16 Such an algebraic relation
 between first- and second-order differentials, however, remains undetermined until a

 further condition is imposed on the first-order differential dx and d y, because these

 differentials cannot be varied independently. Hermann's relation was obtained from

 Prop. 1 geometrical construction which leads to the constraint that the first-order dif-

 ferential ydx - xdy is a constant, that is

 d(ydx - xdy) = 0. (5)

 This condition implements in differential form Kepler's area law which, in Prop. 1 ,
 Newton had shown to follow from central forces, and Hermann's differential relation,

 Eq. 4, was derived by applying this constraint. 17 To integrate18 his differential relation,

 Hermann had to impose this condition which then becomes an additional second-order

 differential relation which he applied implicitly in his integration of Eq. 4.

 In his treatment, Hermann neglected to consider an equivalent representation for
 / obtained by substituting for ED in Eq.2 the expression obtained in terms of the
 second-order differential dd y,

 ED = -У-y/ x2 + y2. (6)

 У

 When substituted in Newton's relation for the force, Eq. 2, this expression leads to the
 equivalent relation

 ddy^/x2 + y2

 J Í A A '2 ' ( )
 y(ydx Í A - xdy)2- A '2

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 16 For an elliptic orbit, the constant a is the latus rectum of the ellipse. Setting ydx - xdy = Idt and
 / = ix/(x2 + y2), where / is the angular momentum, and д is the strength of the inverse square force,
 leads to the relation a = /2/д that determines the value of a.

 17 For central forces, this condition corresponds to the conservation of angular momentum /, which in New-

 ton's fluxional calculus, as well as in modern calculus, is represented by / = yx - xý , and / = yx - xy = 0,
 The dot superscript corresponds to a derivative with respect to time.

 18 In Leibniz's calculus, to integrate a relation between differentials meant to find a relation between dif-

 ferentials of a lower order which satisfies the requisite relation between the higher order differentials. By
 the fundamental theorem of the calculus, this operation corresponds to the calculation of the area under a

 given curve (see Appendix 1). It should be pointed out that without specifying the first-order differentials

 in the problem that are kept fixed, the concept of a second order or higher order differential is meaningless.
 In Hermann's calculations, the linear combination of differentials ydx - xdy a dt is kept fixed.

 The early application of the calculus 277

 and for an inverse square force, / = 1 /{x2 + y2), leads to the second-order differential
 relation

 Му = ~У1(х2+у2)У2 ' (8)

 which is analogous to Eq.4, and must also be satisfied. By multiplying Eq.4 by у and

 Eq. 8 by x, one finds that the condition

 xddy - yddx = d ( xdy - ydx) = 0 (9)

 is then automatically satisfied when both Eqs.4 and 8 are valid. Actually, this result is

 a straightforward proof, based on the application of the differential calculus, of New-

 ton's theorem in Prop. 1 that ". . .equal areas are described during equal time intervals".

 But Hermann missed this simple proof, and it took another 6 years before he came
 up with a different and rather convoluted proof (Guicciardini 1999) that was based
 on the expression for the force in terms of the radius of curvature of the orbit. This

 alternate expression for the force appeared for the first time in the second edition of

 the Principia , and it was derived by Bernoulli who in turn had learned it from a private
 communication by De Moi vre (Guicciardini 1999)

 For the first integral of his second-order differential relation, Eq.4, Hermann set

 (ydx - xdy) equal to a constant and obtained

 y (ydx - xdy)

 dx=

 ajx2 + y

 d (uv) = (u + d u)(v + du) - uv = udv + vdu + dudv, (11)

 but the assumption that du and d v are small quantities which ultimately vanish, implies

 that in this limit the product dudv can be neglected compared to the terms linear in
 du and du, that is

 d(uv) % udv + vdu. (12)

 I have introduced here the sign ^ to indicate that this relation is an approxima-
 tion.19 It is the basis of the differential calculus of Newton and Leibniz, and appears

 ^ For finite values of du and du, the common use of the equality sign, which unfortunately is standard

 form in the literature on this subject, leads often to confusion.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 But to establish this result, an essential approximation was to neglect all higher order

 terms in the differentials dx , and d y that appear in the calculation of the differential

 on the right hand side of his relation. It is instructive to examine this step in some
 detail, because it illustrates the treatment of differentials in the calculus of Newton

 and Leibniz, and the nature of the approximations that are made at each step in its

 implementation.

 The differential of the product of two quantities u, v is, by definition ,

 278 M. Nauenberg

 prominently as Prop. II in L'Hospital 1696 book, Analyse des Infinitiment Petits , the
 first text-book on this new calculus. The justification given for neglecting dudv is that

 . . .dudv is a quantity infinitesimally small compared to the other terms udv , and

 vd u' because if one divides, for example, udv and dudv by dv, one finds on the
 one hand w, and on the other du that is its differential, and consequently it is

 infinitesimally smaller than it.20

 For Hermann's problem, let и = y, v = 1 /у/х2 -f у2, then the next step is to

 obtain an approximation for the differential dv. Setting z - '/ v, and applying repeat-

 edly the basic calculus rule, Eq. 12, one finds d z2 ^ 2 zdz ^ 2(xdx + ydy) or dz ъ
 v(xdx + ydy), and since d(zv) = 0, dv ъ -v2d z & - v3(xdx + ydy). Hence

 vdu = ¿+У2)У2' (14)

 and fínally

 л< ^ dl л( У V I !=» x(xdy-j/dx)
 d(«D) л< ^ = dl - ===== I !=» - -=

 Vn/^+7/ - ===== ( -=

 which verifies that Eq. 10 is the first integral of Eq.4. Actually, the differential dv is a

 power series expansion, which according to Newton's generalized binomial theorem,

 consisted of an infinite number of terms of higher powers in dx and d y. But a proof

 that the infinite sum of all these neglected terms is of higher order and therefore can
 be neglected, was not available. Hence, for a finite value of da:, d(uv)dt & addx,
 and for finite differentials Eq. 10 satisfies Eq. 4 only approximately. But in accordance

 with the fundamental theorem of calculus, in the limit that dx becomes vanishingly
 small,21 Eq. 10 is an exact integral of Eq.4.

 In a similar way, Herman found that the integral of Eq. 10 is

 a yjx1 + y2

 - =
 X X

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 20 ...dudv est une quantité infiniment petit par rapport aux autres terms udv & vdu ; car si l'on divise,

 par example, udv & dudv par dv, on trouve d'une part и, & de l'autre du qui en est la différence, & par
 conséquent infìnitment moindre qu'elle.

 21 Regarding the approximations in relations involving finite differentials, Leibniz commented that

 at the same time one has to consider that these ordinary incomparables themselves are by no means
 fixed or determined; they can be taken as small as one wishes in our geometrical arguments. Thus

 they are effectively the same as rigorous, infinitely small quantities, for if an opponent would deny

 our assertion, it follows from our calculus that the error will be less than any error which he will be

 able to assign, for it is in our power to take the incomparably small small enough for that, as one
 can always take a quantity as small as one wishes (Bos 1973).

 The early application of the calculus 279

 where с is a constant.22 Again, this result can be verified by taking differentials on
 both sides of this relation, applying the Kepler area law condition (conservation of

 angular momentum), Eq. 9, and keeping only terms that appear in the resulting series

 expansion that are first order in the differentials dx and d у. This relation is the alge-
 braic equation for a conic section.23 with eccentricity c; a parabola for с = 1, an
 ellipse for с < 1, and a hyperbola for с > 1. For an ellipse, the constant a is the
 latus rectum , and a/( 1 - c2) is the major axis, providing the role of unit of length
 to the constant a introduced by Hermann. Hermann's solutions constrain the axis of

 the conic to lie along an arbritraly chosen horizontal, but this restriction is invalid for

 arbitrary initial values of position and velocity. But by including in the first integral,

 the missing constant of integration e(yx - xá у) pointed out by Bernoulli, one obtains

 the solution for a general conic section

 a = y/x2 + y2 + cx + ey (17)

 It is instructive to apply the differential calculus to obtain the solution of the direct

 problem in dynamics - given a planar orbit satisfying Kepler' area law, to obtain the
 radial dependence of the central force. In Props. 11-13, Newton gave a geometrical

 proof that for orbits that are conic section, the force depends inversely with the distance

 from a center. Starting with the Cartesian coordinate representation of a conic section

 given in Eq. 16, and taking his differential steps in reverse order by applying repeat-

 edly the chain rule to this representation, leads to the expressions for the first- and

 second-order differential dx , Eq. 10, and ddx, Eq. 4, provided that the area ydx - xdy

 of the triangle BSC is kept constant.24 In Cartesian coordinates, Eq. 3 corresponds to

 Newton's definition for a central force / given in Prop. 1 and Prop. 6, and substituting

 for ddx in this equation the relation given by Eq.4 yields for the force the inverse
 square radial dependence, / a l/(x2 + y2).

 22 The ± sign corresponds to the two possible choices for the foci of a conic section as the center of the

 inverse square force.

 23 In his evaluation, Herman introduced a spurious constant b , describing his result by the value of a con-
 stant c/b , "...qui est une équation aux trois Sections Conique; savoir à la Parabole si b = c, à l'Ellipse si
 b > c, & à TdHyperbole si b < c".

 24 The first-order differential of the algebraic equation for a conic section, Eq. 16, including an additional

 term ey , where e was a constant pointed out by Bernoulli is

 da=-_^ + y^+cdx 2 + edy_ (l8)

 y/X2 + y 2

 and since a is a constant da = 0 Setting ydx - xdy = d t, where dř is treated as a constant when taken a
 differential of this relation, one obtains an equation for dx by substituting d y = ('/x)(ydx - dt) in this

 equation,

 (J V X2 -f- y2 + cx + ey) dx = ^ + ed t. (19)
 V Jx2 + y

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 But for the conic section, Eq. 16, the coefficient of dx is equal to a, which shows that this equation corre-

 sponds to Hermann's first integral, Eq. 10 including a missing constant of integration.

 280 M. Nauenberg

 Bernoulli responded to Hermann with a harsh criticism of his work Bernoulli (1710),

 remarking that Hermann had not provided any direct procedure to obtain the first inte-

 gral, Eq. 10, of his second-order differential equation, Eq.4 and that he had obtained
 his result because he already knew the answer - that his second integral was a conic

 section, Eq. 16. Actually in practice, integration of a nonlinear differential equation

 by an application of the fundamental theorem of the calculus usually involves an edu-

 cated guess of the solution, followed by the verification that its derivative satisfies the

 differential equation.25 Bernoulli also pointed out that in the first integration Hermann

 had neglected to include a constant term. This term has to be a first-order differential,
 and since ydx - xá y is treated as a constant, it has the unique form e (ydx - xd y),

 where e is an additional constant of integration. For this reason, Bernoulli stated that

 "one might be left in doubt that there is another kind of curve, other than the conic sec-

 tions, that satisfies your problem", claiming that Herman had failed to prove that conic

 sections were a unique solution of his differential relation. Then Bernoulli showed that
 his constant leads to an additional term of the form ey/x on the right hand side of
 Herman's second integral, because

 d (y/x) ^ - '{ydx - xdy). (20)

 Xa

 It can be verified that with this additional term, Eq. 16 leads to the algebraic equa-

 tion for a conic section with its major axis rotated relative to the jc-axis by an angle
 co = atan(e/c). Ironically, Bernoulli's own proof that the solution he obtained from
 an application of Prop. 41 in Newton's Principia satisfied the algebraic equation for
 a conic section also was restricted to the special case that e - 0, as will be shown in
 the next section.

 Setting dt = ('/l)(ydx - xdy), where / is a constant correspond to the angular
 momentum, indicates that Herman's first integral, Eq. 10, with the additional constant

 e introduced by Bernoulli, can be written in the alternate form

 where vx = dx/dt is the x component of the velocity v. If Herman had also solved

 for Vy = dy/dt, where vy = ( y/x)vx -l/x, according to Kepler's area law, he would
 have found that

 a y

 e = jvx 1
 1 ']хг + уг

 a x

 C = ~JVy 1 yjxL / 2 + i yL 2 '

 1 yjxL / 2 + i yL 2

 Hence, given the position x, у relative to the center of force, and the velocity vx, vy
 at some point along the orbit, called the initial conditions , the angular momentum

 constant I = yvx - xvy is fixed and all the parameters of the conic section are deter-

 25 For this purpose, both Newton and Leibniz created extensive tables of derivates of elaborate functions,

 and ever since such tables have become a standard aid for the analytic evaluation of difficult integrals.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 28 1

 mined in units of Hermann's length parameter a. In this form, Herman's result can be

 recognized as the components of a vector

 € =

 v X I r

 ß r

 where / is the vector angular momentum taken normal to the plane of the orbit along the

 negative z axis (Herman's diagram corresponds to clockwise rotation around the center

 of force 5), and ß = a/ 12 is a constant that determines the magnitude of the inverse
 square force, / = ¡jl/(x2 + у2). This vector ? is a constant of the motion directed
 along the axis of conic section with a magnitude corresponding to its eccentricity e,

 where €x = c, and €y - e. Ninety one years later, it was derived in a similar manner
 by Simon Pierre Laplace (1798) who apparently was unaware of Herman's result.
 Actually, this special invariant of the motion for inverse square forces had already

 been described in geometrical form by Newton in the Principia , Book 1 , Prop. 17, but

 this connection has not been made in the past. In this way, Prop. 17 establishes the

 uniqueness of conic sections, a fact that was already recognized by Euler (1736), but

 still leads to misconceptions up to the present time. In the first edition of the Principia ,

 Newton gave an argument for the uniqueness of conic sections in Cor. 1 to Prop. 13

 which was considered to be insufficient and lead to disputes. But in the second edition,
 Newton added the remark that

 For if the focus and the point of contact and the position of the tangent are given,
 a conic can be described that will have a given curvature at that point. But the

 curvature is given from the given centripetal force and velocity of the body,
 and two different orbits touching each other cannot be described with the same

 centripetal force and the velocity.

 In the differential calculus, the uniqueness of the conic section solution for inverse

 square force is based on the fundamental theorem of the calculus (see Appendix 1).

 3 Leibniz differential equation for motion in polar coordinates

 In 1688, after studying the Principia , Leibniz's was able to apply his calculus to
 obtained the differential equation of motion for central forces in polar coordinates

 which appeared in his Tentamen de motuum coelestium causis (Bertoloni Meli 1991).
 Like Hermann's derivation, Leibniz's treatment was also based on Newton's Prop. 1.

 For clarity, in Fig. 3 taken from E. J. Aiton (1995), I show only the section of Leib-
 niz's diagram relevant to his analysis, which is also similar to Hermann's diagram,
 Fig. 2. The curve M', Mi, M$ represents the orbit of planet moving under the action
 of a force centered at the point indicated here by the symbol for the Sun (a circle
 with a small dot in the center which will be called S here). Leibniz draws the chord

 M i M2 which he extends by an equal length to a point L, and from there draws the line

 segment LM3, parallel to the radial line M2S that intersects the curve at Л/3. In this

 way, given any two nearby points M' and M 2 on the curve, the location of the third

 point Л/3 is determined. Hence, except for change in notation, Leibniz's construction

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 282 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 3 A section of Leibniz
 diagram

 is the differential change in the radial coordinate from M ' to A/2, and

 dr' = -M2T2 = ~(LM3 + GD2 - T2D2). (25)

 is the corresponding change from M2 to M3. By equality of the triangles M' M2N and
 M3D2G, NM2 = GD2i and PN = D2T2. Hence

 dr = -(LM3 + NM2 - PN) (26)

 corresponds to Newton's construction in Prop. 1, shown in Fig. 1. The only difference
 is that Leibniz changed the sense of rotation in the Prop. 1 diagram to a clock-wise

 rotation, in the same manner that Hermann did later on in his diagram, Fig. 2.

 The additional lines in Leibniz's diagrams are auxiliary lines to derive the necessary

 relations among the differentials. The lines M' N and Л/3 D2 represent differential nor-

 mals to the radial line SM2 drawn from the vertices M' and M3, respectively, and M' P
 and Л/3Г2 are corresponding differential arcs centered at S. In addition, a line M3G
 is drawn parallel to M2L. Then setting SM' = r - dr, SM2 = r and SM3 = r + dr',

 dr = -(PN + NM2) (24)

 and

 where

 Springer

 ddr = d r' -dr = -LM3 + 2 PN (27)

 (м,ло2

 <28)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 283

 to second order in M'N . Since Leibniz followed Newton's geometric construction in
 Prop. 1, the triangles M' SMi and M2SM3 have equal areas A = (1/2 )(M' N x SM2 ),
 and the elapsed time interval dt satisfies Kepler's area law dt = ('/a)A. Here a is a
 constant of proportionality introduced by Leibniz on dimensional grounds which we
 recognize as the angular momentum for unit mass. Setting SM2 = r , and M'N =
 adt /г, one obtains

 a2dt2

 PN = ^T' <29>

 Substituting in Eq. 27 this expression for PN and LM3 = fdt 2, where / is the central

 force, Leibniz obtained the now well-known differential equation of motion in polar
 coordinates,

 a2dt2 9

 ddr

 r 0

 Leibniz also demonstrated that when the orbital curve is an ellipse and the motion
 satisfies Kepler's area law, d A = 0, the force / is an inverse square force / a 1/r2.

 His proof, which he obtained by evaluating the second-order differential ddr from a

 first-order differential expression for the elliptical orbit (Aiton 1995), corresponds to

 Newton's geometric proof in Prop. 11.

 It has been argued that Leibniz's representation of orbits by discrete polygons
 instead of continuous curves was just a matter of convenience (Aiton 1962; Bertoloni

 Meli 1991 ; Guicciardini 2008), but this is not the case. In Prop. 6, Newton represented

 a segment of the orbit by an arc, PQ , and the force by the deviation QR from a line

 Z PRY tangent at one end P of the arc, Fig. 4. In order to apply the differential calculus

 to this representation, however, an analytic expression for this tangent line is required,

 but this is an unknown quantity which cannot be expressed in terms of differentials

 from the geometric quantities given in Prop. 6. In fact, three nearby points of the orbit

 are required to obtain a unique circular arc, and then the tangent line at any point on
 this arc can also be obtained. Such a construction was pointed out to Leibniz by Pierre

 Varignon, and if the tangent line is placed midway on the arc, it leads to half as large a
 value for the force impulse obtained by Leibniz and by Hermann (Guicciardini 2008).

 This procedure is equivalent to Leibniz's original construction, Fig. 3.26

 Although Leibniz derived his analytic equation of motion directly from Newton's
 geometrical construction in Prop. 1, he gave it a completely different physical inter-

 pretation. Regarding the issue of how mathematics can mirror reality, it is of interest
 to discuss Leibniz's interpretation, because it illustrates ambiguities that can occur at
 the initial stages when a new theory is in the first stage of development. Following

 26 In the second edition of the Principia , Newton altered Prop. 6 to read

 . . .the sagitta of the arc is understood to be drawn so as to bisect the chord and, when produced,

 to pass through the center of force...

 This sagitta is the displacement associated with the force, which corresponds to Varignon's construction,
 but Newton did not alter the diagram, Fig. 4, associated with Prop. 6 accordingly.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 284 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 4 Newton's diagram for
 Prop. 6, Book 1 of the Principia

 'Y

 L i.

 the Cartesian argument that planets rotate around the sun because they are carried by

 vortices of unseen particles or a fluid circulating the sun, Leibniz argued that Kepler's

 area law gave a mathematical description of these vortices, namely, that the circulation

 velocity of a vortex depends inversely with the distance from the sun. A consequence
 of Leibniz's interpretation is that planets experience an acceleration or force which,

 in accordance with Prop. 2 in the Principia 27 is directed towards the sun, and is repre-
 sented by LM3 in Leibniz's diagram, Fig. 3, but Leibniz did not give any justification
 that this force must be a central force. For circular motion, this central force which

 Leibniz re-named solicitation of gravity is balanced by an outward centrifugal conatus

 represented by the term a2dt2/r 3 in Leibniz's equation of motion, Eq. 30. Leibniz

 interpreted this term as a real force due to the Cartesian vortices acting on the planet,

 which depends on the parameter a. Since the rotational velocity of the planet is the

 same as that of the vortex, a is also an intrinsic property of the planet corresponding to
 it angular momentum. Planets, however, do not rotate in circular orbits, as would be

 expected in this Cartesian model, but instead move in elliptical orbits crossing differ-

 ent vortices, and Leibniz explained the variation in radial distance, expressed by the

 second-order differential ddr, by the difference between the solitication of gravity and
 the centrifugal connatus. But this radial acceleration is also a consequence of Prop.
 1, and it does not require the existence of vortices. In fact, such an explanation for

 the radial oscillations in the orbit was already given by Newton in a cryptic remark in

 his 1679 correspondence with Hooke, and in his 1681 correspondence with Crompton

 regarding a question of Flamsteed about the motion of comets near the sun (Nauenberg
 (1994)). The vortex interpretation had one advantage over Newton's theory, because
 it offered an explanation why the planets all rotated along the same direction.28 But
 this explanation had to be abandoned when comets were found to rotate around the

 sun in directions opposite to that of the planets.29

 27 In Prop.2, Newton gives a proof that "every body... that describes areas around a point proportional to

 the times, is urged by a centripetal force toward the same point". But Newton's proof is based on the concept
 of inertial straight line motion in the absent of an external force, which Leibniz ignored.

 28 The modern explanation is based on the theory for the origin of the planets from an initial dense gas
 of particles circulating the sun which holds also for numerous recently discovered extrasolar planetary
 systems.

 29 It is interesting to compare the seventeenth century vortex theory based on unobserved particles with
 our current speculations of dark matter. This matter, which is also associated with unobserved particles, has

 been invoked to account for the peculiar rotational velocity of some stars that cannot be explained with our
 current theory of gravity by the amount of observable matter in galaxies.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 285

 4 Bernoulli's and Varignon's derivations of Prop. 39 and 41.

 In his response letter to Hermann (Bernoulli 1710), Bernoulli applied the differential

 calculus to derive Newton's expression for the energy conservation principle, Prop.

 39, and the integral for the orbital curve in polar coordinates, Prop. 41, for a general
 central force. A similar derivation was given by Varignon in the same issue of the
 Memoires of the Academy des Sciences where the letters of Hermann and Bernoulli

 appeared. Varignon's derivation differs from Bernoulli's only in the form that each

 one used for the central force. In 1706, Bernoulli learned the expression for a central

 force in terms of the radius of curvature p of the orbit from a correspondence with
 De Moivre, although he did not acknowledge it (Guicciardini 2008).30 On the other

 hand, by following Newton's geometrical derivation of Prop. 39, Varignon obtained an

 expression for the force in terms of the second-order differential of the arc length of the

 orbit. Bernoulli gave an expression for p in terms of first and second-order differentials

 in polar coordinates, without indicating how he obtained it.31 But his derivation of the

 equations of motion also follow directly from Herman's algebraic treatment of Prop. 1

 by using polar coordinates г, в instead of Cartesian coordinates x, у . It is instructive to

 follow these steps which are similar to Leibniz's original derivation of the differential

 equations of motion in polar coordinates discussed in the previous section.32

 Turning to Bernoulli's notation, r - x and rdO = d y, Eq. 38 corresponds to Ber-
 noulli's expression for the force, which he obtained by applying the relation for the
 central force /, in terms of the curvature of the orbit, that he had obtained from De
 Moivre,

 / = - - , (39)

 P3(2p)

 where p = rsinx/s = dy/y/dx2 + d у2, and p is the radius of curvature of the orbit.

 For p, Bernoulli wrote the expression

 P - - ö

 x(dx2 + d у2)ъ/2

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 dx¿d y + d yó -f xdxddy - xdyddx

 30 Newton had derived this relation earlier, but he did not include it in the first edition of the Principia
 (Nauenberg 1994). It appear in the second edition (1713) of the Principia in several new corollaries to a
 revised form of Prop. 6. In Lemma 1 1, Newton discussed the radius of curvature to justify the existence of

 the ratio, Eq. 2, that gives the magnitude of a central force in Prop. 6 in the limit that the square of the area

 of the triangle in this proposition becomes arbitrarily small.

 31 In 1 69 1 , Bernoulli obtained a differential expression for the radius of curvature p that impressed L'Hos-

 pital, who offered him a position as his private tutor in the differential calculus (Bos 1973). L' Hospital's
 celebrated Analyse des Infiniment Petits was based on Bernoulli's lectures, and he devoted an entire section
 entitled Usage des calcul des differences pour trouver les Dévelopées to Huygens's theory of evolutes based
 on Bernoulli's 15th lecture (Bernoulli 1914). Johann Bernoulli's older brother Jacob Bernoulli also derived

 and expression for p by applying the calculus. The source for both Bernoulli brothers was the general
 expression for p in Huygens's Horologium Oscillatorium (1673).

 32 In Hermann's diagram, Fig. 2, set SC = r, SB = r - dr, SD = r + d r' and with vertex at S, set angle
 BSD = d0 and angle CSD = d0. Let ' ft be the angle BC S with vertex at C. Then

 without indicating its origin,33 and restricting the variation of the differentials by the

 area law condition which in polar coordinates takes the form

 286 M. Nauenberg

 d(xdy) = xddy + dxdy = 0 (41)

 Footnote 32 continued

 BCsin('Js ) = (r - dr)d0 , (31)

 and the conditions, С D parallel to ВС, leads to the relation

 C£sin(iH = (r + d/)d0' (32)

 Since CE = CD = BC> by equating Eqs. 31 and 32, 1 obtain

 ddö = dé»' -dö = -drdô (33)

 Г

 which relates the second-order differential dd0 to the first-order differentials d r and d6. To third order in

 the differentials d r and de, I find that

 BC2 =dr2 +r(r -dr)de2, (34)

 and

 CE2 = d r'2 + r(r + dr')á$'2 + IE D Ar, (35)

 and taking the difference between these two terms, I obtain

 CE2 - ВС 2 = 2(drddr + r2 d0dd0 + rdrde2 + EDdr') (36)

 Then, setting СЕ - ВС , and substituting for dd0 the expression given in Eq.33, yields

 ED = rde2 - ddr (37)

 , rd02 - ddr

 <3"

 33 This expression for the radius of curvature p can be obtained by substituting polar coordinates in an
 expression for p in Cartesian coordinates obtained by Jacob Bernoulli.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This relation for the impulse ED was first derived by Leibniz using an equivalent approach (Aiton 1962).
 In polar coordinate, the area of triangles BSC an CSE, which are equal by construction, is (l/2)r2d0 and
 according to Prop. 6, the force / given by Eq. 2, is

 The early application of the calculus 287

 he obtained34

 _ x(dx2 + d y2)3/2
 ^ _ ( dy 3 - xdyddx)

 Substituting this expression for p in Eq. 39 yields.35

 ф - & -^Mx (44)

 where с = xdy Apart from a factor 2, this is the same expression for the force, Eq. 38,

 obtained directly from Hermann's diagram. Multiplying both sides of this equation by

 dx , and applying Eq. 41 to substitute dxdy = -xddy on the right hand side yields

 or equivalently

 d(da;2 + dy2)

 ф dx =

 f dx 2 + dy 2

 I f </>dx =

 where n is a constant of integration. Setting с = dt, this relation can be recognized as
 a derivation via the differential calculus of the principle of conservation of energy E
 for central forces,36 where E = 2n that Newton had demonstrated by a geometrical

 34 Since Hermann analysis satisfies Kepler's area law condition d(xdy) = 0, Bernoulli's restricted expres-
 sion for p , can be obtained by finding the radius of a circle containing the points В , С and E in Hermann's

 diagram of Prop 1 , Fig. 2. The center of this circle is located at a point О where three lines of equal length
 drawn from В, С and E intersect. Hence the length p of these lines is determined by the differential chords
 ВС and CE and their relative orientation. Bernoulli's expression differs, however, from the conventional

 expression for p in polar coordinates, first obtained in 1671 by Newton (Newton 1670-1673), which has
 the form

 _ (d r2 + r2de2)3/2 (42)

 ^ _ d$(r2de2 + 2d r2 - rd2r)

 because the second-order differential d2r is obtained by assuming that d в remains constant.

 35 Bernoulli's notation for force is ф.

 36 A modern version of Bernoulli's derivation starts with his differential equations in the form

 r -rdO2 = -ф. (47)

 where / = r20 is the constant angular momentum. Applying the identities

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 analysis in Prop. 39. Finally, substituting d y = c/x, Bernoulli obtained

 where d s is the differential arc length traversed during a differential interval of time

 dt. For a central force /, ft = fdr/ds , which leads to Varignon's relation for /, apart
 from a missing minus sign,

 ds dds

 / ,54)

 288 M. Nauenberg

 dx

 d У = , - (52)

 yj , 4x2(n - f фдх') - 1

 which is a relation between first-order differentials corresponding to Newton's quad-

 rature or integral in Prop. 41 given in terms of the differential d z = aàO = aáy/x.

 In an article that followed the exchange of letters between Hermann and Bernoulli,

 Pierre Varignon gave another derivation of Prop. 39 and 41 based on the differential

 calculus (Varignon 1710). Varignon's derivation follows Newton's original derivation

 in the Principia by starting with a representation in polar coordinates of Proposition
 39 for the conservation of energy in the language of the calculus. For an attractive

 force, the component ft tangent to the orbit is

 /, = -dds/dt2 (53)

 Footnote 36 continued

 and

 to the relation

 then shows that

 â Springer

 Гф = ^ <t>dr^ (49)

 ^/••-^ + ^ = 0 (50)

 5('2 + Д) + /^ = £ <5I>

 where E is a constant corresponding to the total energy.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Introducing polar coordinates y , z, where y = r is the radial distance, z is the polar
 angle in units of the arc of a circle with arbitrary radius a, and dx = ydz. Then ydx

 corresponds to the equal areas of the differential triangles in Prop. 1 and is propor-

 tional to the differential time interval dt. Varignon failed to recognize that according
 to Prop. 1 , this relation is a direct consequence of the assumption that the force /
 is a central force, but he did consider as an example, the case that the second-order

 The early application of the calculus 289

 differential dds is evaluated under the hypothesis that ydx and dt are kept constant.

 Setting dsdds ъ (l/2)d(ds2), leads to the first integral of Eq.54

 f ds2

 2 J f fdy = --^+n (55)

 where « is a constant. Since ds/dt is the velocity, we recognize that n = 2 E where E

 is the modern constant representing the conservation of energy principle.

 The next step in Varignon's derivation was to express the differential arc length

 ds in polar coordinates, ds = y/dx2 + d y2, and to set dt = ydx. Substituting this

 expression in Eq. 55, and solving the resulting algebraic equation for dx , he obtained

 dx = dy (56)

 Jny2 -2y2 f fdy - 1

 Varignon's result corresponds to Newton's result in Prop. 41 , and to Bernoulli's result,
 Eq. 52, except that Newton introduced a constant Q = ydx/dt corresponding to the
 angular momentum, which then leads to his relation

 dx = (57)

 ödy

 yjny1 - 2 y2 f fdy - Q2

 •*7 In conformance with the notation in Bernoulli's article, in this section, x refers to the radial coordinate
 r instead of the conventional cartesian coordinate x for the horizontal axis.

 38 The constant ab = IE where E is the total energy, and the constant ac = / where / is the angular
 momentum. Bernoulli dropped a factor 2 which should multiply the constant a2g.

 a2cdx

 dz = , _ _ (58)

 xy/abx2 , + a2gx - a2c2

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 except for the factor 2 in the denominator. But neither Varignon, nor Bernoulli or
 Hermann considered the integration of dt = ('/Q)ydx to determine the time along
 the orbit.

 5 Bernoulli's integration of the quadrature in Prop. 41 for an inverse square

 force

 In his letter to Hermann, Bernoulli translated into Leibniz's notation Newton's descrip-

 tion in Prop. 41 for an integral that determines the dependence of the polar angle of
 an orbit on the radial distance from the center of a general central force / (Bernoulli

 1710; Brackenridge 2003; Erlichson 1994). Afterwards, he also derived this integral
 from a differential expression for the force, as has been shown in the previous section.
 For an inverse square force, / = a2g/x2, where x is the radial distance from the
 center of force.37 a is a constant with dimension of length, and g is a constant with
 dimension of acceleration, Bernoulli obtained38

 290 M. Nauenberg

 where d z = adO is an infinitesimal arc of a circle with radius a. Bernoulli obtained

 this result by a direct translation of Newton's expression for this arc, given for an

 arbitrary central force in geometrical language, into the cartesian notation for differ-

 entials developed by Leibniz.39 In order to transform this expression into the "ordinary
 differential of the arc of a circle", Bernoulli's first step was to introduce the inverse
 transformation

 x=- , (59)

 a i2

 У

 to a variable y, which leads to the relation

 dz = - cdy ===. (60)

 y/ab + gy- (c2/a2)y2

 Then shifting the origin of the coordinate у by setting у = a - t, where a is a constant

 and Ms a variable, Bernoulli determined a by the requirement that on substitution of

 this expression for у in the argument of the square root in Eq. 60, the term linear in
 t vanish. This condition gives a = a2#/2c2, and in terms of the new variable t he
 obtained

 and

 1 = m

 dz dt

 d$ = 7 = WTi ř <62)

 where h = ( a/c)yjab + a2g2/Ac2. At this point, Bernoulli recognized that while the
 left hand side of Eq.62 is the differential angle for the polar angle в = z/a of the
 orbit, the right hand side of this equation is the expression in cartesian coordinates for
 the differential angle associated with a circle of radius /г.40 In Cartesian coordinates

 X , y, the differential length of the arc is ds = y/dx2 + d у2, and for a circle of radius

 h = y/x2 H- у2,

 xdx 4- vdv

 dh = - = 0. (63)

 Hence dy = - (x /y)dx, and substituting this relation fordy in di gives d в = ds/ h =
 dx/ ' Ih2 - x 2. On geometrial grounds, this identification had already been made by

 The only additional step that Bernoulli had to undertake was the evaluation of the integral in Prop. 39 for

 the area bounded by the curve associated with an inverse square force, namely J dx('/x2) = - '/x. Such
 integrals, however, were already well known over half a century earlier from the work of Fermat (Kline
 1972). Presently, this integral is called the potential for the inverse square force.

 ^ . . .qui est une différentielle d'arc de cercle dont le rayon est=/i, & son sinus=i divise par son rayon.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 which is the now familiar equation in polar coordinate for a conic section with eccen-

 The early application of the calculus 29 1

 several mathematician in the seventeenth century. Hence, in modern notation41, t =
 hsin(6 - 0o ), and Eq. 61 takes the form

 1 - €Sin(0 - 0o)

 where x = XY, y = YQ. The condition that for y = a2 g /2с2 we have x = 2c2/ g
 implies that OQ = atg/lc1 and OZ = 2 c2/g, and then OZ ■ OQ = a2 The con-
 nection to the angular variable is obtained by shifting the origin of coordinates from

 Q to the point О along the horizontal y- axis, and constructing a circle T SM centered
 at О , with radius

 where О Г is along the horizontal and О M along the vertical axis. Then OY = t and
 the condition

 2c2 /q

 X =

 tricity

 € = 2c1 h ! a1 g = yj 1 + 4 c2h/ag2. (65)

 In the tradition of seventeenth century mathematics, Bernoulli also gave a geometrical
 construction to describe this conic section, but his description has not received the
 attention is deserves.

 Referring to Fig. 5, the axis for the cartesian coordinates x, y are the inverted ver-

 tical line RQ , and the horizonal line OQ respectively with origin at the intersection
 Q. The inverse relation between the variables x and y is expressed by the curve VXZ

 which is a hyperbola determined by the proportion

 H = ££. (66)
 OZ YQ

 ОТ = OM = h (67)

 OA = OZ = - . (68)

 2c2

 9

 and t = Y О = O Q - Y Q. The intersection at 5 of a straight line OS with the circle

 TSM, drawn at an angle в = SOM from the vertical line OA, determines Y and X
 by the intersections of a vertical line through S with the horizontal line О Q and the
 hyperbola VXZ , respectively. Then extending the line OS to B, such that OB = XY
 is the radial distance, and varying the angle в = SOM with vertex at 0, the path of
 В describes geometrically the curve ABC corresponding to orbit, where

 41 Bernoulli did not use a notation for the ratio t/ h which corresponds to the trigonometric function sine

 of the angle в.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 292 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 5 Bernoulli's geometrical
 construction for the orbit of a

 Soit donc ici ( où les mêmes lettres marquent les mê-

 conic section

 mes chofes que dans la A
 Fig. precedente ) perpen- JSc^ - ' ye
 diculairemcnt en О Гиг v
 АО la droite
 Ы du centre pentire les / у ' '
 afymptotes gjj , gjt , < С T F Y О
 une hyperbole equilatere
 VXZ , donc le re&angle

 (descoordonnées)e^rj:ou /%* Jg
 J¡)OZ*aiAASo't prolongée /%*
 une ordonnée quelcon- /
 que -XT de l'hyperbole /
 jufqu'à ce qu'elle rencon- /
 tre le cercle MST en S , /
 par lequel point «Í foie R /y
 menée OS , fur laquelle
 ( prolongée s'il en eft befoin ) foie prife OB : =¡XT. Je dis
 que le point В fera un de çeux de la řrajettoire ЛВС %

 puifque

 OQ • OA

 OB = -

 - OQ-OY

 Substituting in this expression OY = OTsin(0 ), e = ОТ /OQ - h(2c2/a2g) and
 OA = 2 c2/g, shows that Bernoulli's geometric construction42 for the curve ABC
 corresponds to Eq. 64.

 In his next step, Bernoulli gave an algebraic proof that the curve ABC , determined
 geometrically in polar coordinates г, в , satisfies the algebraic equation for a conic
 section, in cartesian coordinates,43 x = OF and у = F В , where F is the intersection

 of the vertical line from В , with the horizontal line OQ. In his diagram, Fig. 5, the
 origin of coordinates at О is one of the foci of the conic, and

 x = - (70)

 OB • OY

 ОТ

 OB-SY

 y of ^

 After this geometrical considerations, Bernoulli obtained an algebraic equation for
 x , у by eliminating the variable t which appears in Eqs. 70 and 71, but he did not
 describe his derivation which is, however, easy to reconstruct.

 42 Newton, who expressed his propositions and solutions in the Principia in geometrically form, could
 have used Bernoulli's construction in the second and third edition of his Principia to include the famous
 "missing" corollary of Prop. 41 for inverse square forces. Most likely, however, he failed to do this because
 his animosity towards Bernoulli, which also led to his refusal to give him any credit for this achievement.

 ^ We follow here Bernoulli who used the same notation for the radial coordinate, and for its cartesian
 component along the jc-axis.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 where OB = a2/(a2g/2c 2 - t), Eq. 61, OY/OT = t/h and SY/OT =
 J(h2-t2)/h.

 and substituting this expression for t in Eq. 71 for y gives

 The early application of the calculus 293

 Setting ï] = a2g/2c 2, Eq. 70 for x yields

 rihx

 ' = (72)

 (rj2 - h2)x2 = la2hx - r¡2y 2 + я4, (73)

 where h/r¡ = e is the eccentricy parameter.44 In this manner, Bernoulli gave an alge-
 braic proof that his geometrical curve ABC corresponds to the curve for a conic
 section, Eq. 64, which he wrote in the corresponding form

 ( a4 g 2 - 4 c4h2)x2 = 8 a2c4hx - a4g2y 2 + 4a4c4. (74)

 In reference to Bernoulli's translation of Props. 39-41 in the Principia into the

 notation introduced by Leibniz, Keill perceptively observed that

 The solution of M.Bernoully does not differ from that of M.Newton except in
 the characters or symbols... it will result that that formula does not differ from
 the Newtonian more than the same words when written in Latin and in Greek

 (Guicciardini 2008)

 Keill's judgement hits the nail on its head.45 Like Newton, Bernoulli was well versed

 in both geometrical and algebraic techniques, and he employed both approaches to
 achieve his result.

 6 Concluding remarks

 In the late seventeenth century, the analytic calculus of Newton and Leibniz introduced

 finite differentials which were grounded on geometrical quantities readily comprehen-

 sible to its practitiones. The difficulty associated with the mathematical limit - that at

 the end of a calculation the differentials, like ghosts, had to vanish - was not resolved

 rigorously until a century later, but this problem was left to be debated as a philo-

 sophical problem of mathematics; it did not delay progress in the development and
 application of the new calculus. Later on, after Clairaut, d'Alembert and Euler formal-

 ized the calculus into the form familiar to us today, all traces of the geometrical origin

 44 Setting h/ïj = с, Bernoulli's algebraic equation corresponds to Herman's result, Eq. 16, with a substi-

 tuted by a/y/rj.

 45 Although Guicciardini agrees that Bernoulli's expression, Eq. 58, is "a translation of Newton's geomet-
 rical proportionalities into the language of calculus", he questions whether Newton could have performed
 such a translation, claiming that "he used his own method of series and fluxions that is equivalent and yet
 different from Leibniz's algorithm" (Guicciardini 2008). Yet the explanation that Newton gave to David
 Gregory on how he obtained the solution for the inverse cube force, described in Cor. 3 of Prop. 41, shows
 that Newton's procedures were virtually identical to those of Bernoulli.

 40 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 of these equation were removed. Leibniz foresaw this development with his remark
 that

 294 M. Nauenberg

 Fig. 6 Newton's diagram for
 Lemma 2, sect 1 of the Principia

 In truth no one before Leibniz has had the idea of constituting out of this new cal-

 culus and algorithm whereby the imagination would be freed from the perpetual
 attention to figures (Leibniz 1849)

 In a letter to Christiann Huygens, he wrote

 For what I love most about my calculus is that it gives us the same advantages
 over the Ancients in the geometry of Archimedes, that Viète and Descartes have

 given us in the geometry of Euclid or Apollonios, in freeing us from having to
 work with the imagination (Huygens 1905)

 Leibniz's remarks offers some insight why the connection between mathematics
 and reality has become a riddle in modern times. The standard abstract formulation

 of Newtonian mechanics based on the equation / = ma , where the acceleration a

 is represented by a second derivative, hides its geometric origins. Indeed, it is the

 "attention to figures", which Newton advocated, that give us some understanding of
 the connection of this differential equation to reality. We have shown that in the work

 of Bernoulli, Hermann, Leibniz and Varignon, the problem of inverse square forces
 was first visualized geometrically, and then solved analytically with finite differentials
 that satisfy algebraic equations.

 7 Appendix 1. Early formulation of the fundamental theorem of the calculus

 In Prop. X: 1 1 of his 1668-1669 Geometrical Lectures (Barrow 1916; Mahoney
 1990), Isaac Barrow gave a rigorous geometrical proof of the fundamental theorem of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 295

 the calculus.46 Barrow proved that the subtangent of a curve with ordinate Yx for the

 area bounded by another curve yx at a corresponding value of x of the abscissa, is pro-

 portional to the ratio Yx/yx. In a 1693 article in the Acta Eruditorum (Leibniz 1693),
 Leibniz essentially took over Barrow's geometrical proof, substituting the differential

 form for the subtangent, Yxdx/dYx, to write Barrow's result, Yxdx/dYx - aYx/yx ,

 in the form aYx = f yxdx , where a is an arbitray constant of proportionality with the
 dimension of length.

 In an appendix to his lectures, Barrow also gave a bound for the area of a curve by

 the sum of the areas of rectangles, which later Newton adopted as Lemma 2 of Sect. 1

 in the Principia. Barrow's bound served as the starting point for an analytic proof of the

 fundamental theorem along the lines developed by Leibniz and Newton. Referring to

 Fig. 6, which corresponds to Barrow's diagram as it appeared in Lemma 2, let y¡ be the
 ordinate of the curve at x¡ for i = 1-5. Then y' - Aa,yi = Bb, y$ = Cd , 2/4 = Dd
 and У5 = Ее, and x' = 0, X2 = AB , x$ = AC, X4 = AD , and xs = AE, where
 AB = ВС = CD = DE, i.e., the corresponding rectangles have equal differential
 widths dx = X/+1 - Xi à The upper bound U for the area under the curve is

 /=4

 i=t

 1 = 4

 1=2

 и = ^ y¡dx, (75)

 the lower bound D is

 D - y^y¡áx, (76)

 and the difference U - D is the area of the first rectangle

 U - D = yxdx. (77)

 Geometrically, this result can also be seen to be the sum of the area of the residual
 rectangles albK, bmcL , cndM and deED. Of course, this result applies also for a
 subdivision with n equal rectangles. It follows that when the magnitude of the differ-
 ential d# is decreased, and accordingly the number n of rectangles is increased, the
 difference U - D between the upper and lower bounds to the area under the curve,

 which is proportional to dx, also decreases. In the limit that dx becomes vanishingly
 small, this difference becomes zero giving a proof equivalent to Archimedes method

 by exhaustion that either bound approaches the area.

 Hence, by taking a sufficiently large number n of rectangles, the sum of differentials

 46 In a letter to Oldenburg meant for Leibniz, written on Oct 24, 1676, Newton formulated this theorem in

 the form of an anagram that reads "given an equation involving any number of fluent quantities to find the
 fluxions, and conversely" (Newton 1676).

 Y„ = У, Vidx (78)

 i=n

 /=1

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 296 M. Nauenberg

 for i = 1 to i = n , where dx = x,+i - х/ is a constant, determines the area under

 the curve in the interval x = 0, x = xn to any desired accuracy.47 In turn, the sum Y¡

 satisfies the property that the difference

 àYi = Yi+x-Yi=yi+xáx (79)

 is determined by 2/,-+ j and the magnitude of the differential dx. Taking x as a variable,

 let Yx be the area bounded by the curve yx = y¡, and the ordinates x' and x. Then in

 the limit that dx -» 0 the ratio dYx/dx approaches the tangent of the curve Yx , and
 according to Eq. 79

 d Yx
 -7^ -> Ух (80)
 dx

 This relation represents in algebraic form Barrow's geometrical theorem. In Leib-

 niz's suggestive notation where the summation sign ^ is replaced by the integral
 sign/

 X

 XI

 Yx = J yxdx (81)

 In Newton's equivalent language for the calculus, 48 the ordinate yx with x as a uni-

 formly increasing variable, i.e. x = 1, represents the fluxion associated with the fluent

 Yx , and the differential relation between Yx and yx is denoted in Newton's notation

 by a dot on Yx,

 Yx = Ух- (82)

 It is surprising that Newton did not introduce a notation for the integral of yx compara-

 ble to Leibniz's, Eq. 8 1 and instead, he referred to the fluent Yx always as the quadrature

 or area associated to the curve yx. He defined also the moment of any fluent Yx or curve
 by Yxo , where о is a small quantity corresponding to Leibniz's differential dx. It is
 also important to recognize, that Leibniz's differential dYx = Yx+ ¿x - Yx is the same
 as Newton's moment Yx dx only to first order in dx.49

 47 Although the sum X/=ï 2/i increases with increasing n without bounds, the product (X/=ï Vi )&x
 remains finite, because dx = ( x - x')/n decreases with increasing n in the same proportion.

 48 Leibniz's rules for the differential calculus are the same ones that Newton developed for his calculus of

 fluxions. In 1696, the Marquis De L'Hospital published Analyse des Infiniment Petits pour L'Intelligence
 des Lignes Courbes , based on lectures that he had received from Bernoulli, which became the first textbook

 on the differential calculus in the Continent. It was translated from French to English in 1730 by E. Stone
 under the title The Method of Fluxions both Direct and Inverse. Stone changed Leibniz differential notation
 into Newton's dot notation for fluxions, e.g., dx became xdt, and he added his own description of the
 integral calculus.

 49 The ratio d Y' /dx of Leibniz's "characteristic triangle" with sides dx and dY ' is equal to the tangent Y
 at x. Leibniz used the same symbol d Y for this different definition of the differential d Yr , which for a fixed
 value of dx is equal to Newton's definition of the moment of Y.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 297

 While a rigorous mathematical formulation of the limit dx -> 0 had to wait for
 another century, in Lemmal, Sect. 1 of the Principia Newton expressed this limit

 concisely under the heading of "first and ultimate ratios" as follows:

 Quantities and also ratios of quantities, which in any finite time constantly tend to

 equality, and which before the end of that time approach so close to one another

 that their difference is less than any given quantity, become ultimately equal.

 In practice, differentials, either geometrical or algebraic, were always represented
 by finite albeit very small quantities. Both Newton and Leibniz recognized that for
 sufficiently small values of these differentials, the results obtained from approximate

 relations in which the contributions of higher order differentials were neglected would

 be accurate to any desired degree.

 8 Appendix 2

 Using vector notation with Cartesian components along the x, y axis and origin at the
 center of force, we give a succinct derivation of the second-order differentials ddx

 and dd y for the force impulse along the lines given by Hermann based on Prop. 1 in
 Newton's. This derivation is contrasted with Bernoulli's, which was given in polar

 coordinates, and with by a comparable derivation based on Prop. 6.

 In reference to Hermann's diagram shown in Fig. 2, let the positions В , С and E
 on the curve ABC D . be represented by the vectors r# = r(t),r с = r(t -f di), and
 rD = r(t + 2d t). Then ?e = 2 rc - гв , and ED = r¿> - r# is given by

 ED = r(t + 2d t) + r(t) - 2 r(t + d t)) (83)

 Defining the first-order differential by d r(t) = r(t + d t) - r(t ), and the second-order

 differential by ddr(/) = d r(t -|- d t) - dr(/), we find that

 ED = ddr(i). (84)

 For an attractive central inverse square force ED = E Dr /г, where г = Ух2 -h у 2,
 ED = -(xá у - yáxÝ/ar 2, and we obtain

 ddr = -^r(xdy - ydx)2. (85)

 r3

 which corresponds to Hermann's result, Eq. 4, for the x component of r.

 In polar coordinates г, в , one also must take into account that the reference unit

 vectors i/, v along the radial and transverse direction are not fixed in space, but satisfy
 the conditions du = vdO , and dv = udO. Setting r = гй, we have

 dr = drü + rdOv, (86)

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In the diagram associated with Prop. 6, shown in Fig. 4, let r/> = r(t), ?q =

 r(t + di)) represent the positions Q and P on the curve, and r¡t(t) = r(t ) -I- v(t)dt,
 the position of R9 where v(t) is the velocity at P along the tangent line RP . Hence
 the change in position RQ - ?r -7q, is

 298 M. Nauenberg

 and

 Then

 ddr = (dd r - rde2)u + (rdde + 2drd0)t>. (87)

 For a force impulse along the radial direction, the second-order differential com-
 ponent of ddr along the transverse direction v must vanish, leading to Kepler's area
 law in the form

 d(r2d6>) = 0. (88)

 £ <x ddr - rd02 (89)

 which is the form originally obtained by Leibniz and re-derived by Bernoulli. Setting
 £ = -2 фс2, where ф is the force and с = r2d0 is a constant, we recover Bernoulli's
 result

 ф m

 RQ = - dr(/) + v(t)dt. (91)

 To convert this expression to differentials, we need to express the velocity vector v(t)

 in terms of first-order differentials dr(ř) with the property that in the limit when Q

 approaches P, this vector remains tangential to the curve at P up to third order in
 powers of dt. Introducing Q ' for the position on the orbit at time t - dt, which is not

 shown in Newton' diagram, where rg> = r(t - dt), this property is satisfied uniquely
 by the chord 7q - ?q> = dr(i) 4- dr(/ - dt). Hence, we approximate v(t) by the
 relation

 v(t)dt = i(d r(0 + dr(i - dt)), (92)

 and substituting this expression for v(t)dt in Eq. 91, we obtain

 RQ = iád r(0 (93)

 Acknowledgements I would like to thank Niccolo Guicciardini for numerous discussion and many help-
 ful comments and corrections of an earlier draft of this manuscript.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The early application of the calculus 299

 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncom-
 mercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,

 provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

 References

 Aiton, E. J., 1954 The Inverse Problem of Central Forces. Annals of Science 20:81-99
 Aiton, E. J., 1962 The Celestial Mechanics of Leibniz. Annals of Science 16:65-82

 Aiton, E. J., 1995 The vortex theory in competition with Newtonian celestial dynamics. Planetary astronomy

 from the Renaissance to the rise of astrophysics, part B, edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson (Cambridge
 University Press) pp. 3-21

 Barrow, I., 1916 The Geometrical Lectures of Isaac Barrow. Translations and notes by J. M. Child (Open

 Court, London), Quoted by N. Guicciardini in reference (Guicciardini 2009)

 Bernoulli, J., 1710 Extrait de la Résponse de M. Bernoulli à M. Herman, datée de Basle le 7. Octobre 1710.

 Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences pp. 521-533

 Bernoulli, J., 1914 Die erste Integralrechnungen Ostwald Klassiker nr. 194 (Leipzig und Berlin, 1914)

 63-67. Archives for the History of Exact Sciences 46, 222-25 1

 Bernoulli, J., 1999 Die Werke von Jakob Bernoulli: Bd. 5: Differentialgeometrie edited by D. Speiser, A.

 Bernoulli, 2008 Die Werke von Johannn I und Nicolaus II Bernoulli ed. P. Radelet-de Grave (Birkhäuser)

 Weil and M. Mattmüller (Birkhaüsser)

 pp. 125-128

 Bertoloni Meli, D., 1991 Equivalence and priority: Newton vs. Leibniz (Clarendon Press, Oxford)
 Boyer, С. В., 1989 A History of Mathematics (Wiley, New York)

 Bos, H. J. M., 1973 Differentials, Higher-Order Differentials and the Derivative in the Leibnizian Calculus.

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 14:1-90

 Brackenridge, J. В., 2003 Newton 's Easy Quadratures " Omitted for the Sake of Brevity ". Archive for

 History of Exact Sciences 57, 313-336

 Cohen, I. В., 1999 Isaac Newton The Principia. A new translation by I. B. Cohen and Anne Whitman
 assisted by Julia Budenz, and A Guide to Newton's Principia by I. B. Cohen (University of California
 Press) p.l 15

 Erlichson, H., 1994 The Visualization of Quadratures in the Mystery of Corollary 3 to Proposition 41 of

 Newton's Principia. Historia Mathematica 21, 148-161

 Euler, L., 1736 Medianica (St. Petersburg) Quoted in reference (Bertoloni Meli 1991) p. 214
 Guicciardini, N., 1999 Reading the Principia: The Debate on Newton's Mathematical Methods for Natural

 Philosophy from 187 to 1736. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) pp. 207-225

 Guicciardini, N., 2008 Isaac Newton and Johann Bernoulli on central force motion, (to be published)
 Guicciardini, N., 2009 Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge)
 Hermann, J., 1710a Extrait d'une Lettre de M. Herman à M. Bernoulli, datée de Padoiie le 12. Juillet 1710.

 Mémoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences pp. 5 19-521

 Hermann, J., 1710b Metodo d'investigare l'Orbite de' Pianeti... Giornale de' Letterati ď Italia , voi. 2,

 Huygens, C., 1673 Horologium Oscillatorium (Paris). Reproduced in Ouvres Complètes de Christiaan
 Huygens, voi. 8 (Martinus Nijhoff). English translation in Richard J. Blackwell, Christiaan Huygens's
 Pedulum Clock (Ames 1986)

 Huygens, С., 1905 Ouvres Complètes des Christiaan Huygens vol. 10 Correspondance 1691-1695 (Martinus
 Nijhoff, The Hague) p. 227. Translation from French to English by N. Guicciardini in réf. (Guicciardini
 1999) p. 166

 Kline, M., 1972 Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, vol. 1 (Oxford University Press,

 447-467

 Oxford)

 Laplace, P. S., 1798 Traité de Méchanique Celeste Tome I, Premier Partie, Livre II, (Gauthier- Villars, Paris)

 p. 165, Ouvres Complètes de Laplace (Gauthiers- Villars, Paris, 1843) p. 181

 Leibniz, G., 1693 Supplementum geometriae dimensoriare ... Acta Eruditorum, 385-392. Translated into
 English from Leibniz, Mathematische Schriften , Abth. 2, Band I, 294-301, in A source book in mathe-
 matics, edited by E.D. Struik (Harvard University Press 1969) pp. 282-284

 Leibniz, G. W., 1849 Mathematische Schriften vol. 5, ed. С. I. Gerhardt (Berlin) p. 393

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Leibniz, G. W., 1973 Marginalia in Newoni Prncipia Mathematica ( Ì687) edited by E. A. Fellman (Librarie

 Philosophique J Vrin, Paris)

 Mahoney, M. S., 1990 Barrow's mathematics: between ancients and moderns , in Before Newton: The life

 and times of Isaac Barrow, edited by Mordechai Feingold (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) pp.
 179-249

 300 M. Nauenberg

 Mazzone, S. and Roero, C. S., 1997 Jacob Hermann and the diffusion of the Leibnizian calculus in I tally

 (Olschki, Firenze)

 Nauenberg, M., 1994 Newton's Early Computation for Dynamics

 Nauenberg, M., 2003 Kepler's area law in the Principia : filling in some details in Newton 's proof of Prop-

 osition 1. Historia Mathematica 30:441-456

 Nauenberg, M., 2005 Robert Hooke's seminal contributions to orbital dynamics. Physics in Perspective 7,
 4-34; reprinted in Robert Hooke Tercentennial Studies, edited by M. Cooper and M. Hunter (Ashgate,
 Cornwall, 2006) Physics in Perspective

 Newton, I., 1670-1673 The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton vol. 3, 1670-1673, edited by D.T. White-

 side (Cambridge University Press) pp. 154-155

 Newton, I., 1960 The correspondence of Isaac Newton vol. 3 edited by H. W. Turnbull (Cambridge Uni-

 Newton, I., 1968 The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton vol. 2, edited by D.T. Whiteside (Cambridge

 versity Press) p. 297

 Universit Press, Cambridge) p. 270

 Newton, I., 1974 The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton vol. 6, 1684-1691, edited by D.T. Whiteside

 (Cambridge University Press, 1974) pp. 35-37

 Newton, I., 1676 The correspondence of Isaac Newton , vol. 2, 1676-1687, edited by H.W. Turnbull (Cam-

 bridge University Press 1976)

 Varignon, M., 1710 Des forces Centrales Mémoires de Г Academie Royale des Sciences 533-544
 Wilson, С., 1994 Newton's Orbit Problem: A Historian's Response. The College Mathematics Journal

 25:193-205

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:40:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

