 

 

 

 

The correspondence between Sophie Germain and Carl Friedrich Gauss
Author(s): Andrea Del Centina, Alessandra Fiocca, Ch.Fr. Gauss, Le Blanc and  Sophie
Germain
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 6 (November 2012), pp. 585-700
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23319292
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:06 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2012) 66:585-700
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0105-x

 The correspondence between Sophie Germain
 and Carl Friedrich Gauss

 Andrea Del Centina • Alessandra Fiocca

 Received: 9 January 2012 / Published online: 10 August 2012

 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract This paper publishes the correspondence between S. Germain and C.F.
 Gauss. The mathematical notes enclosed in her letters are published for the first time.

 These notes, in which she submitted some of her results, proofs and conjectures to

 Gauss for his evaluation, were inspired by her study of the Disquisitiones Arithmeti

 cae. The interpretation of these mathematical notes not only shows how deeply she

 went into Gauss's treatise and mastered it long before any other mathematician, but

 also, more importantly, shows that she obtained interesting results in the theory of

 power residues that have never previously been attributed to her.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 586

 2 Sophie Germain's life and work 587
 3 The consistency of the Germain-Gauss correspondence 591
 4 The discovery of the correspondence 595
 5 The editorial project of Boncompagni 599
 6 Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae 602
 7 The Disquisitiones in the first three decades of the 1800s 607
 8 Gauss's results on cubic and biquadratic residues 609
 9 The mathematical content of Germain's letters and notes 614

 Communicated by: Umberto Bottazzini.

 A. Del Centina (El) • A. Fiocca

 Dipartimento di Matematica, Università di Ferrara,
 via Machiavelli 45, 44100 Ferrara, Italy
 e-mail: a.delcentina@unife.it

 A. Fiocca

 e-mail: a.fiocca@unife.it

 «£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 586

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Appendix: Transcription of the correspondence 636
 References 696

 1 Introduction

 Sophie Germain is known for original research in Mathematical Physics and Num
 ber Theory. While she earned fame as a recipient of the French Academy prize for
 her work on elasticity in 1816, she produced her best results in Number Theory.
 A.-M. Legendre credited her with an important step toward proving the first case of
 Fermat's Last Theorem (Legendre 1827, art. 22:; see also Edwards 1977, Chap. 3;
 Ribenboim 1999, p. 110).

 It is well known that Sophie Germain initiated a correspondence with Gauss in
 1804, under the pseudonym of "Le Blanc." She wrote ten letters, eight in the period
 1804-1809 and the remaining two, respectively, in 1819 and in 1829. The first five
 were published (in facsimile) by Boncompagni (1880). Excerpts from these five and
 the one dated 1829 have been published in English in Bucciarelli and Dworsky (1980).
 The others, except for the one dated 1819 (already published in Del Centina 2008),
 are unedited.

 In the first five letters, Germain enclosed extended mathematical notes, and submit

 ted to Gauss's evaluation some new proofs, theorems and conjectures inspired by the
 study of his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae. These mathematical notes, which consisted

 of more than 22 pages (larger then A4), full of mathematical formulas, computations
 and statements, were believed to be lost forever (see Bucciarelli and Dworsky 1980,
 p. 21; Sampson 1990; Ribenboim 1999, p. 203). Luckily, it is not the case, and they
 have been preserved, together with Germain's letters to Gauss, at the Niedersachsische
 Staats- und Universitatsbibliothek in Gottingen.1

 The interpretation of these mathematical notes reveals that she studied the Disqui
 sitiones Arithmeticae and she mastered it in a relatively short time, long before other
 more experienced mathematicians could do. What is more, she obtained interesting
 results on the whole matter of Gauss's treatise. If she is well known for the result

 pertaining to Fermat's Last Theorem, which Legendre credited to her and can be

 dated around 1820, she is not known for her achievements on «-ary quadratic forms,

 nth-power residues, etc., obtained in the early years of her correspondence with Gauss.
 For these reasons we believe that her letters and mathematical notes deserved to be

 published in their entirety. We hope this paper will contribute to complete the rééval
 uation of Sophie Germain as a number theorist, initiated with Del Centina (2008) and
 Laubenbacher and Pengelley (2010).

 This paper is divided into two parts.

 The first, consisting of eight sections, is devoted to a presentation of Sophie
 Germain's life and work, as well as of her correspondence with Gauss, This includes

 a discussion of the mathematical content of her letters. The second part consists of the

 ' Cod. ms. Gauss Briefe A: Germain, n. 9. Abteilung Handschriften und Seltene Drucke.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 587

 Appendix, completely devoted to the annotated transcription of all Germain's letters,
 including the mathematical notes, and Gauss's responses. More specifically:

 In Sect. 2, we give an account of Sophie Germain's life and work, stressing the fact

 that she learned mathematics by herself and—although she benefitted from the advice
 of Lagrange and Legendre and from the correspondence with Gauss—she worked in
 almost complete isolation.

 In Sect. 3, we present the epistolary exchange between Germain and Gauss in its

 chronological development, and we comment briefly on it.

 In Sect. 4, we discuss the discovery of the correspondence between 1877 and 1880,

 and the interest that the publication of some of these letters aroused in European
 mathematical and historical circles.

 In Sect. 5, we discuss the editorial project of a complete edition of the correspon

 dence that Prince Baldassare Boncompagni aimed to publish, but never did.

 Section 6 is devoted to a short summary of the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, focus

 ing specifically on what is needed for explaining Germain's results and introducing

 Gauss's notation which she used in her mathematical notes. We hope this may aid the

 reader in understanding the mathematical content of the correspondence.

 In Sect. 7, we give an account of the impact the Disquisitiones had in Europe from

 the time of its publication to the time of Sophie Germain's death in 1831.

 In Sect. 8, we briefly describe the work of Gauss on cubic and biquadratic resi
 dues, especially his first memoir on this topic (Gauss 1828a), which is important in
 discussing Germain's sixth and seventh letters.

 Finally, in Sect. 8, Germain's letters and mathematical notes are analyzed and com

 mented upon, giving special attention to certain results, namely those on cubic and
 biquadratic residues, which have never previously been attributed to her.

 2 Sophie Germain's life and work

 Marie-Sophie Germain was born in Paris the April 1, 1776, the middle daughter of
 Ambroise-François and Marie-Madeline Gruguelu. Her father, a rich silk-merchant,

 was elected a deputy in the National Assembly in 1789 and 3 years later, he became a
 member of the Constitutional Assembly.2

 In the years of the Great Revolution, she was in her teens. Forced to stay at home
 when the Terror began in 1793, she found diversion from her fear in reading. In her
 father's library, she found the Histoire des Mathématiques by J.E. Montucla, and
 she read it with great interest. Fascinated by the story about Archimedes's fate, she

 decided to devote herself to mathematics and science. She studied with great passion

 and indomitable will, in opposition to her parents, who found her desire foreign to her
 gender and social class.3

 2 For the genealogy and other information on her family, see Stupuy ( 1879, 1896).

 3 Much of what we know about her youth, personality and attitude come from the biographical obituary
 written by her friend and fellow mathematician Guglielmo Libri, shortly after her death in 1831 (Libri
 1832). Other information comes from her correspondence published in Stupuy (1879, 1896), and partly
 translated into English in Bucciarelli and Dworsky (1980). For her correspondence with Libri see also Del
 Centina (2005).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 588

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Sophie began to learn mathematics by studying the Cours des mathémati-ques by
 Etienne Bézout, and then the Calcul différentiel et calcul integral by Joseph Cousin.

 She also learned Latin by herself to read the works of Newton and Euler.

 With the establishment of the Ecole Centrale des Travaux Publiques (later Ecole

 Polytecnique ) in 1794, to which women were not admitted, Sophie obtained the lecture

 notes of various professors for her own use. Fourcroy's chemistry and Lagrange's
 analysis especially attracted her interest. The students were typically invited to pres

 ent the professors with written observations pertaining to the course topics. She used
 the name of an actual student, Antoine-August Le Blanc, to submit her own obser
 vations. Joseph Louis Lagrange praised Le Blanc's essays profoundly, and wanted to
 meet him; he was really surprised when he discovered that Le Blanc was a young lady,

 and he then went to her home to demonstrate to her all his astonishment and good
 will.

 The appearance of a young woman talented in mathematics caused curiosity among
 men of science. Many were eager to aid in her education, and Mademoiselle Germain

 did not wait long before receiving scientists of great merit. Nevertheless, not all those
 encounters were pleasant, comfortable and encouraging. Sometimes she felt some

 how intellectually diminished by them, as was the case with the astronomer Joseph
 Lalande, who gallantly proposed that she read his Astronomie des dames. Irritated,
 she responded that she had already read Laplace's Système du monde (Bucciarelli and
 Dworsky 1980, pp. 12-13).

 Sophie Germain became known in Parisian intellectual circles as a sort of prodigy
 over which to marvel, rather than as a student to be taught. What she needed was a

 proper education, both in basic mathematics and in judging the nature of mathematical

 questions, rather than the admiration of scholars. However, at that time, regular studies

 were available only to men. This not only prevented her having a scientific career, but

 also influenced her personality.

 In 1798, Adrian-Marie Legendre published his Essai sur la théorie des nombres,

 and Sophie Germain began to study number theory with great fervor.

 We do not know when or how Sophie learned of Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithme
 ticae, which was published in 1801, but certainly she was amazed by the originality
 of this work. In it she found new stimulus toward number theory. For a couple of
 years she studied Gauss's treatise, solving many exercises and trying to give her own

 proofs of some of the theorems therein. Then, eager for acknowledgment and encour
 agement, on November 21, 1804, she wrote her first letter to Gauss. She signed it
 "Mr. Le Blanc," fearing the ridicule attached to the title of "femme savant."

 After having praised the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, which had long been the
 object of her admiration and study, Sophie Germain disclosed some of her ideas and

 results. Gauss replied after a seven-month interlude, but in his letter, he showed appre

 ciation for the work of the young Parisian geometer. In fact, Gauss had already written
 to his friend H.W. Olbers on December 7, 1804, saying (Schilling 1990, p. 237):

 Neulich habe ich die Freude gehabt, einen Brief von einem jungen Geometer aus
 Paris Le Blanc zu erhalten, der sich mit Enthusiasmus mit der hôheren Arith

 metik vertraut macht, und mir Proben gegeben hat, dass er in meine Disquis.

 Arith. tief eingedrungen ist [Today, I received with pleasure a letter from a young

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 589

 geometer of Paris, Le Blanc, who has studied the higher arithmetic with great
 enthusiasm, and has given me evidence of having penetrated very deeply into
 my Disquisitiones Arithmeticae].

 Sophie Germain, under the name of Le Blanc, wrote three letters to Gauss, and
 Gauss numbered Le Blanc among his correspondents. Although Gauss's praises were
 sincere, as clearly demonstrated in some letters, he wrote to Olbers, and despite
 Germain's solicitousness, he scarcely commented on her work.

 In February 1807, as a consequence of the Franco-Prussian War, she had to reveal

 her true identity to Gauss. This time he responded promptly and at length, and with

 even more praise than before.

 Gauss wrote his last letter to Germain in January 1808. In it, Gauss seems to be

 saying that he would no longer have time to correspond with her. Germain addressed to

 Gauss three other letters, to which he probably never replied, and she stopped writing
 to him in 1809.

 In 1808, after a series of spectacular experiments performed in Paris by the
 German physicist E.F. Chladni on the intricate vibrational patterns of thin plates,
 the Paris Academy of Sciences announced a contest for the best memoir—supported
 by experimental evidence—on the mathematical theory of vibrating elastic surfaces.

 Sophie Germain set aside her beloved number theory, and began to study this prob

 lem intensely. In 1811, assisted by Legendre, she presented, as the only competitor,

 her first contribution to the Academy. Unfortunately, the memoir she offered, based on

 a generalization of Euler's theory of vibrating beams, was marred by a significant mis

 take. However, the contest was extended for 2 years. Helped by her mentors, Lagrange
 and Legendre, she submitted to the Academy an amended version of her first memoir

 in 1813, again as the sole competitor. This time, although the way she came to her
 fundamental equation was still judged completely incorrect, the memoir was awarded

 an "honorable mention," for the part regarding the comparison of the theory with the
 experimental data.

 The competition was extended again until October 15, 1815. Sophie Germain's
 third memoir, presented again as only competitor, was different in many respects from

 the previous one. For instance she tried to extend her research to curved surfaces, but

 her work, although interesting in intent, was still fundamentally deficient. Neverthe
 less, the commission, consisting of Poisson, Laplace, Legendre, Poinsot, and Biot,
 decided to award her the prize with reservation. In their motivation, the members of

 the board stated that her (correct) fundamental equation was not clearly deduced from

 the hypothesis, but the comparison—made with the results observed by Chladni—

 and the new experiments carried out to test the indications of the theory, appeared to

 merit the prize.

 (Germain 1821).4

 In 1821, Germain published her prize-winning memoir at her own expense

 4 For a detailed analysis of Sophie Germain's works in elasticity see Bucciarelli and Dworsky (1980),
 Dahan-Dalmédico (1987), and Truesdell (1991).

 4?) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 590

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 In late December 1815, the Academy of Paris established a new contest and prize,
 aimed at the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem (FLT), i.e., the impossibility of solving
 in nonzero integers the equation x" + y" = zn when « > 3. The competition was
 extended in 1818, and withdrawn in 1820. Probably, only after the second call for FLT,

 did Sophie Germain return with force to work on this challenging question, which she

 had been considering since 1804—the time of her first letter to Gauss. She not only

 was convinced that the theory of congruences and power residues, developed by Gauss

 in the Disquisitiones, was the right tool for solving that old problem, but in 1818, the

 memoir by Louis Poinsot Sur I 'application de l'algèbre à la théorie des nombres, gave
 her new encouragement to address the question.5

 In May 1819, the visit she received from H.C. Schumacher, a friend of Gauss, gave

 her the occasion to address a new letter to him. In it, she put forth her ideas and her

 progress toward the resolution of Fermat's problem.

 For a long time, her only contribution to FLT had been entirely described by the so
 called Sophie Germain theorem (see Dickson 1971, II, p. 734; Edwards 1977, Chap. 3;
 Ribenboim 1999, p. 110). Legendre attributed this to her in a footnote of his paper
 (Legendre 1827).6 Only very recently, through the study of some of her unpublished

 manuscripts, it has been recognized that her results related to FLT went far beyond
 the content of that simple footnote (Del Centina 2008; Laubenbacher and Pengelley
 2010).

 In the early 1820s, through the work of S.-D. Poisson, J. Fourier, C.-L. Navier, and

 A.-L. Cauchy, a new theory of elastic surfaces emerged. It was impossible for Sophie
 Germain to take part in its development, not only because of her lack of knowledge
 of mathematical analysis, but also because of lack of access to the sessions of the
 Academy, the difficulties she encountered in getting information about the works of
 others, and the arrogance with which she was treated. She had never been included in

 serious scientific discussions. All this put her in an isolated and uncomfortable position
 (Bucciarelli and Dworsky 1980, Chap. 9).

 In May 1825, during one of the Thursday parties given by François Arago at the
 Observatory, Sophie Germain met Guglielmo Libri.7 Germain and Libri had many

 5 From a letter of Germain to Poinsot dated July 2nd 1819, and published in Del Centina (2005, p. 63),
 we deduce that she received from Poinsot a manuscript copy of this memoir, already announced to the
 Academy in 1818 by Delambre and published one year later (Poinsot 1820).

 6 Legendre read this paper to the Paris Academy in 1823.

 7 Guglielmo Libri, count of Bagnano [1802-1869], was born in Florence. He had an excellent education
 and enrolled at the University of Pisa in 1816. He graduated in Mathematics in 1820, and the same year
 he wrote his first paper Memoria sulla teoria dei numeri [Memoir on Number Theory], which he sent to
 Legendre and Cauchy. In 1823, he became professor of Mathematical Physics in Pisa. In the winter of

 1824, already known as a talented young mathematician to Legendre and Cauchy for having corresponded

 with them, he went to Paris to present in person his memoirs to the Academy. Libri remained in Paris until
 August 1825, when he returned to Florence. He returned to Paris in 1830. In 1833, Libri became a French

 citizen, and the same year he was named a member of the Academy. In 1843, Libri also became a professor

 at the Sorbonne. In 1848, accused of being involved in thefts from several French public libraries, he fled
 to London, where he continued his trade in books and manuscripts. He returned to Florence in December
 1868. He died the following year in Fiesole, a small town in the hills surrounding Florence (Maccioni Ruju
 and Monstert 1995; Del Centina and Fiocca 2010).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 591

 interests in common, most importantly a real passion for Number Theory and FLT,
 and—although he was 26 years her junior—their friendship immediately grew. They
 met several times during Libri's stay in Paris. In the summer, Libri went back to
 Florence, and he started to correspond with her (Del Centina 2005).

 In 1826, Sophie Germain presented to the Academy a new memoir on elasticity,

 which she considered a clearer version of her third entry. Cauchy was designated to

 review her paper. He encouraged her to publish it, to relieve the Academy of the embar

 rassment of having to deal with her work (Bucciarelli and Dworsky 1980, p. 107), and

 her memoir appeared in Annales de Chimie in 1828 (Germain 1828).

 In 1829, Sophie Germain wrote her last letter to Gauss. The occasion arose from
 the visit she received from Mr. Bader, a pupil of Gauss's, who delivered a copy of
 Gauss's Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum (published a year earlier) to her.

 The same year, Sophie Germain became afflicted with breast cancer, and was unable

 to do real work anymore.

 In June of 1830, Libri returned to Paris, and visited her. According to him, it

 was during the week of fighting of the July Revolution that she wrote her last paper
 on elasticity (Germain 1831a). In December the same year, Libri returned to Flor
 ence. Then, in February 1831, she told him she had found the energy to write a
 short note on a question she had presented to Gauss in her first letter more than
 25 years earlier (Germain 1831b). She wrote to him again in April and in May.
 From her words, it seems that only by thinking of her friends could she obtain some
 relief (Del Centina 2005). She died on June 17, 1831, at one o'clock in the morn

 ing.

 In addition to mathematics, Sophie Germain studied natural sciences and philos
 ophy. Her philosophical writings Considérations générales sur l'état des sciences et
 des lettres aux différentes époques de leur culture and Pensées diverses, were pub
 lished posthumously. The first was edited by her nephew Jacques-Amant Lherbette,
 2 years after her death (Germain 1833) (also in Stupuy 1879, 1896). It was highly
 appreciated by the philosopher Auguste Comte (see Comte 1864, II, p. 415). The
 second, which is a list of reflections on the history of science and mathematics, was

 published together with a few letters, by Hyppolite Stupuy and appears in Stupuy
 (1879, 1896).

 3 The consistency of the Germain-Gauss correspondence

 The known correspondence between Sophie Germain and Carl Friedrich Gauss con

 sists of 14 letters, ten by Germain and four by Gauss.

 We can be quite sure that if any letter has been lost, it is much more probably a

 letter by Gauss rather than by Germain, because the letters of Germain were preserved

 by Gauss himself and reached the Academy of Gôttingen after his death. On the other

 hand, after Germain's death a large part of her papers fell into the hands of Libri, and

 the letters suffered the fate of the dispersal of his archives (Del Centina and Fiocca
 2004). When, in 1848, Libri fled to London, he brought with him a large part, but
 not all, of his vast collection. Many papers were confiscated by the French authorities

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 592

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 in his apartment at the Sorbonne. Likely among them, there were writings by Sophie
 Germain and letters addressed to her.8

 To each of the first five letters, Sophie Germain added extensive mathematical

 notes, in which she submitted to Gauss's judgement some new proofs, theorems and
 conjectures inspired by his Disquisitiones arithmeticae.

 The work of Boncompagni (Boncompagni 1880) has long caused us to think that

 there were only five letters of hers held in Gôttingen. Bucciarelli and Dworsky,
 despite acknowledging the existence of Germain's unpublished letters (Bucciarelli
 and Dworsky 1980, pp. 114-115, 143), believed the mathematical notes to have
 been lost (Bucciarelli and Dworsky 1980, p. 21) (see also Sampson 1990; Riben
 boim 1999, p. 203). However, the letters of Sophie Germain, numbered from 1 to 10,

 the first four by Gauss himself, together with the enclosed five mathematical notes,

 are held, as already stated, at the Niedersâchsische Staats- und Universitâtsbibliothek

 of Gôttingen.9 The first-named author was really surprised some years ago when, in

 answer to a request to Gôttingen for copies of Germain's letters, he also got copies of
 the mathematical notes.

 Gauss's letters are preserved in Paris at the Bibliothèque Nationale (Fonds Français

 n. 9118), except for the one dated April 30,1807. Of this letter, listed as n. 40 art. 605 in

 the Catalogo delict insigne biblioteca appartenuta a B. Boncompagni (Boncompagni
 1895), the Library of the University of Gôttingen has only a photolithographic repro

 duction. This copy was a gift from Prince Boncompagni. In a handwritten note posted

 on that reproduction, we read:

 Die Manuskripten Sammlung des Prinzen Boncompagni und damit wahrschein

 lich auch das Original des dritten Gaussischen Briefes an Sophie Germain gehôrt
 jetzt dem Professor Mittag-Leffler in Stockholm. Im Archiv! [The collection of
 manuscripts belonged to Prince Boncompagni and so, probably, also Gauss's
 third letter to Germain now belongs to Professor Mittag-Leffler in Stockholm.
 In the Archive! (added by another hand)].

 This note suggests that all the letters of Boncompagni's collection are likely held at the
 Mittag-Leffler Institute in Stockholm, but this is not true (see Del Centina and Fiocca

 2004, pp. 189, 211, 232). In any case, recent searches by Folkerts have not confirmed

 the presence of that letter by Gauss in Stockholm (Folkerts 2003).

 The first three letters by Germain—dated, respectively, November 21, 1804, July
 21, and November 16,1805—are signed "Le Blanc." In the first letter she asked Gauss

 to send his reply to the address of Sylvestre de Sacy, who would have forwarded it to
 her.

 8 Autographs by Sophie Germain are preserved at the Biblithèque Nationale (see Bucciarelli and Dworsky
 1980) and at the Biblioteca Moreniana in Florence (see Del Centina and Fiocca 2004), where drafts of letters

 to Gauss can be found. In 1859, manuscripts by Sophie Germain were donated to the French Academy by
 her sister Angelique-Ambroise madam Dutrochet and Jacques-Amant Lherbette, son of her eldest sister
 Marie-Madeleine (Bertrand 1859).

 9 Gauss used the notation "Nro 1," "Nro 2 etc. for Germain's first four letters and "Ad. 1"Ad. 2," etc.

 for the mathematical notes. We presume that "Ad." stands for the Latin "Additamentum" or for the German

 "Addition." The same notation has been used by another hand for the remaining six letters and the fifth
 mathematical note. We have adopted the term "Addendum."

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 593

 Gauss responded to the first letter after almost 7 months, on June 16, 1805, while to
 the second, he replied more promptly, on August 20, 1805. Both times Gauss praised

 "Mr. Le Blanc" for his results and progress in the difficult field of higher arithmetic.

 Gauss's reply to Sophie's third letter, if it ever existed, has not been found.

 As we have already stated, it was only with the fourth letter that Sophie Germain

 disclosed her true identity to Gauss. The circumstances were as follows:

 In October 1806, the success of the Napoleonic Army at Jena opened the way
 for the invasion of a large part of Prussia, and French troops occupied Bruns
 wick, Gauss's hometown. Sophie, fearing for Gauss's safety, asked General

 Pernety (a family friend and commander of the French artillery in the Prussian
 campaign, responsible for the siege of Breslau) the favor of discovering Gauss's
 whereabouts and ensuring that he was not mistreated. The General ordered Chef

 de Bataillon Chantai to ride two hundred miles west to Brunswick and carry out
 this mission. The meeting between Chantai and Gauss is described in the letter

 that the former sent to his General once he had fulfilled his duty; the letter is
 published in Stupuy (1879). When Chantai revealed to Gauss the name of his
 protector "Mademoiselle Sophie Germain," Gauss replied that he had not had
 the honor of knowing her. Informed of these events by General Pernety (Stupuy
 1879, 1896) on February 20, 1807, Sophie wrote her fourth letter to Gauss,
 finally revealing her true identity.10

 Gauss responded promptly with a long letter containing many mathematical sug

 gestions and even more praise than before for his correspondent.

 The epistolary exchange between the two continued with a letter from Germain

 dated June 27,1807, the reply by Gauss dated January 19,1808, and a new letter from
 Germain dated March 19, 1808.

 The letter of January 1808 is likely the last Gauss addressed to Sophie Germain. In

 this letter, he seems to be saying that, due to various circumstances, he would no longer
 have much time for corresponding with her, although, as is clear from his words, he

 maintained great esteem for her talent.

 In the first months (probably in the spring) of 1809, Gauss forwarded to Sophie
 Germain, through Legendre, a copy of his memoir Summatio quarundam serierum, a

 work that he had presented to the Academy of Gôttingen the year before. In the letter

 dated May 22, after having thanked Gauss for this gift, she professed admiration for
 Gauss's memoir Theorematis arithmetici demonstratio nova,11 a copy of which Gauss

 had sent to her on January 19, 1808:

 En étudiant votre mémoire du 15 Janvier 1808, qui m'a inspiré tant d'admira

 tion et d'étonnement par la simplicité des formules qu'il contient et par les belles

 conclusions que vous en avez deduites, je me suis avisée de chercher ce qu'elles

 10 The letter of Chantai to Penerty and that of Pernety to Germain, are held at the Bibliothèque Nationale
 of Paris, MS Fr. 9118, pp. 266 and 269. A copy of the first, probably requested by E. Schering (see next
 section), is in the Universitâtsbibliothek of Gôttingen with the Gauss-Germain correspondence. For an
 English translation of these letters, see Bucciarelli and Dworsky (1980, pp. 23-24).

 ' ' In this paper, Gauss gave a new, shorter proof of his "Fundamental Theorem," as he called it in the
 Disquisitiones, and that is today known as "Quadratic Reciprocity Law" (see Sect. 8).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 594

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 donneraient si on les appliquaient aux résidus biquarrées... [While studying your
 memoir of January 15, 1808, which left me in complete astonishment and admi

 ration for the simplicity of the formulae therein and the beautiful conclusions
 you have deduced from them, I have tried to see what they may yield when
 applied to biquadratic residues...]

 She then put forth her results concerning biquadratic residues. In closing her letter,

 she added "vous me promettez une ouvrage plus éténdu sur l'astronomie" [you prom
 ised me a more extended work on astronomy]. This phrase causes one to think that
 Gauss included, with the complimentary copy of his paper Summatio..., the written
 promise to send her a copy of his tract on the motion of planets, Motus corporum
 coelestium .... The existence of his accompanying letter is further suggested in the

 next one which she wrote. On May 26, she received from the printer the awaited copy

 of Gauss's tract that she had ordered long before, and, immediately, she addressed a
 new letter to Gauss. Explaining the reasons for having sent two letters in so short a
 time, she wrote

 Je n'avais pas voulu différer plus longtemps de répondre à la lettre et au present
 dont vous m'avez honnorée et cependant j'ai cru vous témoigner d'avantage le
 cas que je fais de vos ouvrages [I had not wanted to delay anymore to reply to
 your letter and present with which you have honored me, and at the same time

 to show you even more how much I value your works]

 She also implored him to maintain his generosity by sending her some of his mem

 oirs which were more difficult for her to find.

 Soon Sophie Germain informed Legendre about the content of Gauss's tract, and

 on May 31, Legendre wrote to Gauss saying:12

 Je pense. Monsieur, que Mad.lie Germain se sera acquittée auprès de vous de
 la commission dont elle avait bien voulu se charger, qui était de vous faire
 tous mes remerciements du mémoire que vous avez bien voulu m'envoyer
 sur la sommation de quelques séries. Vos écrits sur une matière que j'ai touj
 ours affectionnée ne peuvent que m'intéresser beaucoup et j'ai remarqué dans
 celui-ci la fécondité de votre génie qui a vous fait trouver un quatrième ou
 cinquième démonstration de la proposition à laquelle j'ai donné le nom de
 loi de réciprocité entre deux nombres premiers. Depuis peu de jours M.Ile
 Germain a reçu d'Allemagne votre Theoria motus corporum coelestium; Elle
 même donné communication et dans le peu que j'ai pu lire, je vois que ce ouv
 rage est digne de votre réputation ...J'ai vu avec plaisir que vous étiez tombé
 par vos méditations sur la même méthode que j'ai appelé méthode des moin
 dres quarrées dans mon ouvrage sur les comètes. Je vous avues que j'attache
 quelques prix à cette petite trouvaille. Je ne vous dissimulerai donc pas, Mon
 sieur, que j'ai éprouvé quelque regret de voir qu'en citant mon mémoire pag.
 221, vous dites principium nostrum quo jam inde ab anno 1795 usi sumus, etc.

 '2 The letter of Legendre is held at the Niedersâchsische Staats- und Universitatsbibliothek in Gôttingen,
 but only a short extract has been published in Gauss (1917, 1, p. 380).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 595

 [I imagine Sir, that Mademoiselle Germain will have delivered the message
 which she kindly agreed to take, which was to thank you very much for the
 paper which you were kind enough to send me on the summation of certain
 series. Your writings on a subject of which I have always been fond could not

 fail to interest me deeply, and I noted in these the fecundity of your genius which

 led you to discover a fourth or fifth demonstration of the proposition to which I

 have given the name of law of reciprocity between two prime numbers. Since a
 few days ago M.lle Germain received from Germany your Theoria motus cor
 porum coelestium; she herself had passed on extracts, and from the little I have

 managed to read, I can see that this work is worthy of your reputation .. .It was

 with pleasure that I saw that in the course of your meditations you had hit on the
 same method which I called Méthode des moindres quarrés in my memoir on

 comets.. .1 confess to you that I do attach some value to this little finding. I will

 therefore not conceal from you, Sir, that I felt some regret to see that in citing

 my memoir p. 221 you say principium. nostrum quo jam inde ab anno 1795 usi
 sumus etc],13

 In the following years, Sophie Germain became more and more involved in her
 studies on elasticity and vibrating surfaces. She put aside her beloved number theory

 and stopped writing to Gauss.

 Sophie Germain wrote again to Gauss on May 12,1819. The occasion was Gauss's
 friend H.C. Schumacher's visit to her.14 This letter is very important, because in it, she

 explains at some length her ideas and progress toward a proof of FLT. This was a ques

 tion of great interest for her, but, as is well known, not for Gauss (Del Centina 2008).

 The last letter Germain addressed to Gauss is dated May 28, 1829.

 It is very likely that Gauss never responded to these two letters.

 4 The discovery of the correspondence

 Libri, in his short biography of Sophie Germain (Libri 1832), was the first to make

 mention of an exchange of letters between Germain and Gauss. However, the existence

 of a further letter of Sophie Germain to Gauss emerged in 1877.

 During the celebrations for the first centenary of Gauss's birthday, Ernst Scher
 ing (1833-1897), one of the editors of Gauss's works, gave an official speech to the
 Academy of Science of Gôttingen. This was published together with some letters
 from Gauss's archives (Schering 1877). Among these was Sophie Germain's letter

 that Gauss dated February 20,1807. According to Schering, the reason for publishing

 this letter was to reveal the true identity of the "Mr. Le Blanc" cited in Gauss's letter

 written to Olbers on September 3, 1805.

 The same year, Schering informed the Academy of Sciences of Paris that the library
 and the archive of Gauss had been acquired by the Academy of Science of Gôttingen.

 Gauss's remark led to a long controversy with Legendre on priority for the discovery of the Method
 of Least Squares, see Plackett (1972), where an English translation of the whole letter has been published

 (a translation of which we have used an excerpt).

 14 Seethe letter that Schumacher wrote to Gauss from Paris on May 10, 1819(Peters 1860, pp. 157-159).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 596

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Schering also sent to Paris copies of some letters by Lagrange, Laplace, Delambre,
 and Germain addressed to Gauss. Along with this was a request that copies of letters,

 manuscripts, and documents concerning Gauss (owned by Parisian scientists, collec
 tors, and institutions) might be sent to Gôttingen to be included in the new volumes of

 Gauss's works that he was preparing. Schering's request was presented to the Parisian
 Academy of Science by Bertrand (1877).

 In 1879, Hyppolite Stupuy included in his réévaluation of Sophie Germain's philo
 sophical works (Stupuy 1879) some letters from her correspondence. Among these
 were three letters by Gauss and two undated letters signed "Le Blanc." In Stupuy's
 work, Gauss's first letter was erroneously dated June 16, 1806, and moreover Stupuy
 did not mention the whereabouts of these documents. Stupuy's work was reviewed
 by Bertrand (1879), and by Charles Henry, who expressed severe criticisms (Henry
 1879).

 Still in 1879, Baldassarre Boncompagni published the photolithographic reproduc
 tion of Gauss's letter to Germain of April 30, 1807 (Boncompagni 1879).15 This letter

 came from Libri's archives, which had been dispersed in a series of private and public

 sales before and after his death (in 1869). The letter was acquired the following year,
 together with 160 pounds of paper, by the engineer Tommaso Montanari. He, in turn,

 sold it to Boncompagni on December 2, 1878 (Del Centina and Fiocca 2004).

 In October of the same year, Boncompagni sent two copies of his publication to

 Angelo Genocchi, a member of the Turin Academy of Sciences—one for personal
 use and one for the Academy.16 Boncompagni also informed Genocchi that Gauss's

 letter was in his hands and he intended to write a note, with all the details of the lucky

 purchase, to be published in the memoirs of the Accademia Pontificia dei Nuovi Lincei.
 Boncompagni requested Genocchi's advice in order to understand the profound math
 ematical questions that Gauss was dealing with in the letter. However, the note that
 Boncompagni had planned to write never saw the light of day. Nevertheless, this was
 the beginning of a close epistolary exchange between Boncompagni and Genocchi,
 focused on the Germain-Gauss correspondence which, as we will see, was revealed
 in its entirety only later and bit by bit.17

 In November 1879, Ernst Schering presented Boncompagni's work to the Acad
 emy of Science of Gottingen. Schering stressed the importance of that letter, not

 only because it was the first that Gauss had addressed to Germain after having been

 informed of her true identity, but mainly because it allowed him to date Gauss's studies
 on biquadratic residues (Schering 1879).

 15 Baldassarre Boncompagni (1821-1894), prince of Piombino, is well known for his research in the history
 of mathematics. He founded the Bullettino di bibliografia e di storia delle Scienze matematiche e fisiche,
 also known as Bullettino of Boncompagni.

 16 Angelo Genocchi (1817-1889), who is considered the most qualified Italian number theorist of the
 nineteenth century, was one of the first Italian mathematicians to learn the new methods of the Disquisitione

 Arithmeticae. His paper Sur la théorie des résidus quadratiques (Genocchi 1852), gave him an international
 reputation.

 17 Most of the letters that Boncompagni addressed to Genocchi are preserved in the "Passerini-Landi"
 Public Library of Piacenza, whereas those of Genocchi to Boncompagni are dispersed.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 597

 Michel Chasles, in presenting Boncompagni's publication to the French Academy
 of Science (Chasles 1879), remarked the historical and scientific rele vance of the letter,

 but inverted Schering's order of importance:

 Cette lettre offre un très grand intérêt, non seulement par les questions les plus
 élevées de l'analyse des résidus cubiques et des résidus bicarrés, et de la men
 tion des travaux astronomiques auxquels Gauss se livrait depuis cinq ans, mais

 surtout au point de vue historique des relations qu'il croyait depuis six [sic] ans

 avec un élève de l'École Polytechnique [This letter is of great interest, not only

 for the highest questions concerning the analysis of cubic and biquadratic resi

 dues, and for the mention of the work in astronomy to which Gauss has devoted

 himself since five years previous, but above all from the historical point of view

 for the epistolary communications he had had for six [sic] years with a student
 of the École Polytechnique],

 According to this note, Charles thought, without supporting evidence, that the corre

 spondence between the two initiated the same year that the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae
 were issued.

 The Belgian mathematician Paul Mansion ( 1844-1919) also commented on Gauss's
 letter published by Boncompagni (Mansion 1880a). He remarked (a) how Sophie
 Germain revealed her identity to Gauss, (b) that Gauss detected some errors in her

 theorems, (c) that, at that time, Gauss had developed enough the theory of cubic and

 biquadratic residues to fill up a volume as large as the Disquisitiones, and (d) on the
 statement of the theorem—today known as Gauss's lemma—which had given Gauss

 the means to discover a new concise proof of the Quadratic Reciprocity Law. Mansion

 concluded his review by observing that

 L'admiration que Gauss exprime ainsi, à la fin comme au début de sa let
 tre, ne doit pas nous étonner. A part Sophie Germain, personne ne semb
 lait, en effet, s'occuper des Disquisitiones ni leur accorder l'attention dont
 elles étaient dignes. Il est tout naturel que le jeune Géomètre hanovrien,
 encore peu connu à cette époque, éprouvât et exprimât un vif contentement
 d'avoir trouvé, en Sophie Germain, un lecteur consciencieux et compétent
 [The admiration expressed by Gauss, at the end as at the beginning of his letter,
 should not surprise us. Aside from Sophie Germain, nobody seemed to take an

 interest in the Disquisitiones, nor to dedicate to these the attention they deserved.

 It was natural that the young Hanoverian geometer, still not very well known at

 that time, felt and expressed a strong pleasure at having found in Sophie Germain

 such a conscientious and competent reader].

 Summing up, at the end of 1879, only seven letters of the Germain-Gauss corre

 spondence were known to the public: (1) the two undated drafts, by Germain; (2) three

 letters by Gauss dated June 16, August 20, 1805, and January 19, 1808 published by
 Stupuy; (3) Germain's letter dated February 20, 1807 published by Schering; and (4)
 Gauss's response dated April 30, 1807 published by Boncompagni. In particular, at

 that time, nobody knew of the existence of the mathematical notes that Sophie Germain

 had enclosed in her letters, except Schering.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 598

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 The existence of a mathematical note enclosed in Germain's first letter, as pub
 lished by Stupuy, was suggested to Genocchi by Germain's phrase, "J'ai ajouté à cet
 article autres considerations. La dernière est relative à la célèbre équation de Fermât"
 [I have added to this article some other considerations. The last is related to Fermat's

 celebrated equation]. Despite these words, nothing about FLT was present in the letter.

 Then, Genocchi asked Schering about the existence of mathematical notes by Germain

 among the correspondence from Gauss. At the same time, searches were commissioned

 by Boncompagni, in order to find the originals of the letters between Germain and
 Gauss published by Stupuy. Three letters by Gauss were finally rediscovered at the
 Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris.

 On March 3, 1880, Schering informed Genocchi:18

 Parmi les papiers de Gauss se trouvent dix lettres de Sophie Germain. Aux
 cinq premières lettres appartiennent des notes mathématiques spéciales, rep
 lissant un assez grand nombre de feuilles: les cinq autres lettres contiennent
 elles mêmes des recherches étendues dans les mathématiques. J'ai l'intention
 de publier ces lettres et ces écrits scientifiques, en tant qu'ils sont exactes.
 [Among Gauss's papers there are ten letters by Sophie Germain. To the first

 five are attached special mathematical notes, filling up many sheets, the other

 five also contain extended mathematical research. I am planning to publish these

 letters and scientific writings, since they are exact].

 One month earlier, Boncompagni, via Julius Jochens, secretary of the Royal Library
 in Berlin, had convinced Schering to allow a photolithographic reproduction to be

 made of Germain's letters which had already been edited. The work, financed by Bon
 compagni, was done in Berlin. It includes, actually, the first five letters, which were
 published both in facsimile and in printed version, but without the additional mathe
 matical notes (Boncompagni 1880). Schering presented Boncompagni's new work to
 the Academy of Science of Gôttingen (Schering 1880).

 Thanks to this publication, it became clear that the two undated letters signed "Le
 Blanc," published by Stupuy, were drafts of the actual letters dated November 21,
 1804 and November 16, 1805, held in Gôttingen. Genocchi also corrected the mis

 print of the date of the first letter by Gauss (June 16, 1806 instead of June 16, 1805 in

 Stupuy's edition). The misprint had induced Schering to believe that Gauss's response

 to Germain's first letter was still to be found (Schering 1880). To thank Genocchi, he

 sent some excerpts from Germain's mathematical notes.

 On May 30, 1880, Genocchi, while presenting Boncompagni's new editorial work

 to the Academy of Science of Turin, announced his own yet-to-be-published writing
 on the correspondence between Germain and Gauss. The note appeared the same year

 in the memoirs of the Academy of Turin, with the title II carteggio di Sofia Germain
 e Carlo Federico Gauss (Germain 1880). With it, Genocchi revealed to the commu

 nity of mathematicians and historians that the (known) correspondence consisted of

 ten letters by Germain—five with extended mathematical notes—and four by Gauss.
 He also informed of the exact location of the letters, and commented briefly on the

 18 Schering's letters to Genocchi are preserved at the "Passerini-Landi" Public Library of Piacenza.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 599

 letters published up to that time. He remarked on the importance of Gauss's letter of
 April 30,1807, for the two theorems on cubic and biquadratic residues that Gauss had

 stated therein. According to Genocchi, especially the theorem on cubic residues was
 noteworthy because

 quantunque già si sapesse fin dal 1805 il Gauss aveva fatto studii intorno a tali

 residui non era noto alcun teorema speciale da lui trovato,19 e nessun cenno se ne

 rinvenne nelle sue carte, non vedendosene traccia nell'edizione delle sue Opere
 postume [even if it was known that Gauss had conducted research on such resi

 dues since 1805, no special theorem found by him was known, nor has any hint

 of them been found among his papers, because there is no trace in the edition of

 his posthumous works].

 Schering did not agree with this claim, and in his letter of September 26, 1880,
 he reminded Genocchi of what he had already written on this subject (Gauss 1863,
 p. 375):

 Die in den Anzeigen erwahnten Untersuchungen liber cubiche Reste werden
 wohl nicht zur Ausarbeitung gelangt sein; aufgezeichnet finden sich davon die
 mit den Htilfsmitteln, welche die Abhandlung Disquisitionum circa aequationes

 puras ulterior evolutio bietet, durchgefiihrten Beweise der Reciprocitâtssâtze fiir
 zwei Primzahlen, von denen die eine reell ist [The research on cubic residues

 indicated in the announcements had probably not reached a conclusion;20 the

 proof of the theorem of reciprocity for two primes, one of which real, can be

 found [among the handwritten notes of Gauss], where the proof is given with the

 methods developed in the tract Disquisitionum circa aequationes puras ulterior
 evolutio. ]21

 5 The editorial project of Boncompagni

 Boncompagni requested a copy of all the letters and notes by Germain, and on March 3,
 1880, Schering replied:

 Cependant ayant maintenant parcouru les papiers de Sophie Germain je me sens
 d'abord obligé à vous dire que selon mon opinion ce qu'ils continent d'intérêt
 purement mathématique est déjà publié. Les autres me semblent avoir moins
 d'importance pour les mathématiques pures que pour l'histoire et quelques unes
 des démonstrations contenant des erreurs. Pour soumettre cette circonstance à

 votre propre jugement j'ai fait hier une petite liste sur les lettres et les notes
 mathématiques ainsi que sur leur contenu scientifique; je me permets de l'ad
 joindre ici. Vous y voyez que de la note à la lettre numéro 1 (la même que j'ai

 19 Genocchi is referring to what Gauss wrote in his memoir Theorematis fundamentalis in doctrina de
 residuis quadrcitici... (Gauss 1818, 1863, p. 50).

 Gôttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen, lOMàrz 1817 (see Gauss 1863, p. 161).

 21 Gauss's handwritten notes concerning his research on cubic residues were published only in 1900 in the
 8 volume of Gauss's works, see Gauss (1900, pp. 5-20).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 600

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 mentionnée dans ma dernière lettre) la première partie, quant à ce qui concerne

 son contenu essentiel est déjà imprimée dans le Journal de Crelle VII, 1831. De

 la seconde partie contenant un essai de démontrer un cas du dernier théorème de

 Fermât je vous envoie une copie exacte à l'originale quoique cette [est incor
 recte]22 [Having now read the papers of Sophie Germain, I must say to you that,

 in my opinion, what they contain of pure mathematical interest is already pub
 lished. The other things seem to me less important for pure mathematics than

 for history, moreover some proofs have mistakes. To submit these circumstances

 to your judgment, yesterday I made a short list of the letters, the mathematical
 notes, and their scientific content; which I add here. You see that what is essen

 tial in the first part of the note in letter number 1 (the same that 1 mentioned
 in my previous letter) has already been published in the Crelle's Journal VII,
 1831. Regarding the second part containing an attempt to prove a special case of

 Fermat's last theorem, I am sending you an exact copy, even if it was wrong].23

 In our opinion, Schering neither read all Germain's mathematical notes nor did he

 do so with great attention.

 Hence, on the same day in which Schering wrote to Genocchi about his plan to
 publish all the letters and notes by Germain (see the previous footnote), he changed

 his mind. The reason for such a rapid retraction is not clear.

 On July 13, Boncompagni informed Genocchi that he had finally received a copy
 of the five unedited letters and all the mathematical notes by Germain. In his letter,

 Boncompagni declared his intention of publishing the correspondence in its entirety,

 mathematical notes included—in the form of a little book to be entitled Carteggio tra

 Sofia Germain e Gauss—and asked Genocchi's opinion of the project.

 In contrast with Schering, Genocchi was convinced that the notes were worthy of

 publication. He also suggested that Boncompagni publish them in printed form and
 not in facsimile. Boncompagni agreed, and hoped to publish the volume in the first
 half of 1881.

 In the middle of November 1880, the proofs were ready. They consisted of 69
 printed pages in all, 26 for Germain's letters, seven for those of Gauss, and 36 for the

 mathematical notes.24 Boncompagni invited Genocchi to cooperate in the correction

 of the proofs and especially, being well aware of his own lack of knowledge in number

 theory, to help him with mathematics. The correction of the proofs lasted a couple of

 months, and during this time Genocchi visited Boncompagni in Rome.

 In 1880, two reviews of Boncompagni (1880) appeared (Henry 1880; Mansion

 1880b,c). In the second, a note signed by Eugène Catalan at the end of Mansion's
 article announced Boncompagni's plan for the publication of the Germain-Gauss cor

 respondence in its entirety.

 -- This document ends with the words "quoique cette," "est incorrecte" was written on another sheet which
 has been lost. In the letter of Schering to Genocchi dated March 3, 1880, is written "Je vous envoie mantai

 nant une copie de l'essai de démonstration de Sophie Germain pour le cas mentionnée du dernier théorème

 de Fermât quoique cette démonstration est incorrecte'.

 23 This passage of Schering's letter to Boncompagni on Mars 3, 1880, was copied and enclosed in Bon
 compagni's letter to Genocchi dated July 13.

 24 We do not know if these proofs still exist.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 601

 One more review appeared in 1881 (Giinther 1881). In this review, the author
 claimed that the letters already published constituted the entire correspondence
 between Germain and Gauss, and that the mathematical notes had been lost.

 It is clear that the existence of still unpublished letters and mathematical notes by
 Sophie Germain was not known to everyone who wrote about the Germain-Gauss cor

 respondence. In the Italian translation of Gunther's article, published in the Bullettino

 (Giinther 1882), the editor (in a footnote signed "B.B."), rectified Gtinther's claim:

 L'illustre Société Reale di Gôttingen possiede dieci lettere di Sofia Germain,
 cinque delle quali sono qui menzionate dal sig. Giinther, ed altre cinque finora
 inedite saranno da me in breve date in luce. Unitamente a queste cinque let
 tere inedite pubblicherô cinque note matematiche di Sofia Germain, di ciascuna

 delle quai i la medesima Società delle Scienze di Gôttingen possiede un esemplare
 autografo. Tali note sono annesse allé prime 5 delle dieci suddette lettere di Sofia
 Germain

 [The Royal Society of Gôttingen possesses ten letters by Sophie Germain, five

 of which are mentioned here by Mr. Giinther, and the other five, still unedited, I

 will publish shortly. Together with these five letters I will publish five mathemat

 ical notes by Sophie Germain, the originals of which are also held by the same

 Society. These notes are attached to the first five letters of the above mentioned

 letters by Sophie Germain]

 Boncompagni had himself planned to write an introduction to the Carteggio, but
 because of the duties involved in managing his Bullettino, and the printing of the
 Régula Abaci by Adelard of Bath that took more time than expected (for one reason
 or another), he was unable to find the time to complete it. From what appears in
 Boncompagni (1879-1880) we may deduce that he presented a note entitled Intorno
 al carteggio tra Sofia Germain e Carlo Federico Gauss to the Pontificia Accademia
 dei Nuovi Lincei. This was probably a draft version of the planned introduction that
 he withdrew shortly after, with the aim of perfecting it.

 A few years later, Boncompagni published the paper (Boncompagni 1884)25 in
 which he commented on and annotated at great length (as was his style), Gauss's
 letter to Olbers of September 3, 1805 [this letter had already appeared in facsimile
 (Boncompagni 1883)]. As in the letter to Olbers, Gauss again mentioned his corre
 spondent "Le Blanc" with great appreciation, so Boncompagni had the opportunity to

 comment on the first two letters by Germain to Gauss and their addenda. In particular,

 Boncompagni stressed the fact that in the second addendum she gave a new proof that

 2 is a quadratic residue for primes of the form 8k + 1 and 8k + 7 and a nonresidue for
 those of the form 8A: + 3 and 8£ + 5.

 -- Here, Boncompagni also gave detailed information about the contents of Gauss's correspondence held

 by the Academy of Sciences of Gottingen. The letters addressed to Gauss by 164 authors were distributed in

 alphabetical order in 180 portfolios contained in 19 cardboard folders. The letters by Sophie Germain were

 contained in the fourth folder numbered 98, covered in dark green paper, and inside the second portfolio
 numbered 38. On the spine of the folder was written, in golden letters and digits, "98 Gauss Nachlass 98
 Briefe Fuss-Harding," and on the portfolio, in Schering's handwriting, was written "38, Sophie German
 Leblanc 1804-1829." The drafts of the letters written by Gauss were in alphabetical order, and distributed

 in portfolios contained in 19 folders numbered 95b—113b.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 602

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Genocchi, who had read with great attention and interest the letters exchanged by
 Germain and Gauss, wrote in 1884 two other notes on the subject (Genocchi 1884a,b,
 1885; Genocchi and Realis 1884). In his papers, he credited Germain with certain
 results contained in her mathematical notes (see Sect. 9).

 However, Boncompagni never completed his project, and a few years after the
 initial interest aroused by the first incomplete edition of the correspondence, the still

 unpublished letters by Germain to Gauss, along with her mathematical notes, were
 completely forgotten, and—what is worse—believed to have been lost forever.

 6 Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae

 The Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (in the following also "D.A." for short), were pub

 lished in the summer of 1801 in Leipzig. The content of this innovative treatise of 665

 pages on number theory—or better on Higher Arithmetic (as Gauss himself loved to
 call this branch of mathematics)—is divided into seven sections (or chapters) and 366
 articles (or paragraphs).26 We will adopt Gauss's notation.

 The first section, which is very short, is devoted to establishing some new con

 cepts—in large part elementary—and notation such as that for congruence with respect
 to a number, in symbols a = b(mod n), a and b (are congruent or not) with respect
 to n if a — b is divisible (or not) by n. Gauss called n the modulus and b a residue of

 a, and showed the compatibility of congruences with arithmetic operations.

 Section 3 contains several theorems on integers, such as the unique factorization
 theorem and the Chinese remainder theorem. It also includes a treatment of linear

 congruences and Lagrange's result that a polynomial congruence cannot have more
 solutions than its degree.

 In Sect. 4, Gauss treats power residues, or the sequence 1, a, a2, a3,... modulo a
 prime p(a is a number not divisible by p). He discusses the periods of a modulo p and
 Fermat's Little Theorem according to which ap~] = l(mod p). He also shows the
 existence of primitive roots and introduces the use of indices of 1, 2,..., p — 1 modulo

 p with respect to a fixed primitive root. Let us recall that an integer a is a primitive root
 for the prime p if for every integer b not divisible by p we have b = a" (mod p) for

 some exponent a which is the index of b. In particular, if a is a primitive root for the
 prime p, then a, a2,..., are all distinct, and their minimal residues coincide (not

 necessarily in that order), with 1, 2,..., p — 1. Moreover he treats «th-power roots
 modulo p and gives proofs of Wilson's theorem, i.e., 1 • 2 ■••(/?— 1) = — l(mod p).
 Finally he characterizes those integers n for which there exists a primitive root mod
 ulo n.

 In Sect. 5, Gauss develops a systematic theory of quadratic residues. In general, if
 the congruence x"' = «(mod p) has a solution, then a is called a mth-power residue
 modulo p, so a quadratic residue is a 2nd-power residue, i.e., a residue of a perfect
 square. He also proves the Quadratic Reciprocity Law that he states in the form: ±p is

 a quadratic residue or nonresidue (the sign + or — to be taken depending on whether

 For more details on the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, and in-depth historical studies concerning it, see

 the recent papers (Goldstein et al. 2007).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 603

 p is of the form An -f 1 or An + 3) of any prime p' which is a residue or a nonresidue
 of p. He uses the notation aRa' or aNa!, to mean that a is a residue or a nonresidue
 modulo a', respectively. This law relates the occurrence of a prime p as a quadratic
 residue of a prime p' to the occurrence of p' as quadratic residue of p.

 The Quadratic Reciprocity Law, at least in particular cases, was known to Euler, and

 was stated in the general form by Legendre, who named it the loi de réciprocité and

 introduced a new symbol to express it, namely defined to be 1 or — 1 depending

 on whether the integer A: is a quadratic residue or a quadratic nonresidue (mod p)
 today known as Legendre's symbolP With this, the quadratic reciprocity for two odd
 primes is easily expressed by the formula:

 ^ ^ = (_1)[(p-l)/2][(?-D/2]>

 In the Disquisitiones, Gauss calls this result the "fundamental theorem."28

 The Sect. 6, which occupies more than half of the volume, is devoted mostly to the

 theory of binary quadratic forms (or indeterminate equations of second degree), i.e.,

 ax2 + 2 bxy + cy2

 which he also denotes by (a b c). Gauss defines the determinant of a binary qua
 dratic form to be the number D := b2 — ac, showing that D is a quadratic residue
 of any integer primitively represented by the form, i.e., which can be represented as
 ax2 + 2bxy + cy2 with x, y being two coprime integers.

 The problem of the representation of numbers by means of a quadratic form is
 reduced to the classification of forms of a given determinant, and the first half of

 Sect. 6 is devoted to this question. Gauss defines two quadratic forms to be equivalent
 if they can be transformed into one another by a linear transformation of the vari
 ables, namely, (x, y) i-> (ax + fly, yx + Sy) where a, fi, y, and <5 are integers and
 L := aS — /3y = ±1 (i.e., a unimodular transformation with integer coefficients).
 The equivalence is said to be proper or improper depending on whether the value of
 L is +1 or — 1. Basing his argument on a finer classification of binary forms, Gauss

 addresses the general problem of representing numbers by quadratic forms, and shows

 (art. 200) how to solve the equation t2 + Du2 = m2, where D is the determinant of the

 given form and m is the gcd(a, 2b, c). In particular, in art. 201, he gives the possible

 values of m for a given D. For instance, m = 1 is always possible if D is not a square,

 and m = 2 is possible only if D is of the form 4k or 4k + 1.

 In art. 215 Gauss shows that if / = ax2 + 2bxy + cy2 has determinant 0, then
 / := m(gx + hy)2, where g, h are integers and m = gcd(a, c), which is to say: /
 can be reduced to the square of a linear form.

 27 See Legendre ( 1785, 1798), in the latter of which Legendre introduced his symbol.

 28 It seems that as attested in his diary, Gauss had known this result since 1796. He was so proud of the
 discovery that he named it theoremata aureum [the Golden Theorem], For the history and the genesis of
 this theorem, see Lemmermeyer (2000).

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 604

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 In art. 266, Gauss introduces ternary quadratic forms:

 / := ax2 + a'x'2 + a" x"2 + 2bx'x" + 2b'xx" + 2b"xx',

 which he also denotes

 He defines the adjoint of f to be the ternary form F represented by

 (ia a' a"\
 b b' b" ) '

 ( A A' A"\
 \B B' B")'

 where A := b2 - a'a", A' := b'2 - aa", A" := b" - aa', B ab — b'b", B' :=
 a'b' — bb", B" a"b" — bb\ and thus easily shows that the adjoint of F is the form

 /aD a'D a"D\
 \bD b'D b"D J '

 where D := ab2 + a'b'2 + a"b"2 — aa'a" — 2bb'b" is the determinant of the form /.
 Gauss devotes arts. 266-285 to the study of ternary quadratic forms of D ^ 0.

 Gauss excludes treating ternary quadratic forms with D = 0, postponing the prob

 lem: "We will show at another time, when we will treat more completely the theory of
 ternary forms, that these forms [those for which D = 0] are only apparently ternary.
 All them are, in fact, equivalent to binary forms"(Gauss 1801, art. 267). This claim,
 as we will see, attracted the attention of Sophie Germain.

 Then, he quickly generalizes the basic theory of binary quadratic forms to ternary
 ones. In particular, in art. 271, he gives conditions for a ternary quadratic form to be

 positive or negative definite or even indefinite, depending on whether it can represent

 only positive or only negative numbers, or both, i.e., if for any choice of x, x', x" we
 have f(x, x', x') > 0, < 0 or ^ 0.

 In art. 278, Gauss says that a ternary quadratic form f(x,x',x") represents the

 binary quadratic form <p(t, u) if there are integers m, n,m', n', m" and n" such that by
 the linear transformations x = mt+nu,x' — m't+n'u, and x" — m"t + n"u, then we

 have f(x, x', x") = (p(t, u). If <p of determinant D is represented by /, then (see art.

 280), by a direct computation or by applying the method of art. 268, it can be shown that
 D can be represented by the adjoint F(X, X'X") of / by putting X = m'n" — m"n',
 X' = mn" — m"n and X" = mn' — m'n. Gauss calls this representation of D the
 adjoint representation of the representation of <p by /.

 Section 7 is devoted to computational applications such as, for instance, partial

 fraction decomposition, decimal expansion, and primality tests.

 The final Sect. 8 is that which attracted major attention when the D.A. appeared,

 chiefly because it contains the solution of the longstanding question of the construction

 of regular polygons with a ruler and compass. Not by chance does Sophie Germain's

 first letter to Gauss mainly concern this section.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 605

 Here, Gauss studies the equation:

 X := * ~ 1 = xn~l + xn~2 + ■ ■ ■ + x + 1 = 0,

 x — 1

 (.n being a prime number > 3) related to the problem of the division of the circle in n
 equal parts.

 Gauss denotes the set of all roots of X = 0 by £2. It is clear that if r is any root
 of X — 0, then rn — r2n = • • • = 1 and that [r, r2,..., r"~'} is the set £1 In
 particular, for any e not divisible by n, then one has re + r2e + • • • + = — 1.
 Let g be a primitive root modulo n, and let us denote by [1], [/z],.... [hn~2], where
 h := ge, the roots of X = 0. Let X be any number not divisible by n. For any factoriza
 tion n — 1 = ef, Gauss divides the set Œ into e subsets of / roots, which he calls peri
 ods and denotes (/, À), (/, kg), (/, kg2),...,(/, Xge~]), whose union coincides with
 £2 = (/, 1) = (/, g°). Gauss also observes that the sum of the roots of a period, say
 (/, X) = {[À], [X/z], [Xh2], ..., [Xhf~] ]}, does not depend on the choice of the prim
 itive root g, and he calls even this sum period, denoting it by the same symbol (/, X).
 Let the roots, [A], [A.h], [A/z2],..., [A/z-^-1], be denoted by X, X', X", Then in

 art. 345 Gauss proves that

 (/> ^-)(/> M) = (/> ^ + £0 + (/, X' + fi) + (/, X" + fM) + ■ ■ ■ ,

 and, in particular, he shows that any such product can be reduced to the form:

 af + b(f, 1) + b'(f, g) + ■ ■ ■ + b(e-x\f, ge~X).

 Let p := (/, X), p' := (/, Xg2),..., p(e~^ := (/, X.ge~]). Thus he then proves in
 the following article 346 that (/, p.), p not divisible by n, is always a linear combination
 of the periods p := (/, X), p' := (/, Xg2), p" := (/, Ag3),..., p(«"») := (/,
 with rational coefficients. In particular, the polynomial X can be factorized into the
 product of e polynomials z, z', z",... of degree / with integral coefficients, roots of
 which are precisely those found in the periods (/, 1), (/, g),..., (/, ge~]).

 In art. 348, Gauss gives a method to compute the factors of the polynomial X and
 shows that, if one of the periods (sums) is known, then all the others can be obtain

 rationally.

 Then, in art. 356, he studies the distribution of the roots in Q into two periods
 (m, 1) and (m, g) where m = (n — l)/2. The first contains the roots [1], [g2],
 [g4],..., [gn~- ] associated to the minimal residues R, R', R",... and the second, the
 roots [g], [g3], [g5],..., [g"~2] with minimal residues N, N', N", Hence, (m, 1)
 coincides with {[1], [/?], [/?'],...} and (m, g) with {[iV], [TV'], [TV"],...}. Clearly
 1, R, are quadratic residues modulo p, while N, N', N",... are not.
 Article 357 is devoted to showing that for any prime n, the equation

 x" — 1 7 9
 4 = Y2 ±nZ2,

 x — 1

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 606

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 is solvable, i.e., to show that polynomials Y, Z always exist satisfying that equation.
 This result, which in modern language means that the fields generated by the «th
 roots of unity contains the quadratic irrationality is among the deepest of the
 D.A. To prove this, Gauss used his theory of periods of the cyclotomic polynomial
 X = (xn — 1)/(jc — 1) and the trigonometrical sums defined in art. 356, today known
 as Gauss sums.

 Suppose that

 z = xm -ax'"-' +bxm~2 =0

 is the equation having the roots of the period (m, 1), then a = (,m, 1), b is the
 sum of the products of the roots in (m, 1) two at time, c is the sum of the prod
 ucts of the roots in (m, 1) three at time, and so on. By the results of art. 348, if
 we denote by Sk the sum of the A'th-powers of the roots, we have 2b = aS\ — S2,
 3c = bS 1 — aSi + S3, etc., so that b, c, etc., are (see art. 345) always of the form
 214- 93(m, 1) + £(m, g) with 21, 03, £ being integers. It follows that s can always be
 reduced to the form:

 z = R + S(m, 1) + T(;m, g),

 where R, S, and T are polynomials in x with integer coefficients, and so z' =
 R + S(m, g) + T(m, 1). Gauss then shows that the polynomials Y := 2R — S — T
 and Z := T — S satisfy 4X = Y2 ± nZ2, where the sign is + or — according as n is
 of the form, 4k + 3 or 4k + 1.

 In the subsequent article 358, Gauss considers n = 3m + 1 and studies the dis
 tribution of the roots of X = 0 into three periods, namely: (m, 1), (m, g), and
 (m, g2), g being any primitive root for the prime n. It is clear that the first con
 tains the roots [I], [g3], [g6],..., [g"~4], the second [g], [g4], [g7], ..., [g"~3] and
 the third [g2], [g^], [g8],..., [g"~2]. He denotes their sums respectively p, p', and
 p". If the equation roots of which are p, p', and p" is X3 — Ax2 + Bx — C = 0,
 one has A — p + p' + p" — —1, B = pp' + p' p" + p"p and C = pp' p". To
 find the others' coefficients. Gauss proceeds as follows: Let 21, 03, £,... be the min

 imal residues of the numbers g3, g6, g9,... modulo n and let Â their set together
 with the number 1. Similarly, one defines 21', ©', £',..21", 53", £",..., and fi',
 Â". Gauss observes that n — 1 lies in R, and that the numbers h and n — h always
 belong to the same of the sets Â, Â', A". Gauss denotes by (&£) the number of
 those numbers in the sequence 1, 2, 3,...,« — 1 which belong to 8. by themselves
 and when increased by 1. Similarly, (&&') denotes the number of those integers in
 1, 2, 3,..., n — 1 which belong to Â and belong to 8! when increased by 1. The
 meaning of the symbols Gftft"), (Â'Â), (£'£')> (&'&") and so on is clear. One has
 {R8!) = (Â'M), (RM") = (M"A), and (A'A") = (A!'A!). Then, applying the method
 of art. 345, he finds B = — m and C — a2 — be where a := (A!A!'), b :=
 c := (A!'A).

 Finally, in the remaining articles, Gauss applies this theory to show the constructi

 bility with a ruler and compass of regular n-gons for any Fermat's prime n — 2k + 1.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 607

 7 The Disquisitiones in the first three decades of the 1800s

 The Disquisitiones Arithmeticae were presented to the French Academy in Janu
 ary of the year 1802, by Adrien-Marie Legendre. Legendre, Joseph-Louis Lagrange,
 Sylvestre François Lacroix, and Pierre-Simon Laplace were among the first readers
 of Gauss's treatise.

 On May 31, 1804, Lagrange wrote to Gauss: "Vos Disquisitiones vous ont mis de
 suite au rang des premiers géomètres et je regarde la dernière section comme con
 tenant la plus belle découverte analytique qui ait été faite depuis longtemps" [Your
 Disquisitiones have raised you immediately into the ranks of the first-order geometers

 and I consider the last section as containing the most beautiful analytic discovery in a
 long time] (Lagrange 1867-1892. 14, p. 299).

 The same year, Lacroix, in the third edition of his Complément des Élémens
 d'algèbre, presented, "d'après M. Gauss," the theory of residues and its application

 to the resolution of the cyclotomic equation (see Lacroix 1804, p. 296). He also used,
 as he added on pag. 307, "quelques remarques que M. de La Place a bien voulu
 me communiquer"[Some remarks that M. de La Place has communicated to me].
 Lacroix concluded by inviting the reader to consult Legendre's Essai sur la théorie
 des nombrès and "les Disquisitiones Arithmeticae de M. Gauss desquelles j'ai tiré
 ce qui précède"[and the D.A. of M. Gauss from which I extracted the preceding].
 Lacroix's words suggest that Laplace had also read Gauss's treatise.

 Therefore, it seems that, at first, the attention to the D.A. of the mathematical estab

 lishment focused on the resolution of the equation x" — 1 = 0, and the construction

 of regular polygons.

 We cannot be sure how Germain knew of the D.A., if Legendre or Lagrange sug

 gested that she read it, or if she initiated the reading by personal initiative. At any rate,
 as in the Autumn of 1804 she addressed Gauss, saying "Vos Disquisitiones Arithme

 ticae font depuis lontemps l'objet de mon admiration et de mes études " [Your D.A.
 have long been the object of my admiration and my studies], it is clear that she was
 among the first readers of Gauss's book. Actually, as we will see, she not only read

 the D.A. but, unlike others, she proceeded in a systematic study of Gauss treatise, and

 in a few years, she had mastered it in its entirety.

 In the spring of 1805, the project for a French edition of the D.A. started, and
 Gauss, on June 16 (the same day he replied to the first letter of Germain, as Le Blanc),
 wrote to the translator of the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae A.-C. M. Poullet-Delisle (De

 Jonquières 1896, p. 829):

 Il m'est aussi doux que flatteur que les recherches contenues dans mon ouvrage,

 auxquelles j'avais dévoué la plus belle partie de ma jeunesse, et qui ont été la
 source de mes plus douces jouissances, aient acquis tant d'amis en France; sort
 bien inégal à celui qu'elles ont trouvé en Allemagne où le goût pour les parties
 plus difficiles des mathématiques pures n'est la propriété que d'un fort petit

 nombre de personnes [It is for me as sweet as it is flattering that the investiga
 tions contained in my work, to which I devoted the best part of my youth, and

 which were the source of my sweetest joys, have acquired so many admirers in

 France; a fate quite different from what they found in Germany where the taste

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 608

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 for the most difficult parts of pure mathematics has but a very small number of
 adherents.]

 He used almost the same words to her (see Gauss's reply to Germain's letter of
 November 21, 1804). The French edition appeared only in 1807, printed in Paris by
 Coursier.

 Legendre in the introduction to the second edition of his Essai sur la théorie des

 nombrès, which appeared in 1808, wrote:

 Enfin il a été ajouté une cinquième partie où on expose avec tout le détail nécess
 aire, la belle théorie de la résolution de l'équation xn — 1 =0, donnée par
 M. Gauss, dans ses Disquisitiones arithmeticae...On aurait désiré enrichir cet

 Essai d'un plus grand nombre des excellens matériaux qui composent l'ouvrage
 de M. Gauss: mais les méthodes de cet auteur lui sont tellements particulières
 qu'on n'aurait pu, sans des circuits très-étendus, et sans s'assujétir au simple

 rôle de traducteur, profiter de ses autres découvertes [Finally a fifth part has been

 added, where one expounds in all necessary detail the beautiful theory of the res

 olution of the equation xn — 1 =0 given by Mr. Gauss in his Disquisitiones arith

 meticae. . .One would have desired to enrich this essay with a larger number of the

 excellent topics of which the work of Mr. Gauss is composed: but the methods of

 this author are so unique to him that, without extensive digressions and without

 becoming a simple translator, one could not benefit from his other discoveries].

 In the second edition of his Traité de la résolution des équations numériques de

 tous les degrés, printed in 1808, Lagrange included, as a final note, a discussion and
 a simplification of art. 360. of the D.A.

 Ten years after the appearance of the D.A., Gauss's treatment of the cyclotomic

 equation was still the topic of major appeal. Peter Barlow in the preface of his book, An
 Elementary Investigation of the Theory of Numbers (Barlow 1811), wrote: "[the D.A.]

 has opened a new field of inquiry, by the application of the properties of numbers to
 the solution of the binomial equation of the form x" — 1 = 0 on the solution of which

 depends the division of the circle into n equal parts" and devoted the last chapter of
 his book to it.

 Charles Babbage spoke of "the celebrated theorem of Gauss on the resolution of
 the equation xn — 1 = 0" in recommending the D.A. to the newly founded Cambridge

 Analytical Society (Babbage and Herschel 1813, also Babbage 1989).

 The first who used concepts and notation from the D.A. unrelated to the cyclotomic

 equation, such as those of determinant and adjoint, was in Cauchy (1815).

 In 1818, Louis Poinsot presented his Mémoire sur l'application de l'algebre à la

 théorie des nombres (Poinsot 1820) to the Paris Academy, in which, developing simul

 taneously the congruence x" = l(mod p) and the equation x" — 1 = 0, he gave an
 analytic representation of power residues by means of imaginary roots of unity. Poin
 sot's memoir had a great influence on Germain's work on Fermat's Last Theorem (see
 below and also Del Centina 2005, 2008).

 Legendre was never too inclined toward Gauss's use of the symbol = introduced

 in the D.A. in place of the somewhat contradictory = which was in use (equality up
 to multiples), or did he distinguish congruences as a topic which needed a separate

 4} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 609

 treatment. Still, in his Recherches sur quelques objets d'analyse indéterminée et pat
 iculièrement sur le théorème de Fermât Legendre claimed that there is no "besoin de
 signes nouveaux d'égalité ni des denominations nouvelles assez incongrues, dont quel
 ques géomètres font usage [need of new signs of equality nor of new, and somewhat
 incongruous, names of which some geometers make use]" (Legendre 1827, p. 15).
 Germain, on the contrary, was immediately and strongly in favor of Gauss's notation,

 as she confirmed in her letter to him of 1819: "the simple substitution of congruence

 represented by the symbol = seems to me important. The notion of equality elsewhere
 denoted = always seemed to me in contradiction with the progress of analysis, and I

 cannot express the clarity and consequently the facility I have found in this branch of

 computation with the use of your notation."

 Because of the fame of the D.A. and the fact that its reading does not require
 many prerequisites, the mathematicians born shortly after 1801 became familiar with

 Gauss's treatise early on in their lives.

 university in Christiania [Oslo].

 Niels Henrik Abel, born in 1802, read it in his early youth, during the first year at

 In 1819, Guglielmo Libri (also born in 1802) brought a copy of the D.A. with him
 to Pisa, and, like Sophie Germain, attempted to apply the theory of congruences to
 prove FLT (Del Centina and Fiocca 2010). Libri, who showed a good understanding of
 Gauss's D.A., proved some interesting results concerning various types of congruence
 equations (Libri 1829).

 Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi was born in 1804, and graduated from the University of
 Berlin. In 1827, he published the first paper on cubic residues (Jacobi 1827), a sub
 ject—together with that of biquadratic residues—which Gauss had started to study
 in the years 1805-1807 (see Gauss 1900, pp. 5-11 and the correspondence with
 Germain). Some years later, in 1834, Jacobi published his first work on quadratic
 forms (Jacobi 1834), and perfected the theory of determinants (Jacobi 1841).

 Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet, born in 1805, after graduating in Cologne,
 went to Paris in 1822, where he attended the lectures at the Collège de France and at

 the Faculté des Sciences. He set off for France with his copy of the D.A., which he
 kept with him constantly. Dirichlet's understanding of Gauss's work was profound,
 and in 1825, he was able to prove some theorems on biquadratic residues stated with
 out proof by Gauss (Lejeune-Dirichlet 1828). The same year Dirichlet returned to
 Germany, where he contributed strongly to the renewal of German mathematics.

 According to Klein (1826, p. 27), the reason why the D.A. exerted its deserved
 influence in Germany was due, above all, to Dirichlet's interpretative lectures. There
 can be no doubt that, at that time, the D.A. was a difficult book to read. But, thanks

 to Dirichlet's lectures, many young Prussian mathematicians became familiar with
 Gauss's treatise, and number theory emerged in that country as a significant topic

 upon which to determine the value of a mathematician (Goldstein et al. 2007, p. 25).

 8 Gauss's results on cubic and biquadratic residues

 Although the first sign of cubic residues appears in a footnote in art. 358 of the D.A.,

 Gauss asserted that he began to study cubic and biquadratic residues in 1805 (Gauss

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 610

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 1818, 1863b, p. 50). However, in his mathematical diary, on February 15, 1807, he
 recorded: "Theoria cubicorum et biquadraticorum incepta" [Beginning of the theory
 of cubic and biquadratic residues] (Gauss 1917, p. 665). Likely, it was in the winter

 of 1807 that Gauss began to settle that theory. In fact, in his letter to Germain of April

 30 of that year he affirmed: "Last winter I even succeeded in adding an entirely new

 branch to it. This is the theory of cubic and biquadratic residues, brought to an equal

 level of perfection as the theory of quadratic residues," and announced, for the first

 time, two theorems regarding the cubic and the biquadratic characters of the number 2.

 In the years following, seeking a better understanding of the behavior of cubic and

 biquadratic power residues, Gauss was led to penetrate more deeply into the theory of

 quadratic residues and to give new proofs of his fundamental theorem—the Quadratic
 Reciprocity Law (Gauss 1808, 1818). In particular, in Gauss (1818, 1863b, p. 50), he
 wrote:

 Alia adhuc affuit ratio, quae ut novas demonstrationes, novem iam abhinc
 annos promissas, nunc potissimum promulgarem, efficit. Scilicet quum inde
 ab anno 1805 theoriam residuorum cubicorum atque biquadraticorum, argu
 mentum longe difficilius, perscrutari coepissem, similem fere fortunam, ac
 olim in theoria residuorun quadraticorum, expertus sum. Protinus quidem
 theoremata ea, quae has quaestiones prorsus exhauriunt, et in quibus mira
 analogia cum theorematibus ad residua quadratica pertinentibus eminet, per
 inductionem detecta fuerunt, quam primum via idonea quaesita essent:
 omnes vero conatus, ipsorum demonstrationibus ex omni parte perfectis pot
 iundi, per longum tempus irriti manserunt. Hoc ipsum incitamentum erat, ut
 demonstrationibus iam cognitis circa residua quadratica alias aliasque addere
 tantopere studerem, spe fultus, ut ex multis methodis diversis una vel altera
 ad illustrandum argumentum affine aliquid conferre posset. Quae spes neuti
 quam vana fuit, laborenque indefessum tandem successus prosperi sequuti sunt
 [Another reason is also at the origin of the new proof, published here and prom
 ised nine years ago. Since 1805, when I began to be involved in the research on

 cubic and biquadratic residues, a more difficult topic than that of the quadratic
 residues, I have become an expert, by a similar fortune, as once of the theory

 of quadratic residues. Actually, the theorems that respond to all these questions

 and which seem highly analogous to the theorems on quadratic residues, were

 first found by induction before they were properly proved. I have to say that all

 my efforts to prove them, conducted in every direction, remained fruitless for a

 long time. This was the true incentive for striving so hard to add new proofs to

 those already known on quadratic residues, sustained by the hope that by using

 many different methods, one or another would convey something toward the

 clarification of the argument [for cubic and biquadratic residues]. This hope has

 not been in vain, finally by the indefatigable work I have obtained promising

 results. Soon, I will bring the fruit of this research into public view].

 All this leads us to think that, in contrast with what he wrote to Germain in 1807,

 Gauss proceeded slowly in the development of that theory, in particular, with what

 concerns the discovery of a reciprocity law for cubic and biquadratic residues. In fact,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 611

 Gauss's first publication on biquadratic residues, Theoria residuorum biquadratico
 rum, commentatio prima, appeared only in 1828.29

 According to Gauss (1828, 1863b, pp. 67-68), the theory of cubic and biquadratic
 residues was more difficult to develop than that of quadratic residues, and he soon
 came to the recognition that the hitherto employed tools of higher arithmetic would

 in no way suffice to establish a general theory (i.e., to state a reciprocity law), and

 that this necessarily required enlarging the domain of arithmetic by the introduction

 of complex numbers.

 In this first memoir. Gauss only presented those studies on biquadratic residues
 which can be carried out without such expansion, and he gave a criterion for detect

 ing the biquadratic character of the number 2, i.e., determining for which primes the
 number 2 is a biquadratic residue or nonresidue.

 Let us briefly look at how Gauss proceeds.
 First of all, he observes that every biquadratic residue (mod p) is a quadratic res

 idue (mod p) and every quadratic nonresidue (mod p) is a biquadratic nonresidue
 (mod p) for any prime number p. Then, he proves that the claim can be inverted
 whenever p = An + 3, so that in further investigation, one needs to consider only
 primes of the form p = An + 1.

 If p = An+1, Gauss proves that the set of numbers {1, 2,..., p— 1} is divided into
 four subsets, or classes, A, B, C, and D, in such a way that each number appears in
 only one class, each containing (p — l)/4 elements. Moreover, he shows that A is the

 set of biquadratic residues, B the set of all the least positive residues of the products
 eA where e is an arbitrary chosen quadratic residue, and likewise C and D are the
 sets of the least positive residues of the products e2A and e3A (mod p). Since the
 product of two biquadratic residues is always a biquadratic residue, the least positive
 residue of the product of two elements of A is always in A.

 Gauss also remarks that the previous results can be easily obtained by using

 the theory of power residues. In fact, if g is a primitive root for the modulus
 p, we immediately have A = {1, g4, gs,..., gp~5}, B = {g, g5, g9,..., gp~4},
 C = [g2,g6, g10, •gp~3} and D = {g3, g7, gu,..., gP~2}.

 Then Gauss observes that since 2 is quadratic residue for all primes of the form

 8n + 1 (see D.A. art. 114), the number 2 is in A for these primes, and furthermore that,

 since — 1 is always a biquadratic residue for primes of the form 8n + 1 (see D.A. art.
 115), the number —2 is also a biquadratic residue (mod 8« + 1). Moreover, he recalls
 that any prime An + 1 can be brought to the form a2 + b2 in one and only one way
 (see D.A. art. 182), where a is assumed as odd and b even.

 After examining all cases for primes p = An + 1 less than 100 (Gauss 1828, arts.

 11—13), he concludes inductively that 2 must be included in the class A for all those p
 for which b — 8m (Gauss 1828, art. 14).30 Let us stress that this claim is the second

 29 In 1827, Jacobi published De residuis cubicis commentatio numerosa (Jacobi 1827), wherein two theo

 rems related to the cubic reciprocity law are stated by means of complex numbers.

 30 Precisely, Gauss's statement is as follows: the number 2 is in class A for all moduli in which b = 8m,
 and is in class C for all moduli in which b = 8m + 4. he also added: "Sed hoc theorema longe altioris
 indaginis est, quam id, quod in art. praec. eruimus. demonstrationique plures disquisitiones praeliminares
 sunt praemittendae, ordinem, quo numeri complexuum A, B. C, D seinvicem sequuntur, spectantes" [Nev

 ertheless this theorem asks for a much deeper investigation than that of the previous article, and its proof

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 612

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 of the three theorems that Gauss proposed to Germain in his letter of April 1807. In

 the subsequent articles 15-21 of his work, Gauss proves this result.31

 He denotes the number of numbers h from the class A such that h + 1 is in A, B, C

 or D, by (00), (01), (02), and (03), respectively, the number of numbers h from the
 class B such that h + 1 is in A, B, C, or D by (10), (11), (12), or (13), respectively,

 and, analogously, there are the numbers (20), (21), (22),..., (32), (33).

 The symbol (00) denotes in how many different ways the equation 1 + a = a' can
 be satisfied when a, a' denote undetermined numbers from the class A. Since, for the

 modulus p = 8/; + 1, a1, and p — a' belong to the same class, we can also say that
 (00) is the number of solutions of the equation 1 + a + a' = p, or (which is the same)

 of the congruence

 Likewise, the numbers (01), (02), (03), etc., denote, respectively, the number of

 solutions of the congruences:

 1 + a + a' = 0(mod p).

 1 + a + P = 0(mod p),

 1 + a + y = 0(mod p),

 1 + a + S = 0(mod p),

 1 + p + p' = 0(mod p),

 where p, f/ denote numbers from B, and y, y' denote numbers from C, etc. From this
 arise immediately the following six equalities (10) = (01), (02) = (20), (03) = (30),
 (12) = (21), (13) = (31), and (23) = (32).

 From every given solution of the congruence 1 + a + P = 0 arises a solution of
 the congruence 1 + 8 + <5' = 0, provided S is chosen in {11} so that = 1
 (which is certainly from D), and 8' is the least residue of a8 (which is also in D).
 This correspondence can be reversed by choosing /3 such that /38 = 1 and a such
 that a = P8'. Therefore, one has (01) = (33). Similarly one gets (02) = (22), and
 (11) = (03).

 Finally, in a analogous way, he derives from the congruence 1 + p + y = 0 the
 congruence 1 + p' + 8 = 0, as well as the congruence 1 + y' + 8' = 0, from which
 he gets (12) = (13) = (23).

 Taking all this into account, the 16 quantities (00), (01),..., (10), (11),..., (23),
 (33) are now reduced to only six unknowns, and they can be ordered in the following
 4x4 matrix:

 Footnote 30 continued

 needs many preliminary results, which are related to the order in which the numbers follow one each other
 in the sets, A, B,C, £>].

 31 Actually, Gauss proves the following complete result: the number 2 belongs to the class A. B, C, or D

 depending on whether b is of the form 8m, 8m + 2. 8m + 4, or 8m + 6, but we omit this, as the same is not
 essential to our discussion.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 613

 (hi k I \
 i l m m

 k m k m

 yl m m i !

 Gauss finds three other equations among the six remaining unknowns.

 Since each number in the class A, excluding p — 1, must be followed by a number

 in the classes A, B,C, or D, Gauss observes that

 (00) + (01) + (02) + (03) = 2« - 1

 and similarly, starting from a number in B, C or D, he also gets

 The first three equations yield the following:

 (10)+ (11)+ (12)+ (13) = 2n,

 (20)+ (21)+ (22)+ (23) = 2»,

 (30)+ (31)+ (32)+ (33) = 2n.

 h + i + k + / — 2 n — 1,

 i +1 + 2m = 2 n,

 k + m = n

 and the fourth becomes identical to the second. Clearly with these relations Gauss
 reduces the unknowns to only two.

 In order to obtain a complete determination, Gauss computes the number of solu
 tions of the congruence 1 +a+/3+y = 0(mod /?),wherea, /?,andy are undetermined
 numbers from A, B, and C in two different ways. Comparing the two expressions thus

 obtained for the same number, and taking into account the equations above, with some

 computation he gets

 8n + 1 = [4(k — m) + l]2 + 4(1 - i)2,

 so that if x2 + 64v2, one must have x = 4(k — m) + 1 and b = 2(1 — i). Putting
 x = 4q + \ and b = 4r, from 16h = 8« + 1 — 64(k — m) + 1 — 11, he finally obtains

 h — q2 - q + r - 1,

 and, since q2 — q is always even, h = (00) is odd if and only if r is even, i.e., b — 8y.
 As already observed, when p = 8n + 1, the number 2 will appear either in the

 class A or in the class C, and in the former case, it can easily be seen that (p — l)/2
 and (p + l)/2 also belong to A, while in the latter case, they belong to C. Hence, if h
 and h + 1 are in A then also p — h and p — h — 1 are in A, then (00) is always even
 unless a number thus associated with itself exists, i.e., (p — l)/2 belongs to A. One
 concludes that (00) is odd whenever 2 is a biquadratic residue (mod p).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 614

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 In his second work on biquadratic residues, Gauss went more deeply into the theory
 and stated a reciprocity law for them. In this respect, he wrote (Gauss 1832, 1863b,
 p. 102):

 ita theoremata circa residua biquadratica tunc tantum in summa simplicitate ac

 genuina venustate resplendet, quando campus arithmeticae ad quantitates imagi

 narias extenditur [thus the theorems on biquadratic residues gleam in their great

 est simplicity and genuine beauty only when the field of arithmetic is extended

 to the imaginary quantities].

 Gauss begins his memoir by exposing the elementary theory of complex numbers,

 and of the ring Z[/"] = {a + ib : a, b e Z}, and in particular, he introduces the con
 cepts of (a) associated complex numbers (any a+ib and the product of it by the units

 — 1, i, —i), and (b) primary complex number, to distinguish a particular one in the set

 of the four associated complex numbers—as the positive is distinguished between n
 and — n in Z. In other words, a non-unit a + ib is called primary if and only if either
 a = l(mod 4), b = 0(mod 4) or a = 3(mod 4), b = 2(mod 4) [or, equivalently,
 a + ib = 1 (mod (2 + /2))]. Then, after having established the quadratic reciprocity
 law in Z[i] in section 67, on the basis of induction, he finally states the following
 biquadratic reciprocity theorem: let a + ib and a' + ib' be two distinct primary com
 plex primes, then the biquadratic character of the first with respect to the second is

 the same as that of the second with respect to the first if at least one is = 1 (mod 4),

 but the biquadratic character differs by 2 if both are = (3 + il) (mod 4).

 Of this theorem, Gauss wrote (Gauss 1832, 1863b, p. 139):

 At non obstante summa huius theorematis simplicitate, ipsius demonstratio inter
 mysteria arithmeticae sublimioris maxime recondita referenda ext [Although
 this theorem can be stated with great simplicity, its proof is one of the deepest
 mysteries of higher arithmetic]

 and he promised a third memoir on the subject, which never appeared.

 Let us remark that the proof of the biquadratic reciprocity law as stated by Gauss

 was given by Eisenstein (1844a).

 Eisenstein (1844b).32

 The cubic reciprocity law, never stated by Gauss, was announced and proved by

 9 The mathematical content of Germain's letters and notes

 The mathematics which Sophie Germain expounds in the letters and enclosed notes
 (the addenda) is sometimes difficult to follow or understand. The results that she

 presented to Gauss do not have the appearance of polished or well-organized works,

 32 Jacobi also gave a proof of the cubic reciprocity law in his lectures at Kônigsberg during the year 1837,
 as he attested in a footnote in his Uberdie Kreistheilung und ihre Anwendung aus die Zahlentheorie (Jacobi

 1846, p. 172). This note, in which Jacobi accused Eisenstein of plagiarism, gave rise to a bitter dispute over
 priority between the two. For the history of the cubic and biquadratic reciprocity law see Smith (1965),
 Collison (1977), and Lemmermeyer (2000).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 615

 and her writing (especially in the symbols) is not always easy to interpret. Moreover,
 her mathematical explanations sometimes omit details, leaving the reader to complete
 the work, or they consist of lengthy computations sometimes containing trivial mis

 takes. For these reasons, we have not been able to completely check all of Germain's
 claims, but suffice it is to say that the letters and mathematical notes contain many

 interesting results, and we will focus on them.

 9.1 First letter

 Let us recall that in art. 357 of the D.A., Gauss proved that if n is any prime > 2, then
 the equation:

 4X - 1 = Y2 ±nZ2, (9.1)

 x — 1

 where Y and Z are polynomials in x with integer coefficients and the sign on the right

 is + or — depending on whether n is of the form 4k + 3 or 4k + 1.

 In the first part of the addendum, Sophie Germain extends this result to the case of

 the more general equation:

 x"

 4- -z=Y2±nZ2, (9.2)

 x — 1

 x"2 - 1 (xn)n - 1 (xn)n - 1 xn - 1
 16 = 16-— = 4-— 4 ,
 X — 1 X — 1 x" — \ x — 1

 by Eq. (9.1 ), we have

 16-—— = (Y'2 ± nZ'2)(Y2 ± nZ2)

 x — I

 where s is any positive integer, and Y and Z are still polynomials in x with integer
 coefficients. To this end, she uses the following recursive argument. Suppose s = 2,
 from

 and since the second member is equal to (YY' ±nZZ')2 ± n(Y'Z ± YZ')2, if we put
 YY' ± nZZ' = 2/ and Y'Z ±YZ' = 2<p, taking into account the divisibility by 4,
 then we finally get

 4U"2 - 1) i 2
 — = / ±nq>A.

 x — 1

 The same reasoning applied to the last equation and (9.1) gives the case s = 3, and

 so on.

 Sophie Germain observes that due to the ambiguity of the signs, there are 2S_1

 different polynomials Y and 2S~] different polynomials Z satisfying (9.2).

 £} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 616

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Let m = (n — l)/2, then z = xm — + bxm~2 — etc. = 0 be the equation

 solutions of which belong to the period (m, 1). So, by art. 348 of the D.A., we have
 a = (m, 1) and the coefficients b, etc. are of the form 21 + *B(m, 1) + €(m, g), where

 21, 03, and € are integers. Let z! be the transformation of z when the periods (m, g)

 and (m, g2) are, respectively, substituted for (m, 1) and (m, g) into the coefficients of

 z, then the roots of z! = 0 are those contained in the period (m, g), and it follows that

 Thus, by art. 357 of the D.A., z can be reduced to the form R + S(m, g) + T(m, 1),
 where R, S, and T are polynomials with integer coefficients, and consequently, z!
 reduces to the form: z! = R + S(m, 1) + T (m, g). From these reductions, it is possible

 to determine the coefficients of Y and Z. Gauss writes: "It is easy to see that the two

 terms of higher degree in the function Y will always be 2xm +xm~l and that of highest

 degree in the function Z, will always be x"i_1. All the remaining coefficients will be

 integers which depend on n, and it is not possible to give a general analytic formula
 for them."

 In the addendum, Sophie Germain, imitating Gauss's method by replacing r =
 cos sin ^ by R = cos + ' sin , extends the above result to the case
 of Eq. (9.2). In other words, she shows that—even in this case—the coefficients of
 the corresponding z and z!, which are now polynomials of degree (ns — l)/2, can
 be expressed in terms of the periods (m, l), (m, g). The proof given seems to be
 correct, and to see its development, we refer directly to the addendum transcribed
 in the Appendix. This property obviously also holds true for the polynomials Y
 and Z.

 The reasoning followed by Germain allows her to determine, although in a compli
 cated way in general, the coefficients of the polynomials Y and Z for certain values
 of n and(see the examples she gives in the addendum).

 Sophie Germain also remarks: if n = 4k + 1, then the coefficients of Y and Z are
 the same, and of the same signs, starting from xm as well as starting from 1, i.e., if
 N is the coefficient of x"'"1' in Y or in Z then N is the coefficient of xh [she say
 homogeneous function of x and 1],

 Moreover, she observes ifn = 4k + 3, the same holds with opposite sign, i.e., if N

 is the coefficient ofxm~~h, then —N is the coefficient of xh [homogeneous function of
 jc and -1] (see the examples given by Gauss in art. 357 of the D.A.).

 To show this, she proceeds as follows. Let g denote a primitive root for the modulus

 n, and let [1], [g],..., [g"-2] denote the set of all roots of the equation zz! = X = 0.

 She notes that the coefficients of Y and Z depend on those of z and z!. According to
 Gauss's theory of periods, z = 0 can be put in the form z = (x — [l])(x — [g2])(x —
 [g4]) ■■■(x- [g""3]) = 0. Since [l][g2][g4] • • • [g'1"3] = [1 + g2 + g4 + • • • +
 g'1-3] = [0] = 1, one can multiply the second member of the above equation by
 ([l][g2][g4] • • ■ L?"-3])'"-1 without changing the first, and one can do this in such
 a way that each single factor is multiplied by all roots excluding those appearing in
 that same factor. This process allows one to write the above equation in the form:
 z = ([-1] - D(4-g2] — !)••■ (x[-g"-3] - 1).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 617

 When n = 4k + 1, — 1 is a quadratic residue, then the last equation reduces to z =

 (x[l] —l)(x[g2]—1) • ■ • (x[g"-3] — 1), and since the number of factors w = 2k is even,
 one can change all the signs, obtaining z = (1 — x[l])(l — x[£2]) ■ •■(! — x[g"~3]),
 which shows z to be a homogeneous function of x and 1 as defined by Germain. The
 same reasoning can be applied to z', and one gets z! = (x — [£])(x — [g3])(x —
 [g5]) ■ ■ ■ (x — [gn~2]) = 0. It follows that zz! is a homogeneous function of x and 1.
 Here, she claims that Y and Z are also homogeneous functions of x and 1.

 When n = 4k + 3, one can proceed in a similar way (but remembering that in this

 case — 1 is not a quadratic residue) to show that zz' is a homogeneous function of x and
 — 1. Then, she claims that Y (and Z) is homogeneous function of x and —1, without
 explanation.

 At any rate, we can see that the stated property of the polynomial Y holds.

 Legendre, in the second edition of his Théorie des nombres, gave two methods for

 obtaining the coefficients of Y and Z for Eq. (9.1) (Legendre 1827, arts. 509-512).
 The first he showed by using the theory of periods, and so this method is in some sense
 similar to Germain's above line of thought. The second was based on a very simple
 remark that we now describe.

 In the development of (x — 1)", all the coefficients, except the first and the last,
 are divisible by n. Thus, one can write (x — 1)" = xn — 1 — nT, with T a suitable
 polynomial of degree n — 1. Then, remembering equation (9.1), one has 4X(x — 1) =
 4(x — 1)" +4nT = (x — l)(Y2±nZ2). Hence, by omitting the multiples of n, one gets
 4(x—1)" = (x— l)Y2 andthen Y = 2(x— 1)'"; so, in order to determine the coefficients

 of Y, one has only to reduce (mod n) the coefficients of the development of 2(x — l)m.

 The property of the coefficients of Y, noticed by Germain, was remarked upon by

 Legendre as a byproduct of his first method (Legendre 1827, p. 194).

 Germain returned to the subject of Eq. (9.2) with the note (Germain 1831b) which

 she published in the year of her death. In this paper, by using the above-mentioned

 result of Legendre—which she refers to as "useful for establishing immediately that
 Y in Eq. (9.1) is a homogeneous polynomial of x and 1"—she determines the form of
 the general power of x in the polynomials Y' and Z' when s = 2.

 Almost at the end of the addendum, Sophie Germain gives, by using the method of

 art. 345 of the D.A., a new proof of the fact that 2 is a residue for primes of the form

 8k +1 and 8 k+7, and a nonresiduefor primes of the form 8k + 3 and 8k+5. This is the
 only result that Gauss commented on in his response to Germain's letter: "your new

 proof for the primes of which 2 is residue or nonresidue gave me extreme pleasure. It
 is very clever, although it seems peculiar, and not applicable to other numbers."

 In the last part of the addendum, Germain reports on what is probably her first
 approach to FLT. She claims to have proven FLT for the exponent p — 1 when p is a
 prime of type 8n + 7. Since this part of the addendum has already been commented

 upon in Del Centina (2008), we will not give much detail here.

 Let p be a prime > 3 and set 2p' := p — 1. If x, y, z is a primitive solution of the

 equation xp~] +yp~1 = zp~\ thenxp', yp , zp' satisfy X2 + Y2 = Z2, so that either
 x or y must be even, and the other odd. She first proves the following two results.

 (1) if x, y, and z are pairwise relatively prime integers satisfying Fermât's equation,

 then p divides the even one ofx and y, and moreover z is odd and is not divisible by
 p (see Gandhi 1966, also Ribenboim 1999, p. 206). Supposing y = 2phf, she then

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 618

 A. Del Centina, A. Fîocca

 proves xp = f2p — 22p 2 p2p h2p . From this, she gets (2) if x,y,z are as in (1);
 then xp = fx is a quadratic residue (modp) (see Raina 1969, also Ribenboim 1999,
 p. 207).

 Let x = f2 + mp2p where m is not divisible by p. By developing the p'-th
 power of x, one has f2p' — 22p'~2p2p h2p = f2p' + p'f2p'~2 mp2p' + • • -, from
 which, she asserts, one has m — k2p and then —2 = /2(mod p). It follows that
 XP~1 + yP~\ — zp~\ is not solvable in integers when —2 is not a quadratic residue
 (mod p), that is, for primes of the form 8n + 5 and 8« + 7 (D.A. art. 113). In the
 first case, p — 1 is always divisible by 4, and then the result also follows from the
 impossibility of x4 + y4 = z4, but in the second case, p — 1 is never divisible by 4
 and is not always divisible by 3. Hence, FLT for the exponent p — 1 when p = 8n + 7
 would follow.

 Unfortunately, one cannot assert that m necessarily is a (2//)th-power, and her

 reasoning fails (see Del Centina 2008, p. 355). However, we would like to stress that
 this was the very first attempt to apply the theory of congruences and residues to
 prove FLT for some exponent. Likely, Sophie Germain continued to study FLT in the

 following years, but she never returned to this topic in her letters to Gauss until 1819.

 9.2 Second letter

 In her second letter to Gauss, Germain, after an introduction concerning her own

 research on ternary quadratic forms of determinant zero, tells him of the very recent

 publication of the fourth volume of Laplace's Mécanique céleste and describes the con
 tent of it. Moreover, she reviews Legendre's memoir on the orbits of comets, Nouvelle
 méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des comètes, which appeared in March
 (Legendre 1806).33 Her comments on it prove that Sophie Germain had an extensive
 knowledge of mathematical astronomy.

 In the addendum, she gives some details of her work on quadratic forms.

 In art. 267 of the D.A., Gauss claims that a ternary quadratic form

 / = ax2 + a!' x'2 + a" x"2 + 2b"xx' -t- 2b'xx" + 2 b" xx',

 of determinant

 V = ab2 + ab'2 + a"b"2 - aa'a" - 2bb'b"

 equal to zero, can be reduced to a binary quadratic form, up to a linear change of vari

 ables. Gauss also asserts that he would prove this result in the future, when presenting

 a complete theory of ternary quadratic forms. Gauss never published a tract on ternary
 quadratic forms, but he sketched a proof of the above claim in an handwritten note
 dated around the year 1800 (Gauss 1917, pp. 87-88).

 In the first part of the addendum to her second letter, Germain attempts a proof of

 Gauss' claim for quadratic ternary forms. Let

 In this memoir, Legendre expounded the method of least squares for the first time (see also Sect. 3).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 619

 A A' A"

 B B' B"  )

 (

 represent the adjoint form F of /.

 Since V = 0, F is the null form, and one gets the following six equations:

 BB-A'A"= 0, AB-B'B"= 0,

 B'B' - AA" = 0, MB' - BB" = 0,

 B"B" - AA" = 0, A"B" - BB' = 0.

 At this point Sophie Germain seems to be saying that by taking B = map, B' = mSp,
 and B" = maS and then A = mS2, A' = ma2, and A" = m/32, the above equations
 are satisfied. How she got these expressions for B, B', and B" and A, A', and A"
 is not clear, but on the basis of what she also wrote in the third addendum (where

 she extends these results to the case of quaternary quadratic forms), we may argue
 that she proceeded as follows. Let m be gcd(A, A', A"), since by the above equations
 A'A"/m2 = (B/m)2, AA"/m2 = (B'/m)2, and AA'/m2 = (B"/m)2. Then, by a
 well-known result, A/m, A'/m and A"/m are squares (but for this, it is necessary
 that A/m, A'/m, and A"/m are pairwise coprimes). Hence, one can suppose that
 A — mS2, A! = ma2, and A" = m/32. Thus, again by the above equations and taking
 only positive numbers, one has B — map, B' = mSp, and B" — maS. It is clear
 that this cannot be realized for "any" / with V = 0. In order to perform the desired
 reduction, Sophie Germain has to also suppose (but without saying so) that B, B',
 and B" / 0, i.e., a, P, and <5 ^ 0, which, of course, is not always true. Under these
 hypotheses (which only hold for a "general" / with D = 0), by some computation,
 she obtains the following relations:

 (see the addendum). Then, multiplying by &2 the form f, and taking into account the
 equations above, she is able to reduce / to the form:

 which, by putting

 can be written as

 a'a2 = aS2 + 2 b'S p + a"/32

 a"p2 = a82 + 2b" ha + a'a2

 a&2 = a'a2 + 2 bap + a" ft2

 a'(ax — 8x')2 + a" (fix — 8x")2 + 2 b(ax — 8x")(/3x — Sx"),

 u = ax — Sx'

 v = fix — Sx",

 a'u2 + a"v2 + 2 buv,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 fz = — 1, it follows that the 2s numbers z,—z, zf, —zf,..., zf , and — zf
 are congruent (mod 2sm + 1). From this, she deduces that for the primes of the form

 22' + 1 = 2, + l22 -,_l + l, there are 2, + 1 (22 -,_1)-th power residues, and because

 22'+l = l(mod 2' + 1), 2 is a (22'_,~')th-power residue.

 Finally, Sophie Germain claims that by using the method of art. 98 in the D.A., the

 first two parts of the theorem (same article) on the product of two quadratic residues or

 nonresidues, also holds true for (25)th-power (mod 2sm + 1), i.e., the product of two
 (2v)th-power residues is a (25)th-power residue, and the product of a (2s)th-power

 residue with a (2i)th-power nonresidue is a (2s)th-power nonresidue. She also claims
 that the third part of theorem, the one about the product of two nonresidues, extends to
 (2')th-powers only if both nonresidues are (2S_I )th-power residues (mod 2sm + 1).

 620

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 or, which is to say, (a', b, a") (see Gauss 1917, pp. 87-88). She observes that this reduc
 tion can be done in two other ways, obtaining the binary quadratic forms (a, b', a"),
 and (a, b", a').

 This is perhaps the most interesting remark of the addendum.

 In art. 201 of the D.A., Gauss had shown that the equation /2 — Vu2 = 4 is solvable
 in integers only if T> is 4k or 4k + 1. In the second part of the addendum, Sophie
 Germain considers in detail the case when V is one of the following: 8k, 8k + 1, or
 8k + 5. She gives some explicit formulae.

 Next she extends Gauss's result of article 115 from second powers to the (2s)th
 powers. Precisely, Gauss showed that among the numbers 1, 2,..., 4m there are m
 biquadratic residues for the prime p = 4m + 1, and 3m not biquadratic residues.
 Using Gauss's method, Sophie Germain proves that for the prime p = 2sm + 1,
 among the numbers 1,2,..., 2sm, there are m which are (2s)th-power residues and
 (2s — 1 )m which are (2s)th-power nonresidues. In fact, since —1 is always a qua
 dratic residue, i.e., f2 = — l(mod p), let z be any number not divisible by p. From
 aç—[ —| — J

 of determinant D equal to zero, can be reduced to a ternary one. To this end she per

 forms a long computation following the method used in the case of ternary quadratic

 forms. She put

 9.3 Third letter

 At the beginning of the addendum, Sophie Germain shows that a quaternary quadratic
 form

 fa a' a" a'" \

 * V b" b" b"" bv) '

 (A A A' A" \

 ~\B B' B" B'" B"" Bv)

 which is the adjoint form of /, and expresses the coefficients of F in terms of those
 of /. Then, from D = 0, she gets A = m<52, A — ma2. A" = mfi2, and A" = mv2,

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 621

 where m = mcd(A A', AA'", etc). Hence, her proof does not hold for all quater
 nary quadratic forms with determinant zero but only for "general ones."

 Next, Germain observes: under the same hypothesis for f, the adjoint F can be
 reduced to a perfect square multiplied by the maximal common divisors of its coeffi
 cients. She also remarks that f(S, a, v) = 0.

 Let us stress that Gauss, in a handwritten note (Gauss 1917, Part I, pp. 86-88), used

 this fact to prove the reducibility of a ternary quadratic form of determinant zero to a

 binary one.

 form / with D £ 0:

 Then, Germain computes the adjoint of the adjoint F of a quaternary quadratic

 (aD2 a'D2 a"D2 a'"D2 \
 \bD2 b'D2 b"D2 b'"D2 b""D2 bvD2 )

 and observes that the determinant of F is D3.

 Following the case of ternary quadratic forms which Gauss discussed in art. 271 of
 the D.A., Sophie Germain observes: the quaternary quadratic form f (with a ^ 0) is

 definite, if the ternary quadratic form

 ( A" A"" A" \
 —B' -B")'

 where bvbv - a a' = A1', ba - b"b"" = B, b""b"" - aa" = A"", b'a - b"bv = B',
 b"b" — aa'" = A'" and b"'a — b""bv = B", is negative definite. In particular f is
 positive definite if a > 0 and negative definite if a < 0.

 In fact, we have

 af = (ax + bvx' + b""x" + b"x"'2)

 +(A V2 + A""x"2 + A"x"'2 - 2Bx"'x" - 2B'x"'x' - 2Bx"x').

 (Av A"" A" \

 B B' B" / *0' c'cterm:'nant

 J) 0) to be negative are B"2 — AVA"", AVD and Av all < 0. Since, after some
 computation, we see that B"2 — AvA"" = aA!" and 25 = —a2T>, Germain finally
 obtains that those conditions reduce to A", aA!", and V are all < 0. She also proves
 that under these conditions, the adjoint F is definite. Thus, she concludes that if af is

 definite, then F is definite too, and, because A!" < 0, if / is negative definite, then

 F is positive definite, and viceversa.

 Next, Sophie Germain states a proposition on the representation of the determi
 nant of a ternary quadratic form, similar to that in art. 280 of the D.A., as follows: if

 the ternary quadratic form ( Q B, R// J , of determinant T>, is represented by the

 quaternary quadratic form

 (A A' A"\
 \B B' B")'

 )•
 b b' b" b'" b"" bv,

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 622

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 with variables x = ps + mt + nu, x' = p's + m't + n'u, x" = p"s + m"t + n"u,
 x"' = p"'s + m'"t + n'"u, then V is representable by the adjoint of that form.

 She claims (as Gauss does in art. 280 of the D.A. for ternary quadratic forms) that
 this proposition can be easily proven by direct computation, but actually she only

 performs it in a particular case.

 At the end of the addendum, on the basis of the earlier results, Sophie Germain

 conjectures that an n -ary quadratic form with determinant equal to zero, can be always

 reduced, in n different ways, to an (n — 1 )-ary quadratic form. She verifies it by a

 direct computation in the case of quinary forms. Let us remark that, lacking a general

 theory of matrices and determinants, these computations are very long and impossible

 to perform in general.

 Finally, in light of what she knows about ternary, quaternary, and quinary quadratic

 forms, she argues that if'T> is the determinant of an n-ary quadratic form f, then T>n~1

 is the determinant of the adjoint form.

 Let us stress that this general result was proved by Cauchy some years later (Cauchy

 1815, p. 82).

 9.4 Fourth letter

 The first claim of Sophie Germain is

 (A) Let n = 4k + 3 be a prime, and suppose that N = x + y can be put in the form
 f2 + nh2 with f, h being integers, then there are two integers F, H such that
 x" + f = F2 +nH2.
 To prove this she argues as follows. She knows that from addendum I, the poly

 nomial Y, of degree m = (« — l)/2, which satisfies 4^^£y- = Y2 + nZ2, is of
 the form Y = 2xm + + ax'"~2 + • ■ • — ax2 — x — 2. The same prop

 erty holds true for the polynomial Y' in the equation 4*^, = Y'2 + nZ'2, so
 Y' = 2xm +xm-xy + axm-2y2 + ax2y"1'2 - xym~x - 2ym. From this it
 is clear that, for any x, y, the value of Y' is divisible by 2. This is true also for Z',

 as follows immediately from Z'2 = (AX' — Yl2)/n (here X' := xx+yy )• Then,

 — (Y'/2)2 +n(Z'/2)2. To conclude, it is enough to remember the identity

 (a2 +nb2)(c2 +nd2) — (ac — nbd)2 +n(ad + bc)2 (see also Waterhouse 1994,
 p. 142).
 The second claim is the converse of (A), as follows:

 (B) If x" + y" is of the form f2 + nh2, then x + y is of that form as well.

 Unfortunately, this assertion does not hold: in fact her proof, based on the theory

 developed by Gauss in art. 235 of the D. A., is valid for "forms" and not for "num

 bers." In his response to the letter, Gauss provides a numerical counterexample

 and explains how x + y cannot be of the prescribed form, and adds that the propo

 sition holds true under the restriction that x+y be a prime number. For a complete
 proof of this fact and a generalization, see Genocchi (1884a, p. 247). Gauss's
 counterexample is also discussed in MacKinnon (1990) and Waterhouse (1994).

 Next, Germain considers the analogue of proposition (A) for the case of primes
 n = Ak+\. In this case, one has to take into account equation 4 = Y2—nZ2,

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 623

 quadratic forms of type f2 — nh2 instead of f2 + nh2, and consider the identity
 (a2 — nb2)(c2 — nd2) = (ac + nbd)2 — n(ad + be)2.
 She erroneously claims that the analogue of (B) holds true.
 Finally, she asserts (without proof) that propositions (A) and (B) can be extended
 to the case of Eq. (9.2).

 9.5 Fifth letter

 In the kind and lengthy response to Germain's fourth letter—the one in which she
 revealed her true identity—Gauss stated two theorems are "linked," as he wrote, "to
 delicate research" concerning the theory of cubic and biquadratic residues, a theory

 that, he added, "I developed in the past winter to the same degree of perfection as that

 of quadratic residues." Precisely,

 I. Let p be a prime number of the form 3n + 1. / claim that 2 (i.e., +2 and —2) is
 cubic residue of p, if p can be reduced to the form xx + 27yy, and that 2 is not

 cubic residue of p if4p can be reduced to the same form.

 II. Le p be a prime number of the form 8n + 1. / claim that +2 and —2 are biqua
 dratic residues or nonresidues of p, depending on whether p is or is not of the
 form xx + 64yy.

 In the same letter, Gauss also stated a theorem regarding quadratic residues, "whose

 proof," he remarked, "is less hidden [than the others], I will not include it here to not

 deprive you of the pleasure of finding it by yourself":

 Let p be a prime number and denote by A and B (respectively) the two sets
 {1,2, 3,4,..., (p - l)/2} and {(p + l)/2, (p + 3)/2, (p + 5)/2,..., p - 1}.
 Let a be any integer not divisible by p. Consider the minimal residues (mod p)
 of all numbers in A multiplied by a and let a be the number of those belonging
 to A, fi the number of those belonging to B, so that a + fi — (p — l)/2.1 claim
 that a is a quadratic residue of p if f3 is even, and it is not a quadratic residue
 of p if is odd.

 This theorem, today known as "Gauss's lemma," gives a condition for an integer
 to be a quadratic residue, and is of great theoretical significance. Gauss used this
 result to produce a new proof of his "fundamental theorem" in Gauss (1808). In fact
 a few weeks after having replied to Germain, Gauss wrote to Olbers (Schilling 1990,
 pp. 359-360):

 Neulich, als ich ihr antwortete und einige Arithmetica mittheilte, wurde ich dad

 urch veranlasst, wieder eine Untersuchung vorzunehmen und gleich zwei Tage

 nachher gelang mir eine ausserst angenehme neue Entdeckung. Es ist eine neuer
 sehr zierlicher und kurzer Beweis des Fundamentalsatzes Art. I (sic) [8, 9, 12

 Mai 1807] [Recently, when I replied to a letter of hers, explaining some Arith
 metic, I undertook to study again the question and, two days later, I made a

 very pleasant discovery. This is a new, very elegant proof of the fundamental

 proposition of Art. I (sic)].

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 624

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 A month later, with her fifth letter, Sophie Germain submitted the proofs of these
 theorems and some of her own findings to Gauss. She wrote "I had already tried to
 examine residues of higher powers than squares, but I have not been able to pene

 trate this theory, which remains the object of my curiosity. Therefore here is the small

 number of propositions 1 have reached." Among them, we consider the following two.

 (1) Let p be a prime, and q a natural number. If (q, p — 1) = 1, then all num
 bers in the sequence 1, 2,..., p — 1 are qth-power residues. On the contrary if
 p — 1 = qs, then in the sequence 1,2,,qs there are s residues and p — s — 1
 nonresidues (mod p).
 We observe that the "contrary" of the previous case (q, p — 1) = 1 should be
 d = (q, p — 1) ^ 1. For this case, see Sierpinski (1964, Theorem 14 at p. 257)

 where it is proved that the number of different residues is (/? — \ )/d+ \ (including
 0), and so Germain's second claim is a particular case of this result, while the
 first is an immediate corollary (see Sierpinski 1964, p. 258).

 (2) The product of two qth-power residues (mod p = qs + 1) is a qth-power residue

 same modulo. In general, the product of a = r"1 and b = r", r primitive root, is
 a residue or a nonresidue depending on whether or not (m + n) = 0(mod q).

 In the addendum to her letter she expounded the "proofs" of Gauss's theorems.

 The proof of theorem I seems to be correct. Let p = 3n + 1 be a prime number, so

 thatn is even. Let, as in the D.A. art. 358 (Gauss 1801, 1863a, p. 445), g be a primitive
 root modulo p and denote by A the set of minimal residues of g3, g6,..., gp~4
 together with 1, by A! the set of minimal residues of g, g4,..., £p-3,and by A" the
 set of minimal residues of g2, g5,..., gp~2. Let (AA) be the number of integers in
 the set {1, 2,..., p — 1} such that h e A and h + 1 e A, (AA!) the number of those
 that h € A and h + le A1, and similarly (AS!'), (A! A!), and so on. Let a = (A! A!'),
 b = (AA1), c = (AA"). One has n = a+b + c and (AA) = a — 1. In art. 358 (p. 447),
 it is proved that 4p — (6a — 3b — 3c — 2)2 + 21(b — c)2. If p = x2 + 21 y2 (so x, y
 are of different parity), then it follows that 6a — 3b — 3c — 2 = 2x, and b — c = 2y.
 From n = a + b + c, if b + c is even, a is also even, so (AA) = a — 1 is odd. In
 general if h,h+ 1 are in A, then p — h — 1 and p — h are in A, so (AM.) is even unless
 p — h — 1 = h, i.e., p — 1 — 2h and, concludes Germain, since — 1 is a cubic
 residue, 2 is also a cubic residue.

 In the addendum to her letter, Sophie Germain also gave a proof of theorem II,

 a "proof" she wrote, "that requires several preambles, since in the D.A., there is no

 result that can be used directly."

 She follows the route traced by Gauss in art. 358 of the D.A., in the case in

 which the roots are divided into three periods. Let g be a primitive root for the
 prime modulo p = 8« + 1, and denote the four periods (2«, 1), (2n, g), (2n, g2),
 and (2n, g3) by p, p', p", and p'" respectively. We have p = {[1], [g4],..., [gp_5]},
 p' = {[#]• L?5]- • • • > L?p_4]}. and so on- Also, let iî denote the set of the minimal

 remains of the powers g4, g8,..., gp~5 including 1, A! the set of the minimal remains

 of the powers g, g5,..., gp~4, and similarly, define A", A"1. Clearly, these sets are
 mutually disjoint, and their union is the set {1, 2, 3,..., p — 1}. We have that p — 1
 is in A and both h and p — h — 1 belong to the same set among A, A', Aand A'".

 Again as in art. 358 of the D.A., denote by (j?J?) the number of those integers h in

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 625

 the set {1, 2,..., p — 1} such that h e M and also h + 1 e M. Denote by (MM') the
 number of those integers h such that h e M and h + 1 e M'. and similarly define the
 numbers (MM"), (MM'"),(M"M'"), (M!"M!").

 Since —1 is biquadratic residue for the modulus p = 8n -f- 1, we have (MM') =
 (M'M), (MM") = (M"M), ..., (M" M'") = (M'" M"). M is the set of all biquadratic resi
 dues (mod p).lfh and h + 1 are in M also p — h and p — h — 1 are in M, then (MÂ) is
 always even unless there exists h e M such that p — h — 1 = h, i.e., (p — l)/2 = h,
 which means (p—1)/2 is a biquadratic residue. In this case, since p— I is a biquadratic
 residue, 2 must be a biquadratic residue.

 Thus, Germain's strategy for proving theorem II was to prove that (MM) is always

 odd when p = 8n + 1 is of the form x2 + 64y2. She proceeds as follows.

 Let a := (MM), b := (MM!), c := (MM!'), d := (MM!"), e := (M!M!), f := (M"M"),
 d' := (M!M!), e' := (M!M!"), e" := (M"M"'), b' := (M!"M!"). With the 16 numbers
 (MM), (MM!),..., (M!M),..., (M!"M!") we can construct the following matrix:34

 Moreover, for the nature of the numbers a, b,c,..., b', we have the following

 obvious relations among them:

 By developing, as in art. 345 (see also art. 358) of the D.A., the products of two,

 three and four periods she gets a number of relations among the numbers a, b, c,..., b'

 (see the transcription of the addendum in the appendix), so that the matrix above can
 be reduced to the form:

 jab c d \
 b d' e e'
 ce f e"
 yd e' e' b' )

 2 n — 1=a + b + c + d

 2 n=d' + b + e+e'

 2 n = f + c + e + e"

 2 n — b' + d + e' + e"

 la b c d\

 b d e e

 c e c e

 yd e e b !

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 34 Germain does not introduce this matrix, but we think this will be useful for the reader comparing her

 proof with that of Gauss (Gauss 1828, art. 15-20). See the next subsection in which we compare the two

 proofs.

 626

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Thus, the relations above become

 2 n — 1 =a+b+c+d

 2n = b + d + 2e

 n = c + e,

 and we also have b — d — 2(c — d).35 In performing this reduction, she obtains also
 the relation:

 ec + e1 = (2c — 2 d)c + d2 + e(2e — c — 1),

 from which one easily deduces

 or, equivalently,

 4(8/2 + 1) = 64 (c — e)2 + 32 (c — e) + 4 + 64 (c — t/)2

 p = 8/2 + 1 = [4(c - e) + l]2 + 16(c - d)2.

 From this, if p = x2 + 64y2, we must have x = 4(c — e) + 1 and 2y — c — d.

 Thus, the question is reduced to prove that a is odd when c — d even.

 To this end, let us observe that 2 and 4n = (p — l)/2 are quadratic residues for
 p = 8n + 1,36 This means that, remarks Germain, there is an odd number, say Q, of
 integers h in the sequence 1,2, p — 1 such that h, h + 1 are quadratic residues
 (mod p). In fact, on the contrary, an h exists satisfying the equation h — (p — l)/2,
 i.e., h = 4n and then 4n would be a nonresidue.

 Suppose h and h +1 are quadratic residues, then either h,h + \ e Â, or h, h +1 e Â"

 or one of those is in ^ and the other is in A". She claims that Q = (&£) + (&£") +
 (A"A" ) = a+c+d, and then she concludes that, since c+d must be even, a is necessar

 ily odd. Unfortunately, the last claim is false, as she recognizes in the subsequent sixth
 letter to Gauss, where she correctly writes Q = (AA) + 2(AA") + {A!'A!') = a + 3c,
 and gave another argument to conclude her proof.

 We postpone the examination of the amended version for when we discuss the sixth

 letter.

 In the addendum, Germain also gave a proof of the third theorem, which is substan

 tially identical to that published by Gauss in Theorematis arithmetici demonstratio
 nova (Gauss 1808).

 To Germain's fifth letter, written on June 27,1807, Gauss responded after 7 months,

 but on July 21, after a journey that had led him to Nienburg, Hannover, and Bremen

 (where he visited Olbers); after having returned home, he wrote this letter (Schilling
 1990, pp. 376-377):

 35 Germain does not observe this.

 36 D.A., Section 4, art. 94-114.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 627

 Bei meiner Zuriickkunft habe ich hier einige Briefe aus Paris vorgefunden von
 Bouvard, Lagrange und Sophie Germain. [...] Lagrange interessirt sich noch
 mit vieler Warme fur die Astronomie und hôhere Arithmetik; die beiden Probe

 Theoreme (in welchen Primzahlen 2 ein kubischer oder ein biquadratischer Rest

 ist) die ich auch Ihnen vor einiger Zeit mittheilte, halt er fur "ce qu'il peut y avoir

 de plus beau et de plus difficile à démontré." Aber die Sophie Germain hat mir die
 Beweise derselben geschickt; noch habe ich sie zwar nicht durchgehen kônnen,
 ich glaube aber, dass sie gut sind; wenigstens hat sie die Sache von der rechten
 Seite angegriffen, nur etwas weitlaufiger sind sie als nôthig sein wird [On my
 return I found several letters from Paris, from Bouvard, Lagrange, and Sophie

 Germain. [...] Lagrange still shows great interest in astronomy and higher arith

 metic, he considers the two theorems (for which primes 2 is a cubic or a biqua

 dratic residue) which I told you about some time ago, "what one can have that
 is most beautiful and difficult to prove." But Sophie Germain has sent me the
 proofs of them; although I have not yet been able to look carefully through
 them, I think they are good, at least she has approached the problem in the right

 direction, they are only somewhat longer than they need be.]

 We do not know if Gauss found the time to read Germain's proofs of his theorems

 carefully, especially that of theorem II, but on September 2, 1808, writing to Bolyai,

 he confirmed his great esteem for her (Schmidt and Stackel 1899, pp. 93-94):

 Von Personen, die jenes Werk mit Erfolg studirt hâtten, kenne ich bis jet
 zt nur wenige; oben an steht die Demoiselle Sophie Germain in Paris (habe
 ich dir von ihr geschrieben?) ein gewisser Poulet-de-l'Isle in Orleans hat
 es ins franzôsische iibersetzt, Lagrange hat einen Paragraph in der neuen
 Auflage seines Traité de la resolution numerique des equations commentirt,
 indess auf eine Art der ich nicht in alien Stiicken meinen Beifall geben kann ...
 [I know very few people who have studied this work [the D.A.] with profit,
 above all Miss Sophie Germain of Paris (have I written to you about her?), a cer
 tain Poulet-de- l'lsle of Orleans, who translated my work into French, Lagrange
 commented on it in a section of his work Traité de la resolution numerique des

 equations, although in a way that I do not completely agree with ...].

 9.6 Sixth letter

 First of all, we examine the revised version of the proof of theorem II.

 Let us recall that Germain aims to prove that a = (&S) is always odd when
 p = 8A' + 1 is of the form x2 + 64y2. To this end, Germain goes back to the equations

 2n — \=a+b + c + d, 2n = b + d + 2e,

 and she observes that among the numbers a, b,c, and d only one is odd and the others

 are even. This does not seem justified at this point, but in the continuation of the letter
 (see below) she affirms that, since only one among M., Â1, and Â'" contains 2, only
 one among a = (ÂÂ), b = (ÂM!), c = (&£"), and d = (ÂÂ'") is odd. Hence, to
 finish her proof, she claims that, since c — d is even (because c — d — 2y), both c and

 •fj Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 628

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 d must be even and, by the second equation above, b is also even. Therefore, from the
 first equation, a must be odd.

 Let us show that, at this point, she could have completed the proof of theorem II

 precisely as at the end of Gauss's proof.
 From the first equation, we have

 a = 2n — 1— b — c — d

 and with some computation, we obtain

 8a = 4 n — 3[4 (c — e) + 1] — 5

 which can be put in the form:

 16a = 8n + 1 — 6[4(c — e) + 1] — 11

 When p = 8n + 1 is of the form x2 + 64y2, as we have seen in discussing the fifth
 letter, we must have x = 4(c — e) + 1 and c — d — 2y. Hence, from above, putting
 q := c — e and r = c — d, we easily obtain

 a = q2 — q — 1 + r2,

 and since q2 — q is always even and r is also even, it follows that a is odd as required.
 Gauss, after having proved theorem II, commented as follows (Gauss 1828,

 Sect. 22):

 In Disquisitiones Arithmeticae theoriam generalem divisionis circuli, atque sol
 utionis aequationis xp — 1 = 0 explicavimus, interque alia docuimus, si p sit
 divisori p — 1, functionem (xp — \)/(x — 1 ) in /x factores ordinis (p — 1 )//x
 resolvi posse adiumento aequationis auxiliaris ordinis p. Prater theoriam gen
 eralem huis resolutionis simul casus spéciales, ubi p = 2 vel p = 3, in illo
 opere artt. 356 358 seorsim consideravimus, aequationemque auxiliarem a
 priori assignare docuimus, i.e., absque evolutione schematis residuorum min
 imorum potestum alicuius radicis primitivae pro modulus p. Iam vel nobis non
 monentibus lectores attenti facile percipient nexus arctissimus casus proximi
 istius theoriae, puta pro p = 4, cum investigationibus hie in artt. 15-20 expli

 catis, quarum adiumento ille quoque sine difficultate complete absolvi poterit.
 [In the D.A., we have presented the general theory of the division of the circle

 and the solution of the equation xp — 1 =0, and demonstrated, among other

 things, that if p is a divisor of the number p — 1, the function (xp — 1)/(jc — 1) can

 be decomposed into p factors of order (p — 1 )/p, with the aid of the auxiliary

 equation of order p. Out of the general theory of these solutions, we have con
 sidered separately the special cases where p = 2 or p = 3, in articles 356-358
 of the work, and we have learned to establish the auxiliary equation a priori,

 i.e., without the development of the schema of the least residues of the powers

 of some primitive root of the modulus p. Now, without our having to refer to

 that, the attentive reader will recognize the close dependence of the next case

 of that theory, i.e., the case p = 4, on the investigation here laid out in articles

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 629

 15-20, with the aid of which this case can be determined completely without

 any difficulty.]

 This is precisely the path followed by Sophie Germain.

 In her sixth letter to Gauss, Germain gave a new method for finding the first relations

 among the quantity a,b,c,... ,b' which avoids the long computation of the products

 of the periods. This is a very interesting part of the letter, but, at the same time, her

 explanations are very difficult to follow, in view of being extremely concise. Hence,
 we are not sure if we have completely understood her argument.

 Let P = 2 Q + 1 = 2Nn + 1 be a prime number, then — 1 is a quadratic residue as
 well as an «-power residue (mod P). Let S, and T be any two positive numbers less
 than 2Q, and r be a primitive root for the modulo P. The solutions of the equation
 rs + 1 = rT are as many as the solutions of the congruence 1 + rs + rT = Omod P.
 Since we have r2@ = l(mod P) and r@ = —l(mod P), from the congruence
 —rs — rT = —1 (mod P) (and forgetting (mod P)), we have

 If we write Y, Y' for — S, — T, we obtain

 From this congruence, we easily get the following five equations as well:

 rQ+T-S r~S ^

 rQ+y-y -ry = ],

 rQ+Y'~

 x i

 1

 m

 1,

 rQ+y  1

 1

 III

 1,

 rQ+y

 1

 J X.

 X

 III

 1,

 rQ~Y _ - r1Q~Y' =  1,

 rQ-y  -r2Q~Y =  1.

 From any one of the above six congruences, we can obtain the other five. Let
 us denote by Â, Â', Â", Â"',... the periods containing the nth, (n + l)th, (n + 2)th,
 (n +3)th, etc. powers of the primitive root, and by [ÂÂ'], [ilil"], etc. the number of con

 gruences that belong to the same system of six, first member of which is the difference

 between an nth-power and an (n + l)th-power, an nth-power and an (n + 2)th-power,
 etc. Then, by solving Y = yn + 8 and Y' = yn + 5', we obtain [ÂM.S] = [8!1~s

 Since each system containing the difference of the nth and (n + <5)th powers gives the

 same equation, it follows that (ÂÂS) — (Â"~sÂn~s), where (ÂÂS), etc., denotes the
 number of numbers in Â which, increased by 1, belong to Âs, etc.

 Since only one among Â, M', Â", 8!",... contains 2, these conditions imply that

 only one of the numbers (AS"5) is odd.37

 37 This is the justification for the claim, made above: "among the numbers a, b, c, and d, only one is odd".

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 630

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 If we now take Y = yn + d and Y' — yn + 5', we obtain, by a similar reasoning

 that (&n+d~sSin+d) = (kn-dRn's) = (Ân+s~dÂn+s).

 We can also see that, considering the systems of the six congruences, that (&, .1?) is

 either of the form 6h + 3 or of the form 6h, depending on whether 2 is an »th-power
 residue or nonresidue.

 For n = 4, as in the case of the theorem II, she gets the conditions:

 (&&') = (À'"#"), (ÂÂ") = (£"£"), (ÂÂm) = (Â'Âr)

 (Â'Â") = (&"&'") =

 already obtained by confronting the different forms of the same products of periods,
 namely: b = b',c — f,d = d', and c = e' — e".

 The case n — 2 gives Germain a new proof that 2 is quadratic residue for the primes
 of the form 8« + 1 and 8n + 7, and nonresidue for primes of the form 8n + 3 and
 8h + 5.38

 Germain's new approach to the last part of the proof of theorem II seems to be

 a generalization of what Gauss developed, and which we have summarized in the
 previous section (see Gauss 1828, art. 17).

 9.7 Seventh letter

 Germain was certainly fascinated by the theory of cubic and biquadratic residues,
 but in this letter, she expresses the strong belief that a reciprocity law, analogous to
 Gauss's fundamental theorem, does not exist for cubic and biquadratic residues. She
 bases her conviction on the differences observed between these power residues and

 the quadratic residues. In fact, in the letter, she writes: "although is true that every
 number which is not a positive square is a quadratic nonresidue for the modulo 2k + 1,

 it is not true that every number which is not a positive quartic power is a biquadratic

 nonresidue for some prime numbers of the form 4k + 1. In fact, —4 is biquadratic

 residue for all these numbers, since — 1 and 4 are either both biquadratic residues or

 both simply quadratic residues. Actually I think that 4, taken with the minus sign, is

 the only square which is a biquadratic residue for all prime of the form 4k + 1."

 Germain's skepticism, though not entirely justified, is understandable. As we know,

 it took some years before Gauss was able to state the biquadratic reciprocity law, and

 it required the introduction of complex numbers into arithmetic (Gauss 1828a, 1917,
 pp. 65-69).

 Let us show how Germain proves the above:

 ( 1 ) —4 is biquadratic residue for the prime numbers of the form 4k + 1 ?9

 38 Gauss also gave a new proof of this result in Gauss (1808).

 Lemmermeyer in his article (Lemmermeyer 2000, p. 256) refers to this result as "Germain's result,"

 quoting Genocchi.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 631

 Let g be a primitive root for the prime p of the form 8k + 1 or 8£ + 5, then
 g(p-1)/2 _ g4k s _i(mod p) or g(P~V/2 — g4k+2 = —l(mod p). In the first
 case, 2 is a quadratic residue, so 2 = g2"(mod p) and so 4 = g4,1 (mod p). Taking
 into account that —1 is biquadratic residue, one obtains —4 = ^4K+",(mod p),
 and hence —4 is a biquadratic residue. In the second case, 2 is not a quadratic
 residue, so 2 = g2"~~] (mod p), and this implies that 4 = g4"~2(mod p). Taking
 into account that — 1 is biquadratic residue, one again has —4 = g4<A+") (mod p).
 In both cases, —4 is a biquadratic residue.

 In this letter, Germain proves other interesting theorems on biquadratic residues

 (2) Any odd square (2h + l)2 taken with the minus sign is not a biquadratic residue

 that we now present.

 for any prime of the form 8 k + 5.

 Let us follow her proof. The number N (2h + l)2 + 4 is the sum of two co
 prime squares and is of type 8k' + 5. If N is not a prime, then any prime factor must
 be the sum of two squares, so it is necessarily of the forms 8k + 1 and 8k + 5. Let
 p be a divisor of the form 8k + 5, then N = —4(mod p). On the other side (as
 above), 2 s g2"-1 (mod p) and g4k+2 - —l(mod p); hence, 4 = g4"~2(mod p),
 —N = 4 = (mod p). Since N = —4 = g4(*+n)(mod p), it follows that TV is a
 biquadratic residue of p, and —N, being congruent to an even power of g but not
 divisible by 4, is a quadratic residue but not a biquadratic residue.

 From these theorems, Germain deduces the following.
 Let n2 be the maximal square in k, so that k = n2q and q is free from squares.
 Because— 4n2q = l(mod p), —4n2q is an mth-power residue (mod p) for any m and
 so, —4 being a biquadratic residue mod p,n2q is also a biquadratic residue (mod p). It
 follows from p = 4n2q +1 that for any odd prime factor r of n, one has p = 1 (mod r)

 and so, by the quadratic reciprocity law, r is quadratic residue (mod p). If 2 is a divisor

 of n, then p is of type 8k + 1, and so 2 is a quadratic residue (mod p). Hence, n2 is a
 biquadratic residue (mod p). Hence, n2 and n2q being biquadratic residues; q is also
 biquadratic residue (mod p), and taking q = 2, she correctly deduces

 (A) 2 is a biquadratic residue for primes of type 8 n2 + 1.

 Then she claims

 (B) a number of the form 8n2 + 1 may be prime only if n2 satisfies the equation

 n2 = (y2 + y)/2 + 8x2.

 This holds true, as observed in Genocchi (1884a). In fact—in Theoria residuorum

 biquadraticorum, commentatio prima (1828)—Gauss proves that ±2 is a biquadratic
 residue for primes of type p = 8k + 1. Gauss gets this by reducing p to the forms
 g2 + 2h2 and e2 + f2 then, one has that ±2 are biquadratic residues of p when g is
 of the form 8m ± 1, and are nonresidues when g is of the form 8m ± 5. Also, one
 has that ±2 are biquadratic residues of p when, assuming / even and e odd, / is
 of the form 8m, and are nonresidues when / is of the form 8m + 4. As the prime

 p = 8«2 + 1 corresponds to g = 1 and h = 2n, for the first criterion, it actually has
 ±2 among its biquadratic residues. The same number p is the sum of two squares
 e2 + f2, where we can suppose e = 2y + 1, and necessarily / = 8m, ±2 being
 biquadratic residues. Then, if we put / = 8x, we have 8«2 + 1 = (2y + l)2 + 64x2,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 632

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 which is Germain's assertion. Gauss's result was not available to Germain in 1809,

 and so she likely deduced the above equation from theorem II: as proved by Germain,
 since 2 is a biquadratic residue of primes p = 8rr + 1, according to theorem II, p
 can be put in the form v2 + 64x2 where, necessarily, v = 2y + 1, and the required
 equation follows immediately.

 Let us remark that from Germain's result (A), we can deduce that 2 is a biquadratic

 residue for many primes not of the form 8n2 + 1, as the following example shows.
 We have 204 = —8(mod 113); so —8 is a biquadratic residue of 113, (recall Gauss's

 example) ; since 113 is of the form 4/c +1, by the first theorem of Germain, we have that

 —4 is a biquadratic residue of 113, and so, since —8 = —4 x 2, 2 is also a biquadratic
 residue of 113.

 Genocchi (1884b), reviewed Germain's results on biquadratic residues very posi

 tively, and of the theorem of point (2) above he wrote: "I do not know of printed books

 where this theorem is proved or even stated."

 In spite of Genocchi's review, she was never credited for them, and in Dickson

 (1971) there is no trace of Germain's theorems on biquadratic residues.

 9.8 Eighth, ninth, and tenth letter

 Germain wrote her eighth letter to Gauss to inform him that she had just received the
 awaited copy of his work on planetary motion from Germany. She admired the clear

 ness that pervaded all of the work and, at the same time, the simplicity with which the

 computations were performed. She said this was very useful for practical purposes.
 She ended the letter with a post scriptum in which she renewed the desire to know
 more about Gauss's results on biquadratic residues.

 The ninth letter to Gauss was written in May of 1819.

 She had received a visit from Schumacher, who had brought her a copy of Gauss's
 paper, Theorematisfundamentalis in doctrina résidais quadraticis, demonstrationes et
 applicationes novae (Gauss 1818). This encouraged Sophie Germain to try renewing,
 after an interlude of ten years, the epistolary exchange with Gauss.

 The lengthy letter is very interesting in many respects, but mainly because, as we

 will see, she describes the progress she had made on FLT since 1804.

 She confessed that during her studies and experiments on the theory of vibrating

 surfaces, she never stopped thinking about number theory, "a field" she writes "that

 I prefer, even without any hope of success, to a work which produces results almost

 automatically." As we know, she had started to think about FLT, which to her eyes

 appeared a challenge by an ancient geometer, during her first reading of the D. A., when

 immediately she perceived a connection between Fermat's equation and the theory of

 congruences and power residues.

 In the years of her correspondence with Gauss, she probably went much deeper

 into those studies, although, after her first letter, she had never returned to this subject

 with him. The contest and the prize established by the French Academy for the best
 work on FLT in late 1815—and renewed in 1818—probably was an opportunity to
 reconsider her old writing on Fermat's equation.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 633

 Germain continues her letter by explaining, with some details, her plan for address
 ing FLT, not just for a single or isolated exponent p, but—for the first time in his
 tory—an entire class of them.

 Before we go on to briefly describe her plan,40 it is useful to state Germain's theorem

 on the first case of FLT (see for instance Ribenboim 1999, p. 109 and following).41

 For an odd prime p, if there exists an auxiliary prime 6 such that there are no two

 nonzero consecutive pth-power residues (mod 9), nor is p itself a pth-power residue

 for the same modulus, then for any solution ofxp + yp = zp the product xyz must be
 divisible by p.

 If the equation xp + yp = zp is impossible, i.e., it does not have nontrivial integer
 solutions, then every prime number 6 of the form 2Np + 1, for which there are no

 two consecutive pth-power residues in the sequence of natural numbers, necessarily
 divides one of the numbers x, y or z- In fact, if r is a primitive root, this equation
 yields the congruence 1 = rsp — r'p(mod 9) with s, t integers, which implies the
 existence of two consecutive pth-power residues (mod 6). It follows that if there are
 infinitely many such primes 9, Fermat's equation would be impossible, because one
 of the numbers x, y, and z would be larger than any given number.

 Let us observe that, to prove the first case of FLT, the existence of only one such

 auxiliary prime is required.

 Germain's plan for proving FLT for the exponent p was then hinged on the devel
 opment of a method capable of producing infinitely many 9 = 2Np + 1 for which:
 (N-C) there are no two nonzero consecutive pth-power residues mod 9. But, as she

 writes to Gauss, she had never been able to arrive "at the infinity," although she had

 pushed back the limit quite far.

 She does not explain in detail the method she had implemented "being too long," as

 she writes, "to be described in the letter," and affirms only that she was helped by the

 use of a system of six congruences "having the property that from each of them can

 the other five be rediscovered" and that, when 2 is not a pth-power residue (mod 9),
 the number of congruences in that system cannot be reduced to less than six. Let us
 recall that a similar system has been discussed in the previous section.

 In the letter, Germain also tells Gauss that she had found an explanation,"la
 métaphysique," of her method in the paper that Poinsot had communicated to the
 French Academy in 1818 (Poinsot 1820), and that—she assumed—Gauss had on
 hand.42 She thinks that this work would give her another reason to continue her efforts

 to confirm the condition (N-C) by providing a new way of working with the pth-pow
 ers (mod 9), which she considered as solutions of the binomial equation x2N — l.43

 40 Since this letter has been extensively studied and commented upon in Del Centina (2008) and Lauben
 bacher and Pengelley (2010), in the specific context of her work on FLT, we will not go into details here;

 for the details, we refer the readers to these papers.

 41 The first case of FLT is when the non-zero integers x, y, and z are such that xyz is not a multiple of p\
 the second case is when xyz is a multiple of p.

 42 Let us recall that this letter was entrusted to Schumacher, together with a copy of Poinsot's memoir.

 4^ Two months later, Germain also wrote to Poinsot: "L'emploi des racines imaginaires...c'est un phanal
 placé sur la grand route: il éclaire les sentiers détournés" [the use of the imaginary roots...is a light placed
 on the road: it illuminates the misguided paths] (see Del Centina 2005).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 634

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 In fact, Poinsot's memoir takes the point of view that the (mod 9) solutions of this
 equation can be obtained by first considering the equation in the complex field, and
 then considering these roots as (mod 6) integers by replacing V—I with an integer
 whose square is = — l(mod 0).

 At the end of the letter, Germain asks Gauss if her ideas might have some impor

 tance. She is especially interested to know what his thinking was on her deductions

 about the positions in which the residues appear in the sequence of natural numbers.
 Once again, she was not confident enough in her own judgement to decide if her

 approach was worthy of being pushed forward, but Gauss never answered this letter,

 and Germain never knew his longed-for and esteemed opinion.

 In 1819, writing to Gauss, Sophie Germain was enthusiastic about her method and

 confident of the possibility that her plan could yield to a proof of FLT. But her plan

 could never be successful.44 Nevertheless, in her attempt to prove FLT, she produced
 many interesting results that have never been credited to her (see Del Centina 2008,
 also Laubenbacher and Pengelley 2010).

 The tenth letter she addressed to Gauss was written on the occasion of the visit

 she received from Gauss's pupil Bader, who brought to her a copy of Theoria re
 siduorum biquadraticorum commentatio prima. This contained, as we know, Gauss's

 long-awaited results on biquadratic residues. She did not comment on Gauss's work,

 but she very much regretted having been so long deprived of his correspondence, to
 which she never ceased to attach the highest value.

 Bader had also brought with him a copy of Gauss's work on the curvature of
 surfaces, Disquisitiones generates circa superficies curvas (Gauss 1828b), in which
 Gauss computes the curvature of a given surface by means of a map to a sphere of
 unit radius. As is known, Sophie Germain had introduced the concepts of principal
 curvatures at a point p of a surface S, which correspond to the maximal and minimal

 curvature of the curves on 5 through p, and that of mean curvature (k\ +k 2)/2 instead

 44 A first published indication that her method cannot lead to a proof of FLT is contained in Mémoire sur
 la théorie des nombres (Libri 1829, p. 139). In a final note on p. 140, Libri writes that all the results of
 his work were presented to the French Academy in 1823 and 1825. In January of 1824, Libri presented
 the French Academy with a memoir on the theory of numbers, divided in three articles, one of which was

 on the theory congruences. From the report of the referees, Cauchy and Ampère, we know that this latter

 essentially contained new results on congruences [a method here developed by Libri was used by Cauchy in
 his Sur la resolution des équations dont les modules se réduissant a des nombres premiers (Cauchy 1829)].

 The paper that Libri presented to the Academy was never published, but the results it contains appeared later

 in Libri ( 1829). On p. 139, Libri also writes "Nous faisons cette observation, parceque nous avons motif de

 croire que plusieurs analystes ont tenté ce genre de demonstration [of FLT], et puis parceque nous avons vu
 qu'un géomètre distingué, n'a pu démontrer dans aucun cas le théorème que nous avons décuverte" [We
 make this observation because we have reason to believe that several analysts have attempted this kind of

 proof [of FLT], and also because we have seen that a distinguish geometer could not prove any case of the
 theorem we have discovered] (see also Del Centina and Fiocca 2010, part 2). To whom is Libri referring?
 Laubenbacher and Pengelley have brought to light an undated letter of Germain to Legendre, from which
 one deduces that Legendre informed her that all numbers of the form 6a + 1 larger than 13 have a pair of
 consecutive nonzero cubic residues, thus implicitly affirming that her method cannot succeed for p = 3.

 Germain's letter contains the proof of this claim; a proof that she developed overnight and forwarded in the

 morning to Legendre. It is likely that she became aware of the failure of her plan in 1823, or shortly before
 then (Laubenbacher and Pengelley 2010, pp. 25-27).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 635

 of the total curvature or Gaussian curvature k\ki ■ In the letter she explained her point

 of view on this argument to Gauss.45

 Bader only showed Germain this paper. She remained astonished, and at the same
 time, she was happy at seeing that so esteemed a geometer had the same idea as she
 had. But she only had the possibility to look briefly at that paper, and not to study

 it, and so in her letter to Gauss, she essentially mentioned her approach to curvature

 in relation to his, remarking what was most similar to her own work, namely the use

 of a referent sphere. She seemed unaware of the definition of "Gaussian curvature."

 Nevertheless, she perceived the important difference between their works. In the letter,

 she also announced a new paper by her on the subject.

 9.9 Conclusions

 The reading of the letters and mathematical notes which Sophie Germain wrote to
 Gauss show that she was quick to grasp—long before any others—the content of the
 D. A. She not only was able to learn the techniques and theorems of Gauss's work, but
 also—a testament to her merit—to reach on her own initiative new results that were,

 by no means trivial, and to develop ideas and conjectures that demonstrate a strong
 taste for generalization.

 Unfortunately, due to her gender, she was prevented from attaining an adequate

 university instruction. Still worse, she was denied even the possibility of working in

 the academic world, as would have been possible for a man of her ability. Thus, apart
 from the benevolence of Lagrange and Legendre—largely due to the respect due to a
 woman—she worked in almost total isolation, often without being guaranteed access

 to the scientific information and debates within the Academy.

 She saw in her correspondence with Gauss the possibility of escaping from the bell

 jar under which she felt herself eternally banished rather than protected. Gauss greatly
 appreciated her intelligence and admired the wisdom with which she knew how to
 confront and demonstrate theorems which he himself had deemed to be among the

 most difficult and enigmatic. However, she would have certainly needed more support

 and interaction with Gauss to develop all her potential for number theory.

 Nothing better than the words with which she closed her last letter to Gauss can

 express better the sentiment which forever hung over her: "I regret that I am deprived

 of the advantage that I would find in enjoying your learned conversation, as Mr. Bader

 does. What he told me does not astonish me, but it is an object of my envy. Apart from

 what 1 could learn from you, I regret again that I can't submit for your judgement so
 many ideas which I have not published, and which would be too long to explain in
 letter form."

 We believe that the analysis found within the correspondences with Gauss rein
 forces the conviction—already extolled, on the basis of the study of other unedited

 writings by her, in Del Centina (2008) and Laubenbacher and Pengelley (2010)—that

 Sophie Germain should be placed right among the professional number theorists, as

 For a detailed discussion of Germain's point of view see Dahan-Dalmédico (1987).

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 636

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Gauss himself seems to have affirmed when he said that she would deserve an honorary

 degree if she were still alive.46

 Acknowledgments The first author would like to express his gratitude to the Niedersâchsische Staats
 und Universitâtsbibliothek in Gôttingen, for allowing him, several years ago, to have copies of Germain's
 letters and mathematical notes. Both the authors express their warmest thanks to Mrs. Barbel Mund, the
 person in charge of the Library, and to Mr. Ulrich Hunger, the person in charge of the Historical Archive

 of the University of Gottingen, for their kindness and the cooperation offered during the preparation of this
 research article. Finally our warmest thanks go to David Pengelley for having read the paper and corrected
 some typos and misprints.

 Appendix: Transcription of the correspondence

 In the transcription of Germain's letters, we kept close to the original texts with few
 exceptions. We have employed the modern use of the accented letters and the mor
 phology of some words, as pouvait instead of pouvoit, temps instead of tems, faisant

 instead offesant. Moreover, we have written in italics those words and phrases which

 in the text appeared underlined. For three of the four responses of Gauss, we have
 reproduced the text given by Stupuy (1879, pp. 302-307,318-320). For Gauss's reply
 of the April 30,1807, we have used the facsimile published by Boncompagni ( 1879).47

 Paris, ce 21 novembre 1804 Monsieur

 Vos Disquisitiones Arithmeticae font depuis longtems l'objet de mon admiration
 et de mes études. Le dernier chapitre de ce livre renferme, entr'autres choses remar
 quables, le beau théorème contenu dans l'équation

 je crois qu'il peut être généralisé ainsi,

 4(x" - 1) , ,
 — = Y2 ±nZ2;

 x — 1

 4(x"' - 1 ) , 7
 — = Y2±nZ2

 x — 1

 n étant toujours un nombre premier et s un nombre quelconque. Je joins à ma let

 tre deux démonstrations de cette généralisation. Après avoir trouvé la première j'ai
 cherché comment la méthode que vous avez employé art. 357, pouvait être appliqué

 46 When the matter of honorary degrees came up in 1837 at the centenary celebration of the University of

 Gottingen, it seems that Gauss regretted exceedingly that Sophie Germain was no longer alive, and declared
 "She proved to the world that even a woman can accomplish something worthwhile in the most rigorous

 and abstract of the sciences and for that reason would have well deserved an honorary degree" (Dunnington
 1955, p. 68). Among the documents for the centenary celebration preserved at the Historical Archives of
 the University of Gottingen, no record of Gauss's words has been found.

 47 The present transcription is a revised version of the first one provided by Tiberio Antolini in his thesis:
 Le lettere di Sophie Germain a Carl Friedrich Gauss (1804-1828), Tesi di Laurea in Matematica, relatori
 Prof. A. Fiocca and Prof. A. Del Centina, Università di Ferrara, a.a. 2009-2010.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 637

 au cas que j'avais à considérer; j'ai fait ce travail avec d'autant plus de plaisir, qu'il
 m'a fourni l'occasion de me familiariser avec cette méthode, qui, je n'en doute pas,
 sera dans vos mains l'instrument de nouvelles découvertes.

 J'ai ajouté à cet art. quelques autres considérations. La dernière est relative à la
 célèbre équation de Fermât x" + y" = z", dont l'impossibilité en nombres entiers n'a
 encore été démontrée que pour n = 3 et n = 4: je crois être parvenu à prouver cette

 impossibilité pour n — p — 1, p étant un nombre premier de la forme Sk + 7. Je prens

 la liberté de sousmettre ces essais à votre jugement persuadé que vous ne dedaignerez
 pas d'éclairer de vos avis un amateur enthousiaste de la science que vous cultivez avec
 de si brillants succès.

 Rien n'égale l'impatience avec laquelle j'attens la suite du livre que j'ai entre les
 mains, je me suis fait informer que vous y travailliez en ce moment et je ne négli
 gerai rien pour me la procurer aussi tôt qu' elle paraîtra. Malheuresement l'étendue
 de mon esprit ne répond pas à la vivacité de mes goûts, et je sens q'il y a une sorte
 de témérité à importuner un homme de génie lorsqu'on a d'autre titre à son attention

 qu'une admiration nécessairement partagée par tous ses lecteurs.

 En relisant la mémoire de M. de La Grange (Berlin 1775)48 j'ai vu avec étonnement

 qu'il n'a pas su réduire la quantité

 s10 - 11 (s8 - 4s6r2 + ls4r4 - 5s2/-6 + r8)r2

 (pag. 352) à la forme t2 — 11m2, car

 s10 — 1 l(j8 — 4 s6r2 + ls4r4 — 5 s2r6 + r8)r2

 = s10 - 2 ■ 11 • A4 + 11 (5 + 6)r V - 1108 - 6s6r2 + 7s4r4 + 6s2r6 + rs)r2
 = .y10 - 2- llA4+ ll2rV - 1108 -6jV +9s4r4 - 2s4r4 + 6s2r6 + r\2

 = (s5 — 1 lsr4)2 — 1 l(s4 — 3 s2r2 — r4)2,

 cette remarque49 est une nouvelle preuve de l'avantage de votre méthode qui s'ap
 pliquant à toutes les valeurs de n, donne pour chaque cas des valeurs de y et Z
 indépendantes du talonnement.

 Si, connaissant les valeurs de Y et Z dans l'équation

 on voulait avoir celles de Y' et Z' dans l'équation

 4(xn — 1) 7 9
 ——-—- = Y2±nZ2,

 x — 1

 4(xn* - 1)
 — = Y ± nZ \

 x — 1

 Recherches d'Arithmétique, seconde partie, Nouveaux Mémoire de l'Academie Royale des Sciences et

 Belles-Lettres de Berlin, année 1804-1828 (Lagrange 1867-1892, 3, pp. 759-795: 772).

 49 S. Germain forgot to multiply by r2, so the last term should be equal to —11 (s4r — 3— r5)2.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 On peut toujours satisfaire à l'équation 4(aa._]"1) = Y2 ± nZ2, n étant un nombre
 premier et s un nombre quelconque. Car la proposition étant démontrée pour le cas ou

 n n /?2

 5 = 1 il en résulte qu'elle a lieu aussi pour s = 2. En effet soit 4((*„ 11 =

 Y'2 ± nZ'2, il est clair que Y' et Z' sont composées des xn comme F et Z le sont de
 x dans l'équation ± nZ2, on a donc ■ ^r1 =
 (Y'2 ± nZ'2) • (Y2 ± nZ2) = (YY' ± nZZ'2) ± n(Y'Z YZ'2).

 638

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 il est clair qu'il suffirait de changer les signes de tous les termes de Y et Z qui cont
 iennent des puissances de x dont l'exposant est impair.

 Je n'ai pas voulu fatiguer votre attention en multipliant les remarques dont votre
 livre a été pour moi l'occasion: si je puis espérer que vous acceuilliez favorablement
 celles que j'ai l'honneur de vous communiquer et que vous ne les trouviez pas entière
 ment indignes de répondre veuilliez l'adresser A Monsieur Sylvestre de Sacy membre
 de l'Institut national. Rue Santé Famille À Paris, qui me la remettra.50

 Croyez, Monsieur au prix que j'attacherais à un mot d'avis de votre part et recevez

 l'assurance du profond respect de

 votre très humble serviteur

 et très assidu lecteur

 Le Blanc

 Addendum

 À cause de Y'2 ± nZ'2 et Y2 ± nZ2 multiples de 4, il faut que Y' et Z' soient pairs

 ou impairs en même temps et que Y et Z satisfassent aux mêmes conditions, d'où
 nous concluons YY' ± nZZ' — 2f : x, Y'Z =|= YZ' = 2ifr : x et par conséquent

 4(*"_7n = (/ : x)2 ±n(f : x)2.

 On trouve de même

 4((xn2)" - 1)

 , = Y ± nZ"2;

 x" - 1

 16(x"3 - 1) _ 4[(x"2)" - 1] 4(xn2 - 1)

 x - l x"2 - 1 X - \

 = (Y"2 ± nZ"2) ■ ((/ : x)2 ± n{xjf : x)2)

 = (Y"f : x ± nZ"if : x)2 ± n{Y"f : x =f Z"/ : x)2

 d'où nous concluons

 Y"f : x±nZ"f :x = 2f :x,
 Y"ir : x Z"f : x = 2f' : x,

 50 Antoine-Isaac Silvestre de Sacy (1758-1838), professor of Arabic at the École des Langues orientales,
 and, from 1806, also professor of Persian at the Collège de France.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 639

 4U"3 - 1) ,, ,9
 — = (/ : X) ±n(f : x)

 x - 1

 et ainsi de suite.

 Exemples

 x — 1

 x — 1

 x — 1

 4(X ~ = (2x4 +x3 +x + 2)2 + 3(x3 - x)2,

 — = (2x13 + x12 + x10 + 2x9 + x4 + 2x3 — x + l)2

 — = (2x12 + x" + 2x10 + x7 + 3x6 + x5 + 2x2 + x + 2)2

 +3(x12 — x'° — x4 — x — l)2,

 —5(x" +x7+x6+x5 +x)2.

 Nous observons qu'il y a toujours au moins 25_1 valeurs différentes de Y et Z

 dans l'équation 4(* Jj"1^ = Y2 ± nZ2 ; car, l'ambiguité des signes dans les quan
 tités Y Y' ± nZZ', Y'Z ± YZ' fournit deux valeurs différentes pour les quantités
 / : x, x/f : x qui répondent à s = 2: ces deux valeurs pouvant être mises dans les
 quantités Y" f : x ± nZ"ijr : x,K"^ : x =F Z"f : x donnent, à cause de la nouvelle
 ambiguitée des signes, 4 valeurs pour f" : x, V" : x qui répondent a 5 = 3; de sorte
 qu'en continuant le même raisonnement, on trouve que s augmentant d'une unité, le

 nombre des valeurs de y et Z qui satisfont pour la précédente valeur doit être multiplié
 par 2. D' où il rsulte 2i_1 pour l'expression générale de ce nombre.

 -<—*■

 En suivant la démonstration du théorème exprimé par l'équation Azz' = 4=^r =

 Y2±nZ2 (art. 357) on voit qu ' elle est fondée sur la forme de 2 = R+S(m, 1 )+T(m,g)
 et que cette forme elle même résulte de ce que les coefficients a = q — (m, 1), b =

 aqïq — 1 ; etc L|e l'équation du m-ième degré z = xm — ax"'~] +bxm~~2 —
 etc. = 0, ne sont composés que des quantités 1, (m, 1), (m, g) prises un nombre de
 fois détérminé par la valeur de m.

 Pour étendre ce théorème au cas où l'exposant de x est une puissance quelcon

 que d'un nombre premier c'est-à-dire, pour démontrer l'équation 4zz' = 4A"_~jl =

 Y2 ± nZ2, il suffit donc d'établir que les coefficients de l'équation du

 to)-i îeme

 - (mns~] + mns~2 + h mn + w)-ième [m = (n — l)/2] degré

 7 +mns_2H h m +mns -t fm—1 _|_ gx'nnS> +mns~2-\ \-m—2

 — ■ ■ • ± VX^ 1,1 :p A!XmnS~Xj[ ± B'x'nnS~X^ hmn-2 _p
 , y!xmns~x-\ hm(« —1) _ \-m(n—\)—\ _j_ g/^m'"1 A hm(n— 1)—2 _

 "£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 640

 A. Del Centina. A. Fiocca

 _l_yn^mn*~^-\ bmn2 ^«+1 H \-mn2— 1 __j_ 4 \-mn^—2

 ±Vn+1 xmn$~x+ hm(n2— 1) -p j^n+2xmns~[ f/n(n2—1)-1

 .^gn+2xmns~{ fm(n2-l)-2 q; . . .

 (± ou +) V"I_' +"'t-2+ -+n-1 xm(=p ou _)AnI"'+nI"2+" +njcm-1(± ou +)

 Bn>-\+n'-2+...+n^m_2(± Qu }

 (+ ou ±)V"s"'+»'!"2+-+« =0

 ne contiennent que les quantités 1, (m, 1), (m, g) prises un nombre de fois déterminé

 par la valeur de n et par celle de 5.

 (N.otc Les signes + et — devant être alternatifs dans cette équation on voit que les
 signes supérieurs se rapportant au cas ou m est pair et les inférieurs à celui où m est

 impair; on voit en outre que suivant que l'indice de V est pair ou impair les termes de

 la ligne à laquelle il appartient, ont ou n'ont pas, de doubles signes).

 Ainsi il s'agit de choisir m + mn + mn + ■ • • + + mns~] racines parmi

 les ns — 1 racines de l'équation X"XS\ = 0, de manière que A, À', B, B',.
 satisfassent aux conditions indiquées.

 Pour cela il faut que la somme de ces racines, celle de leurs quarrés, et en
 général celle de leurs puissances quelconques, ne soient fonctions que des quantités
 (m, 1), (m, g) et de l'unité.

 A l'imitation de ce qui a été pratiqué pour l'équation = 0 prenons pour racines

 cos — + i sin —.

 n n

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 de l'équations XXZ\ — 0, toutes les puissances de R moindres que ns, c'est-a dire,
 R, R2,..., R", R"+t,..., R"'~' en observant qu'au lieu de r = cos — + i sin —
 on a ici R = cos ^4- + i sin

 -1 n n

 nr n5

 Parmi ces racines nous prenons pour l'équation z = 0, d'abord les m puissances de

 R exprimées par les résidus quadratiques (mod n) multipliés par ns_1, par exemple si

 on a g4 = a (mod n) [alors] Ran sera une de ces racines; leur somme sera (m, 1); car

 (m, 1) est la somme de toutes les puissances de r = cos ^ + i sin exprimées par

 les résidus quadratiques (mod n) et il est clair que Rn* ' = (cos + i sin ^f)"1 ' =

 Nous prenons ensuite les mn puissances de R exprimées par les résidus quadra

 tiques (mod n) augmentés du nombre n, multiplié par 0, 1,2— 1 et multi

 pliés par ns~2, par exemple si on a g4 = a(mod n) [alors] R(-a+hn)"s " sera une de
 ces racines, n étant un quelconque des nombres 0, 1, 2,— 1. Si on fait r' =

 cos ^7 + i sin ^ et que l'on prenne (m, £) pour la somme des puissances de r'
 exprimées par les résidus quadratiques (mod n) on aura pour la somme des mn racines,

 (m, ^)(1 + r'n + rl2n + r'3" -\ h r/(n_1)n) et réservant r, pour exprimer les racines

 de l'équation = 0, cette quantité deviendra (m, ^)(1 +r+r2+r3-\
 qui est visiblement égale à zéro, puisqu'elle est multipliée par la somme des racines
 de l'équation x" — 1 = 0.

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 641

 La somme de ces racines peut encore être considérée comme celle des puissances de
 r' exprimées par les résidus quadratiques (mod n2), car ces résidus ne peuvent différer
 de ceux (mod n) que de la quantité n prise un nombre de fois moindre que n, et sous ce
 point de vue, elle peut être mise sous la forme [1] + [g2] + [g4] + • ■ • + [g"<-'!_1')~2] =
 (mn, 1).

 Nous prenons de même les mn2 puissances de R exprimées par les résidus quadra
 tiques (mod n2) augmentés du nombre n2, multiplié par 0,1,..., n — 1 et multipliées

 par ns~3, par exemple, si on a y4 = a + hn(mod n2) [alors] R(a+hn+h " ' sera une

 de ces racines. Si on fait r" — cos ^ + i sin et que l'on prenne (mn, pour la
 somme z'-ième puissances de r" exprimées par les résidus quadratiques (mod «2), on

 aura pour la somme des mn2 racines (mn, |)(1 + r"'1' + r"2"2 + • • ■ + r"(-n~^n2 =
 (mn, ±)(l + r + ■ ■ ■ + r"'1) = 0.

 La somme des ces racines peut encore être considérée comme celle des puissances

 de r" exprimées par les résidus quadratiques (mod n3 ), car ces résidus ne peuvent diffe

 rir de ceux (mod n2) que de la quantité n2 prise un nombre de fois moindre que n, et sous

 ce point de vue elle peut être mise sous la forme [ 1 ] + [g2] + [g4] H h [g'! 1 ,_2] =
 (mn2, 1).

 On trouvera de même que la somme des mn3 racines doit être exprimée par (mn3, 1)
 et qu'ayant aussi 1 + r + r2 + • • • + rn~] pour facteur elle est égale a zéro; il en est
 de même des mn4 racines et de mn5, mn6,, mns~] racines.

 Aussi la somme des m + mn + mn2 + • • • + mns~x racines de l'équation z = 0

 sera (m, 1) + (mn, 1) + (mn2, 1) + ■ • • + (mns~], 1), et elle se réduira, a cause de
 (mn, 1) = 0, (mn2, 1) = 0, ..., (mns~], 1) = 0, à (m, 1).

 Il est visible par la nature des périodes (mn, 1 ),(mn2, 1),..., (mns~], 1) qu'elles
 seraient encore équal a zéro, si on élevait tous leur térmes à une puissansce quelconque

 q (q étant premier à n) car elle resteront toujours multipliées par la quantité \+r-\-r2 +
 ■ ■ ■ + r"~\ d'où il résulte que (mn, g), (mn2, g), ..., (mns~', g) seront également
 nulles, c'est-a dire que la somme des racines de l'équation z' = 0, se réduit à (m, g). Il
 en résulte encore que la somme des puissances ^lèmes des racines c'est-a dire (m, q) +
 (mn, q) H 1- (mns~], q) se réduit h(m,q); car (mn, q), (mn2, q),..., (mns~x, q)
 sont = 0.

 Si on élevait tous les termes des périodes (mn, 1), (mn, g) à la puissance n on aurait
 (mn, n) — n(m, 1), (mn, ng) = n(m, g), puis à la puissance n2 on aurait (mn, rr) —
 n(m,n) = n, (mn,n2g) = n(m,gn) = n, les périodes (mn2,n),..., (mn2, ng)
 sont nulles mais (mn2, n2) = n2(m, 1), (mn2, g2n2) = n2(m, g) en poursuivant les
 mêmes calculs on voit que les coefficients des équations z — 0, z' = 0 satisfont aux
 conditions exigées.

 Exemples

 Soit n = 3, s = 2,

 z = x3+1 - y*3 + y'x2 - v"x + V" = o.

 On trouve en employant pour calculer les coefficients V, V',... la méthode

 de l'art. 349:

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 642

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 V = (1,1), V = 0, V" = (1, 1), V"' = (1,2),

 z = x4-(\, l)x3-(l, l)[x] + (l,2),51

 R = x4, S = - x3-x, T= 1, Y = 2R - S-T = 2x4+x3+x - 1,
 Z = r- S = x3+x+l

 [Soit] « = 3,5 = 3,

 Z = ;t9+3+1 - Va:9+3 + V'x9+2 - V"x9+1 + V'"x9 - V""x8 + Vux7 - F"1'/

 +Vl"V - Vviiix4 + Vixx* - Vxx2 + v-"x - Vxii = 0.

 [On trouve] V = (1, 1); V' = 0, V" = (1, 1), V"' = (1,2), V"" = 0, Vu = 0, Vvi =
 0, Vvii=0, Vviii=(l, 1), V" = (l,2), Vx=0, Vx'=(l,2), ^"' = 1:

 z = jc13 - (1, \)xn - (1, l)x10 + (l,2)x9 - (1, l)x4 + (1, 2)x3 + (l, 2)x -1=0,
 tf=x13-l, S — —x12 — x10 — x4, T=x9 + x3+x,
 K = 2x13+x12 +x10-x9 +x4 - x3 -x - 2, Z=x12 +x10 + x9 +x4 + x3 +x.

 [Soit] « = 5,5 = 2;

 z = *2-5+2 _ Ajc2.5+I + y*2-5 _ ^2-5-1 + ^2(5-1) _ A^2(5-l)-l + y»x2(5-2)

 —a/"x2(5-2)"1 + y'"x2(5-2) - a""x2(5-2)-s + v""x2 - avx + v" = o.

 [On trouve] A = (2, 1), A' = 0, A" = (2, 1), A'" = (2, 1), A"" = 0,

 A" = (2, 1), y = 1, V' = 0, V" = 2 + (2, 2), V'" = 0, V"" = 1, Vv = 1

 z = x12 —(2, l)x"+xI0-(2, l)x7 + [(2,2)+2]x6 —(2, l)x5+x2-(2, l)x + l = 0.

 R = x12 +x10 + 2x6 +x2 + 1, S = — x11 — x7 — x5 — x, T — x6,

 Y = 2x12+x" +2x10 + [x7]+3x6+x5+2x2+x+2, Z=xn +x7+x6+x5+x.52

 En examinant la manière dont se forment les coefficients de l'équation z = 0,
 nous avons remarqué que les m + mn + mn2 H h mns~2 premiers coefficients de
 l'équation du (m+mn+mn +■ ■ •+m«s_')ieme degré sont égaux à ceux de l'équation
 du («I + mn + mn2 H h mns~2)leme degré, que les m + mn + mn2 H h mns~2
 suivants sont égaux à zéro, et que le (2m + 2mn + 2mn2 + • • • + 2«?«s_2)ieme est

 (m, 1) de sorte que si on connait les coefficients de l'équation z = 0 du (" 2~! )'ème

 51 In Germain's manuscript appears (1, l)*2 instead of (1, 1 )jc .

 52 The term .v7 was erroneously skipped in writing to Gauss.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 643

 degré on a sans calcul les 2m + 2mn + 2mn2 + • • • + 2mns 2 + 1 = ns 1 premiers,

 de l'équation z = 0 du («!^i)ieme degré.

 On trouve aussi par cette méthode qu'il y a au moins 2S~] valeurs différentes de

 Y et Z: car, en reprenant la somme (m, 1) + (mn, 1) + (mn2, 1) + • • • + (mns"', 1)
 des racines de l'équation z = 0, on voit que l'ont peut changer (mn, 1) en (mn, g)
 sans que les précédentes conclusions soient [soyent] altérées, et comme il y a s — 1

 quantités (mn, l),(mn2, 1 ) + ■ ■ - + (mns~\ 1 ) et que les mêmes changements peuvent

 être faits 1 a 1, 2 a 2, etc. on a en ajoutant 1 pour le cas où il n'y a aucun changement

 1 + s — 1 + ^5~12î~2) + S~3> + etc- = 2i_ 1 pour le nombre des différentes
 formes de cette somme. Ces changements n'influissent à la vérité que sur les puissances
 H,rc2,etc.desracinesàcausede(m«, n) — n(m, 1 ),(mn2,n2) = n2 =n2(m, 1), etc.
 mais cela suffit à y donner des valeurs différentes pour R,T et S et par conséquent
 aussi pour Y et Z.

 Nous avons remarqué que les coëficients des termes de Y et Z art. 357 sont, pour

 n = 4k -f-1 les mêmes et de mêmes signes à partir de xm qu'a partir de 1 ; c'est-a-dire,

 que si on a N pour coefficient de x'"~h dans Y ou Z,N sera aussi coefficient de xh dans

 la même quantité. Pour n = 4k + 3 les mêmes coefficients sont de signes contraires;

 c'est-à-dire, que si on a N pour coefficient de xm~h dans Y ou Z, —N sera coefficient
 des xh dans la même quantité.53

 Pour démontrer cette règle nous observerons que les coefficients de Y et Z dépen
 dent de ceux des différents termes de z = 0 et z' = 0; or l'équation z = 0, peut être
 mise sous cette forme z = (x — [1])(jc — Lg2])(x — [g4]) • • • (x — [g"-3]) = 0, et a
 cause de [l][g2][g4] • • • [g"~?] = [1 + g2 + g4 H h g"'3] = [0] = 1. On peut
 donc multiplier le second nombre par ([l][g2][g4] • • ■ L?"~3])m-1 sans que le premier
 reçoive aucun changement.

 Effectuant donc cette multiplication de manière que chaque facteur se trouve mul

 tiplié par le produit de toutes les racines [1], [g2], etc. moins celle qui entre dans
 ce facteur, et réduisant l'équation devient z = (x[— 1] — 1 )(x[—g2] — 1)0[—g4] —
 1)... (x[-g»-3] _ 1)

 Lorsque n = 4k + 1, — 1 étant résidu quadratique, l'équation se transforme ainsi:
 z = (x[l] — l)(x[g2] — 1)U[£4] —!)••• (^[g"~3] — 1) et comme le nombre m = 2k
 des facteurs est pair on peut changer tous les signes ce qui donne z = (1 — x[l])(l —
 *[g2])(l-*[g4]).--(l-x[g"-3]).

 Cette forme comparée à la première montre que z est fonction homogène de x et

 de l.54

 Lorsque n = 4k + 3, — 1 est non résidu, ainsi la valeur de z doit être mise sous la
 forme z = (x[g] — l)(x[g3] — l)(x[g5] —!)••• (x[g"~2] — 1): qui étant comparée à

 This is not true for Z, as clearly appears by looking at the table in art. 357 of the D.A. For polynomial

 Z it seems to hold the property that xm~h and xh have always the same coefficient with the same sign.

 It is not clear to us how she may deduce that Y and Z are homogeneous functions of x and 1.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 644

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 celle de z!, savoir z! = (x — [#])(> — [#3])(a- — [g5]) ■ ■ ■ (x — [gn 2]) montre que zz"

 et par conséquent aussi F et Z sont fonctions homogènes de x et — 1,55

 La méthode de l'art. 345 donne après les réductions convenables. Pour n = 4k + 1

 q2 = m + (m, 2)+2{(m, 1 +g2) + (m, l+g4) + (w, 1+g6) (-(m, 1 +g'n~~2)}-Eton
 tirede la considération desdeux équations (p—q)1 = n, (p+q)2 = 1 cette autre valeur
 de q2, q2 = k + 1 + p: donc si k + 1 est pair, il faut que (m, 2) = p — {m, g), c'est-à
 dire que 2 soit non résidu: au contraire si k + 1 est impair il faut que (m, 2) = (m, 1)
 car 1 — (m, 1) = —2(m, 1) — (m, g) = —2(m, 1) — p, c'est-à-dire que 2 soit résidu.
 Ainsi 2 est résidu des nombres premiers de la forme 8k' + 1 et non résidu de ceux de
 la forme 8k' + 5.

 La comparaison des deux valeurs de q1 relatives a n = 4k + 3 donne de même
 -k + p = (m, 2) + 2{(m, 1 + g2) + (m, 1 + g4) + ■ ■ ■ + (m, 1 + g"1-1)} et par
 conséquent p = (m, 2) lorsque k est pair et q = (m, 2) lorsque k est impair c'est-à
 dire 2 non résidu pour les nombres de la forme 8 k' + 3 et résidu pour ceux de la forme
 8k' + 7.

 Les précédents théorèmes sont démontrés dans plusieurs endroits du livre, par des

 méthodes qui diffèrent toutes de celle-ci.

 •<—y

 On peut démontrer l'impossibilité de satisfaire en nombres entiers à l'équa-tion

 XP~1 + yP-] = zp~\ p étant un nombre premier de la forme 8n + 7.56

 En effet, si on veut satisfaire à l'équation xp~] + yp~] = zp~], p étant un nombre
 premier quelconque, il faut prendre pour a- ou y un multiple de p. Car faisant d'abord
 x, y et z premiers à p et mettant la proposée sous la forme xp~' — 1 + yp~] — 1 =
 zp~' — 2, il en résultera, à cause de zp~] — 1 = 0(mod p), = 0, et faisant ensuite jc
 et y premiers à p et z multiples de ce nombre on sera mené à conclure —2 = 0.

 Soit donc jr impair et multiple de p, en mettant 2p' au lieu de p — 1 et phf à la
 place de x la proposée devient (phf)2p + y2p = z2p , ou z2p — y2p = (phf)2p
 d'où on tire yp ± zp = (pf)2p , }'p T Zp = h2p , 2yp' — (pf)~p' + h2p', h étant
 premier à p, h2p — 1 = 0(mod p) donc aussi 2yp — 1 s 0(mod p), et à cause de
 y2p' — i = o, = 2, y2p =4=1 d'où résulte p = 3.

 Supposons donc y = 2pfh, la proposée deviendra (2pfh)2p = x2p — z2p ■

 Examinons d'abord le cas ou xp' ± zp = 2p2p' f2p', xp zp' = 22p'~xh2p' d'où

 on tire 2xp' = 2plp'f2p' + 22p'-^hlp[ et (2h)2p' s l(mod p), 4xp' = 22p'h2p',
 4xp = 1 - x2p , 4 = xp , 16 = x2p = 1 c'est-à-dire 15 = 0 et par conséquent
 p = 3 ou p = 5.

 Supposons enfin xp ± zp =2f2p', xp ^ z,p = 22p~]p2p'hlp', d'où on tire
 2xp' = 2 f2p' + 22p'-] p2p'h ou xp = f2p' + 22p'~2 p2p'h2p' soit jc = f2 + mp2p'
 le dévelopement donne f2p' + p'f2p ~~2(mp2p') + • • • = f2p' + 22p'~2p2p'h.2p',
 p'f2p'~2(mp2p ) -| = 22p ~2p2p h2p ou p'f2p'~2(m) H = 22P'~2h2p' com
 me tous les termes suivants du dévelopement de f2 +mp2p sont multiples de m, il faut
 que h2p soit divisible par ce nombre et comme tous les facteurs de h2p sont élevés

 55 It is not clear to us how she may deduce that F is a homogeneous functions of x and — 1.

 56 This part of the addendum has been already published and commented on in Del Centina (2008).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 645

 à la puissance 2p' on doit faire m = k2p . L'équation devient p'f2p ~~2k2p + ■ • • =
 22P'~2h2p' ou 4p' f2p'~2k2p = 22p'h2p' = l(mod p) et à cause de k2p' = 1,
 4p'f2p~2 = 1 = f2p d'où on tire 4p' = f2 mais à cause de 2p' + 1 = p,
 4p' = —2 d'où résulte —2 = f2.

 Ainsi l'équation xp~] + yp~] = zp~x est impossible lorsque —2 est non résidu
 quadratique: c'est ce qui a lieu pour les nombres premiers des formes 8/z + 5, 8n + 7.
 Mais nous avons vu plus haut que le cas p = 5 échape à notre méthode et d'aillieurs
 l'impossibilité de l'équation x4 + y4 = z4 a été démontrée ainsi elle est uniquement
 appliquable aux nombres 8k + 7.

 Gauss's reply.

 Brunswick 16 juin 1805
 Monsieur, il me faut vous demander mille fois pardon d'avoir laissé six mois
 sans réponse l'obligeante lettre dont vous m'avez honoré. Certainement je me
 serais empressé de vous témoigner tout de suite combien m'est cher l'intérét que
 vous prenez aux recherches auxquelles j'ai dévoué la plus belle partie de ma jeunesse,
 qui ont été la source de mes jouissances les plus délicieuses et qui me seront toujours
 plus chères qu'aucune autre science. Mais je me flattais de temps en temps de pouvoir

 gagner assez de loisir pour mettre en ordre et vous communiquer pour écrit l'une ou
 l'autre de mes autres recherches arithmétiques, pour vous rendre en quelque sorte
 le plaisir que vous m'avez fait par vos communications. Mon espérance a été vaine.
 Ce sont surtout mes occupations astronomiques qui à présent absorbent presque tout
 mon temps. Je me réserve pourtant de m'entretenir avec vous des mystères de mon
 arithmétique chérie, aussitôt que je serai assez heureux d'y pouvoir retourner.

 J'ai lu avec plaisir les choses que vous m'avez bien voulez communiquer ; je me
 félicite que l'arithmétique acquiert en vous un ami assez habile. Surtout votre nouvelle

 démonstration pour les nombres premiers, dont 2 est résidu ou non résidu, m'à extrême

 ment plu ; elle est très fine, quoiqu'elle semble être isolée et ne pouvoir s'appliquer à
 d'autre nombres. J'ai très souvent considéré avec admiration l'enchaînement singulier

 des vérités arithmétiques. Par exemple, le théorème que je nommé fondamental (art.
 131) et les théorèmes particuliers concernant les résidus 1 ± 2, s'entrelacent à une
 foule d'autres vérités où l'on les aurait jamais cherché! Outre les deux démonstrations
 que j'ai données dans mon ouvrage, je suis en possession de deux ou trois autre, qui
 du moins ne le cèdent pas à celle-là en question d'élégance.

 Je remarque avec beaucoup de regret que les autres occupations où je suis engagé ne

 me permettent point du tout de me livrer à présent à mon amour pour l'arithmétique.
 Ce ne sera peut-être qu'après plusieurs années que je pourrai penser à la publication
 de la suite de mes recherches qui rempliront aisément un ou deux volumes semblables

 ou premier. Mais je croirais n'avoir pas assez vécu, si je mourrais sans avoir achevé
 toutes les recherches intéressantes auxquelles je me suis une fois livré. Au reste, chez

 nous en Allemagne, la publication d'un tel ouvrage a ses difficultés : quoiqu'on en

 dise, le goût pour les mathématiques pures, si l'on cherche de la profondeur, n'est pas

 trop général. Nos libraires ne se mêlent guère de ces sortes de livres, et je ne suis pas

 assez riche pour faire à mes frais l'impression et me soumettre à la malhonnêteté des

 libraires étrangers, comme il m'est arrivé à l'occasion du premier volume. Un M.***,

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 par exemple libraire à Paris, a reçu de moi, il y a presque trois ans, des exemplaires
 pour la valeur de six cent quatre-vingt francs ; mais jamais je n'ai reçu un sou de lui,

 et il ne s'est même pas donné la peine de répondre à mes lettres.

 Peut-être vous pourriez me donner des renseignements par quel moyen, on pourrait

 engager cet homme à faire son devoir.

 Agréez, Monsieur, l'expression de ma haute considération.

 Ch.Fr. Gauss

 646

 II

 Paris 21 julliet 1805
 Monsieur

 je dois sans doute à votre indulgence la réponse flatteuse que vous avez bien voulu
 faire à ma lettre; vous me donnez l'espérance de vous entretenir avec moi de l'objet
 de vos études; rien au monde ne pourrait me faire plus de plaisir qu'une semblable
 correspondance, mais je sens que j'en suis bien peu digne. Quelle différence en effet

 entre les faibles essais dont je suis capable et les méthodes ingénieuses dont l'invention
 vous est familère! Cependant puisque vous avez acceuilli avec bonté les notes que je
 vous ai communiquées je pren[d]s la liberté de vous en soumettre de nouvelles.

 Vous promettez (n. 267) de prouver dans une autre occasion que les formes ternaires

 dont la déterminante est zéro sont équivelantes aux formes binaires; j'ai cherché à faire
 la réduction indiquée et j'ai trouvé que dans ce cas la forme adjointe se réduit à un
 quarré multiplié par m, ce qui est absolument la même forme que celle que prennent
 les formes binaires lorsqu'on suppose leurs déterminantes égales à zéro.

 Je vois avec regret qu'il nous faudra attendre, peut-être plusieurs années la pub
 lication de vos nouvelles recherches arithmétiques; il est impossible de connaître le
 premier volume sans désirer avec impatience d'en voir la suite; ce sera pour moi une
 consolation si vous daignez m'en communiquer quelques parties.

 Le libraire Duprat sur lequel vous me demandez des renseignements a cédé son fond

 et est en banqueroute declarée depuis 18 mois environ; je sais que plusieurs savans

 ont été dupés avec lui ce qui est de très mauvais augure pour votre créance: cependant
 Mr. de Sacy qui a l'habitude de traiter avec les libraires m'a promis de faire des
 démarches, pour découvrir si il n'y aurait pas quelques moyens de vous faire payer,
 il vous fera savoir ce qu'il apprendra d'utile. Si jamais pareil cas se répresent[er]ait
 il ne faudrait pas attendre un temps aussi long pour réclamer le payement car ici les

 créances ne gagnent pas à viellir.

 J'aurais désiré avoir de meilleures nouvelles à vous donner, je crains que le résultat

 fâcheux de l'envoi que vous avez fait ne nous privent de connaître les nouveaux ouv
 rages que vous pourrez publier, je vous demande comme une grâce de vouloir bien
 m'indiquer les titres de ceux que vous écrirez en latin, car n'entendant pas l'Allemand

 je suis forcé de borner là ma curiosité.

 Je pense que vos travaux astronomiques ne consistent pas seulement dans des cal
 culs d'éléments de planètes, vous devez presqu'involontairement trouver de nouvelles
 méthodes; l'esprit d'invention semble vous être si naturel, que quelques soient les

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 647

 objets dont vous vous occupez, je croirais avoir beaucoup gagné si je parvenais à
 connaître vos recherches.

 Puisque vous vous occupez d'astronomie vous connaissez sans doute la Mécanique
 Céleste par Mr. de Laplace, le 4-ième volume a paru il y a environ deux mois il contient:

 la théorie des satéllites de Jupiter de Saturne et d'Uranus; la théorie des perturbations

 des comètes, des recherches sur les réfractions astronomiques, l'intégration de l'équa
 tion différentielle du mouvement de la lumière suivant différentes hypothèses; un

 chapitre sur l'estinction de la lumière des astres dans l'atmosphère; sur la mesure des

 hauteurs par le baromètre; sur la chute des corps qui tombent d'une grande hauteur; et
 un, sur les alterations que les mouvements des planètes et des comètes peuvent éprou

 ver par la résistance des milieux qu'elles traversent et par la transmission successive

 de la pesanteur.

 Mr. Le Gendre a publié aussi il y a quelques temps, un mémoire sur la détermi
 nation des orbites des comètes. Après avoir fait l'analyse du problème il simplifit les

 formules générales par la suppositon de l'égalité des temps entre les observations: il
 s'attache à déterminer les limites de r = rayon de la comète et de p = distance de la

 comète à la terre. Pour le cas où le rayon R de la terre est < r les limites reviennent à
 celles trouvées par Mr. de la Grange (Mémoires de Berlin 1778 n.° 22).57 Mais pour
 celui où r < R il tira de la considération de l'équation r2 — R2 — 2Rp cos(c) + p2
 (dans laquelle c est l'angle entre le soleil et la comète) p > 0 et p < 2/?cos(c)
 puis en mettant cette équation sous la forme r2 = i?2sin2(c) + (p — Rcos(c))2
 il a r > R sin(c), ce qui est beaucoup plus simple que les résultats de Mr. de la
 Grange.

 L'auteur reprend ensuite le cas général, où les temps entre les observations peuvent

 être inégaux et il parvient à des équations de mêmes formes que celles qu'il a obtenues
 dans la supposition de leur égalité. Enfin il fait l'application de sa méthode à la 2-ème
 comète de 1781 et à celle de 1769.

 Si il vous est agréable de connaître les ouvrages qui paraîtront ici je me ferais un
 plaisir de vous tenir sur les avis; ce serait pour moi un motif d'espérer jouir de votre
 correspondance, car je sens que j'ai bien peu de moyens de la mériter par moi-même
 et que je ne puis en être digne que par l'admiration et le profond respect avec lequel
 j'ai l'honneur d'être

 Monsieur

 Votre très humble serviteur Le Blanc.

 Addendum

 La lettre qui était incluse dans celle que vous avez adressée a été mise à la poste.

 Réduction des formes ternaires aux formes binaires lorsque la déterminante est zéro
 (nr. 267).

 S. Germain is referring to Sur le problème de la détermination des orbites des comètes d'après trois
 observations I, II, Nouv. Mémoires Ac. R. des Sci. et Belles-lettres de Berlin 1778 (Lagrange 1867-1892,
 4, pp. 437-496).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 648

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Lorsque l'on suppose V = 0 les équations

 BB - A'A" = aV, AB - B'B" = bV,

 B'B'- AA" = a'V, A'B' - BB" = b'V,

 B"B" - AA' = a"V, A"B" - BB' = b"V,

 se réduisent a 55 = A'A", B'B' = AA", B"B" = AA'; AB = B'B",A'B' = BB",
 A"B" = BB'; on peut y satisfaire en faisant B = map, B' = m8j3, B" = maS; la
 substitution de ces valeurs dans les trois dernières équations donne Amafi = m2aji&2,
 A'mSp = m28/3a2, A"maS = m2aô/32; d'où on tire A = mS2, A' = ma2, A" =
 m/32;
 mettant ces valeurs dans

 ( A A' A" \
 \B B' B" )

 (a a! a"\
 b b' b")

 forme adjointe de

 on trouvera

 Axjc + A'x'x' + A"x"x" + IBx'x" + IB'xx" + 2 B"x'x

 = m({&2xx + ocx' x' + fi2x"x" + 2 afix'x" + 2 Sfixx" + 2 aSx'x}

 — m(8x + ax' +/ix")2.

 Reprenant ensuite l'équation

 V = abb + a'b'b' + a"b"b" — aa'a" — Ibb'b" = 0,

 on a à cause de

 abb — a" a'a = Aa = amS2, abb — bb'b" = Bb = bmaP

 a'b'b' — a"a a = A'a' = a ma2, a'b'b' — bb'b" = B'b' — b'mSfi

 a"b"b" - al'a! a = A" a" = a" m fi2, a"b"b" - bb'b" = B"b" = b"maS;

 Aa + B'b' + B"b" — T> = amS2 + b'm8fi + b"ma8 = 0,

 A'a' + Bb + B"b" = V = a'ma2 + bma/3 + b"maS = 0,

 A" a" + Bb + B'b' = V = a"mp2 + bmafi + b'mSfi = 0,

 ou

 <£) Springer

 aS + b' fi + b"a = 0
 a'a +bfi + b"8 = 0
 a"fi + ba+b'8 = 0

 (1)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 On trouve en faisant usage des mêmes équations

 Aa + 2 B'b' + A" a" — A'a' = T> = amS2 + 2 b'mSft + a" m/32 — a'ma' = 0,

 Aa + 2B"b" + A'a' — A"a" = Z> = amS2 + 2b"mSa + a'ma2 — a"mfi2 = 0,

 A'a' + 2 Bb + A" a" — Aa — T> = a'ma2 + 2bma/3 + a"m/32 — amS2 = 0,

 ou

 aS2 + 2b'S/3 + a" fi2 = a'a2
 aS2 + 2b" Sa + a'a2 = a" fi2
 a'a2 + 2 bafi + a" fi2 = aS2

 649

 (2)

 Multipliant la forme ternaire par <52 et mettant ensuite pour a82 sa valeur donnée par
 la troisième des équations (2) et pour 2b'82, 2b"S2 leurs valeurs —2(a"+ bai5),
 —2(a'aS + b/38), tirées des équations (1) multipliées par 28 on trouve

 a82xx + a'82x'x' + a"82x"x" + 2b82x'x" + 2 b'82xx" + 2 b"82xx'

 — (a'a2 + 2 bafi + a" fi2)xx + a'82x'x' + a"S2x"x" + 2 bS2x'x"

 —2(a" fi8 + ba8)xx" — 2(a'aS + bfi8)xx'

 — a'[a2xx + 82x'x' — 2a8xx'~\ + a"[fi2xx + 82x"x" — 2fi8xx"]

 +2 b[afixx + 82x'x" — a8xx" — /38xx']

 = a'(ax — 8x'y + a" (fix — 8x")2 + 2 b[(ax — 8x')fix + (Sx' — ax)8x'']

 = a'(ax — 8x')2 + a" (fix — Sx")2 + 2b(ax — 8x')(f)x — Sx").

 On trouverait de même

 Les équations (1) montrent que a, b', b"\ b", a', b\ b', b, a"\ sont les valeurs de

 x, x', x" qui dans le cas où V = 0 rendent

 l'addition des trois équations (2) donnent a82 +a'a2 +a"fi2+2ba/3+2b'Sfl+2b"8a =
 0, c'est-à-dire que dans le même cas 8, a, fi sont les valeurs de x, x', x" qui rendent

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 650

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Nr. 201: 2 est une valeur de m dans le cas seulement où V est de l'une ou l'autre

 des formes 4k, 4k + 1.

 Lorsque V est de l'une ou l'autre des formes 8k, 8k + 1, les valeurs de t et u dans

 l'équation t2 — Vu2 — 4,ne sont d'autre chose que les valeurs correspondantes dex et

 y dans l'équation x2 — Vy2 — 1, multipliées par 2. Car alors t et u sont nécessairement

 des nombres pairs.

 Examinons d'abord l'équation t2 — 8ku2 — 4. t ne peut être qu'un nombre impair
 ement-pair, par conséquent t2 est de la forme 32n + 4, et pour que %ku2 + 4 soit de
 la même forme il faut que u soit un nombre pair.

 A l'égard de l'équation t2 — (8k + \)u2 = 4, il est visible que t et u sont pairs et
 impairs en même temps; mais si on supposait t et u impair le premier nombre serait
 divisible par 8; donc t et u sont nécessairement des nombres pairs.

 Lorsque V = 8fc + 4, t est un nombre pair, mais u peut être impair: dans ce cas

 T e U étant les moindres valeurs t et u dans l'équation t2 — Vu2 = 4 et p et q les

 moindres valeurs de x et >• dans l'équation x2 — Vy2 = 1 on a p = q — ^r

 Car 2p, 2q doivent être les moindres valeurs paires de t, u ; et les formules générales

 du nr. 200 donnent en faisant m = 2, e = 2

 +(!~y^) =\v2+ij2'd)=\c-t2-^=t2-2

 ? (t+¥-/g)2+(î - wrf+a+yvf - (i -

 On tire encore de là:

 -d+H2.

 (T + UVV)(P + gy/V)" -UT - UVV)(P - qjvr

 (r + UVV){p + qy/v)" - {T - uVv)(p - qVvr

 iVv

 = JL (L + ^Vv)2n+l - — ~Vv)2"+l,
 VP\2 + 2V ) Jd\2 2 )

 formules relatives au cas où t est pair et u impair.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 651

 Lorsque T> = 8k + 5, t et u peuvent avoir des valeurs impaires et on a dans ce cas

 T(T2- 3) U(T2-\)
 P = â 1 = ^ '

 car

 2p = (| + f VS)' + (| - |V5)3 = I(r' +37-U^X»

 ]

 = -[73 + 3T(T2 - 4)] = T(T2 - 3),

 2q = -L(L + ^Vv) -4=(~- -Vp) = 1(3T2U + U3V)

 VV y 2 2 ) VPV2 2 / 4

 = l[3r2f/ + [/(r2-4)] = t/(72- 1)

 on a donc

 P  + qVr> —

 (ï + ÏV5)3 + (f - ÇVP)3 + tf + ¥V5)3 - <ï - f V5)'

 P

 ^V5=(f-fV5)!

 et à cause de

 l;

 (T ± u*/V)(p + qVvr + (t^ uVv)(p - qVvy

 2

 ^ /^V (T u

 3/îrh 1 / ^ yt \ 3aï±1

 = \2 + 2^) +\2'2

 (t ± UVv) (p + qs/vy - (T qp y>/P)(p -

 2jv
 \ 3ft±l 1 / y n \ 3ft±l

 + --LC---VPV
 /p \2 2 ) Jv\ 2 2 /
 s/V\2

 formules relative au cas où t et u sont impairs.

 On peut démontrer par la méthode employée nr. 115 que pour tout nombre premier
 de la forme 2sm + 1 il y a parmi les nombres 1, 2, 3, 4,... 2sm, m résidus 2s-iéme

 puissance et (2s — 1 )m non résidu même puissance.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 652

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Pour cela il suffit d'observer que —1 est toujours résidu 2S -ième puissance

 AÇ |

 (mod 2sm + 1) car à cause de /z = — 1 les 2Mème puissance des 2S nom
 bres +z, -2, +zf, —zf, +zf , —zf ,..., +zf , —zf , sont congruantes
 entr'elles (mod 2sm + 1).

 o o —1 i ^ s—I i

 Ainsi, par exemple, pour les nombres premiers de la forme 22' +1 = 2,+1 -22'-'-1 +

 1 il y a 2'+1 résidus (22'_i_l)-ième puissance et à cause 22<+' = l(mod 2l + 1), 2

 est résidu (22'~'~')-ième puissance: les 2'+1 résidus, même puissance, sont donc
 1,2, 22,23,..., 22'-1 : -1,-2,-22,-23, ...,-22'-1.

 Il résulte de là que l'on sait a priori que dans la résolution de l'équation du sec
 ond degré dont la somme des racines est exprimée par la période (2l+], 1) le signe
 + du radical appartient à la période (2!, 1) et par conséquent le signe — à la période

 (21' ,g22'

 En effet on a en dernière analyse

 (2', 1)

 P 2 2P 24P 2 6P 2 2>~2p

 cos h cos h cos h cos !-••• + cos

 n n n n

 n

 = 2

 2 2P

 24P 2 bP 2 8P
 cos hcos hcos l-cos | + cos

 2 2'-2i

 4 n 4 n 4 n 4 n 4 n

 22' "

 (2\g

 ) = 2

 2 P

 2 5P
 COS l-COS 1-COS h cos h - • • + cos •

 2 3P

 2 P

 *)2'-l

 n n n n

 que leurs correspondans dans la valeur de (2', g- ), dont le dernier est même
 négatif.

 o2'— i — 1

 On trouve de même

 (2'-\ 1) > (2'—1, g2' '1) > (2'-Kg2*'1) > (2'_I, g3'22'-'-')

 (2'-2, 1) > (2'~2, g22' ' ]) > (2'~2, g2* ') > (2'~2, g3'2* )

 > (2'-2/'"'+') > (2!~2, g5-2~~'~' ) > (22-'V'22'~i+1) > (2!"2, g7'22'

 Il en est de même pour les périodes de 2'~3, 2'-4, etc. termes de sorte que la valeur

 de ces périodes est d'autant plus grande qu'elles contiennet des puissances de g moins
 elevées.

 <—>

 et encore

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 En comparant ces valeurs termes à termes on voit évidemment que (2', 1) est

 > (2', g ) car tous les termes de la valeurs de (2', 1 ) sont positifs et plus grands

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 653

 Pour les nombres premiers 22 + 1, 3 est toujours racine primitive car pour les
 nombres de cette forme tous les non résidus jouissent de cette propriété (nr. 117) 3 est

 non résidus pour les nombres premiers de la forme 12n + 5 et on trouve 22' + 1 =
 4(22' -2 - 1) + 5 = 4 • 2(22'-3 - 22'"4 + 22'"5 ... + 2 - 1) + 5.

 Les deux premières parties du théorème n° [art.] 98 sont également vraies pour
 les résidus et non résidus 2s-ième puissances (mod 2s m + 1) et elles peuvent êtres
 démontrées par des raisonnements analogues à ceux employés n° cité.

 A l'égard de la troisième la méthode du même n° prouverait seulement que le pro

 duit de deux résidus 2i_1-ième puissance, si ils sont un et l'autre non résidus 2s-ième
 puissance (mod 2sm + 1) est résidu 2s-ième puissance, même modul.

 En effet il y a 2m résidus puissance 2J_1 -ième et parmi ces nombres la moitié sont
 résidus et la moitié non résidus 2s-ième puissance. Si donc A et B sont non résidus
 et que l'on multiplie les m nombres résidus par A, on aura m nombres non résidus
 et incongruants entre eux; maintenant le produit A B n'est congruant à aucun de ces
 nombres et il est nécessairement résidu puissance 2s~'-ième, puisque A et B sont
 l'un et l'autre résidus pour cette puissance: si donc il était en même temps non résidu
 puissance 2s-ième, il y aurait parmi les 2m, nombres m + 1 non résidus puissance
 2Mème et par conséquent seulement m — 1 résidus.

 Mais en général le produit hh' sera résidu 2s-ième puissance si h étant =

 R2 -^(mod 2sm + 1) et h' — R2S>'+r' onar + r' = 0(mod 2S).

 Gauss's reply.

 Brunswick, 20 août 1805

 Je profite de la complaisance de M. Grégoire pour vous offrir,58 avec beaucoup de

 remerciements pour toutes les communications de votre dernière lettre, un exemplaire

 d'un petit mémoire que j'ai publié en 1799 et qui probablement vous sera encore
 inconnu.59 Vous souhaitez de savoir tout ce que j'ai écrit en latin. Cette pièce est
 la seule outre mes recherches arithmétiques, et en même temps celle qui a paru la
 première, quoique alors l'impression de mes Disquisitiones eût été portée au-delà de
 la moitié.

 Je suis à présent occupé à perfectionner quelques méthodes nouvelles par rapport
 aux calculs des perturbations planétaires : celles-ci et les méthodes dont je me suis
 servi pour calculer les éléments elliptiques des différentes nouvelles planètes, fourn

 iront probablement les matériaux pour mon premier ouvrage.

 Je vous salue cordialement

 Ch. Fr. Gauss

 58 Likely Henry Grégoire, also known as "Abbé Grégoire" [1750-1831 ], member of the Comité d'instrution

 publique and founder of the Conservatoire des Arts et métiers and of the Bureau des longitudes.

 59 Gauss is referring to Demonstratio nova theorematis: omnem functionem algebraicam rationalem inte
 gram unius variabilis infactores reales primi vel secundi gradus resolvi posse [Gauss 1799],

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 654

 III

 Paris 16 novembre 1805

 Monsieur

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Je dois vous paraître bien coupable d'avoir tardé si longtemps à vous remercier de
 la lettre dont vous m'avez honoré et de l'envoi du mémoire que vous avez bien voulu

 y joindre; cependant il n'y a pas de ma faute, le paquet ne m'a été remis qu'il y a huit
 jours, Mr. De Sacy était en voyage depuis plus de 2 mois et on avait négligé chez lui

 de me le faire tenir: il est vrai que n'espérant pas de vous une réponse si prompte je
 n'avais mis aucun soin à m'informer des lettres qui m'étaient adressées.

 Votre mémoire m'a fait d'autant plus de plaisir que je le connaissais déjà par une

 lecture rapide que m'avait procurée l'un des savans auquels vous l'avez envoyée, et
 qu'ayant toujours eu le désir de l'étudier, comme on doit le faire de tous les ouvrages

 qui sortent de votre plume je l'avais inutilement fait demander à Leipsik, d'où j'avais
 reçu pour réponse que l'édition était épuisée.

 L'indulgence que vous continuez de me témoigner m'encourage à vous communi

 quer encore quelques unes de mes nouvelles recherches.

 Après avoir réduit suivant que vous l'indiquez, les formes ternaires dont la déter
 minante est zéro aux formes binaires, j'ai cherché si cette propriété s'étendait aux
 formes quaternaires, c'est-à-dire, si ces formes étaient susceptibles de se réduire aux
 formes ternaires lorsque leur déterminante est zéro et j'ai examiné ensuite quelques

 autres propriétés des mêmes formes et de leurs adjointes.

 Je crois que si V est la déterminante d'une forme composée de n variables V"~]
 sera la déterminante de l'adjointe de cette forme: c'est ainsi que vous avez trouvé
 V2 pour la déterminante de l'adjointe ternaire et que, d'après mes calculs V>3 est la
 déterminante de l'adjointe quaternaire. Cette analogie n'est sans doute pas suffisante
 pour établir la généralité de la proposition mais on voit au moins que la déterminante

 de la forme étant composée de produits de l'ordre n et les coefficients de son adjoint
 l'étant de produits de l'ordre n — 1, D"~i est du même ordre que la déterminante de
 l'adjointe; c'est-à-dire de l'ordre n(n — 1).

 Ces deux propositions, savoir: que la déterminante d'une forme est composée de
 produits des coefficients de ses termes de l'ordre qui exprime le nombre des variables

 dont elle est composée et que les coefficients de l'adjointe le sont de produits de l'ordre

 immédiatement inférieur; m'ont paru résulter de la nature générale des formes et de

 leurs adjointes.

 Je regarde comme une faveur, la permission que vous voulez bien m'accorder de
 vous communiquer mes faibles efforts persuadé que vous aurez assez de bonté pour
 m'avertir des erreurs qui pourraient m'echapper, dans un genre de recherches où vous

 êtes le seul juge éclairé que l'on puisse consulter.

 Les nouveaux renseignements que j'ai pris au sujet du libraire Duprat ne sont rien
 moins que satisfaisants: son successeur a dit avoir depuis longtemps terminé ses pay
 ements dont le produit a été aussitôt divisé : il est retiré dans une petite ville où il
 vit du revenu d'un médiocre emploi et l'avis général de toutes les personnes que j'ai
 consultées a été qu'il est à peu près imposible de tirer de l'argent de lui.

 Je n'avais pas jugé nécessaire de vous communiquer ces résultats parce que je ne
 vois pas que vous puissiez en tirer parti: et j'attendais pour vous écrire de nouveau

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 655

 que vous m'eussiez accordé la permission: le retard qu'a éprouvé la remise de votre
 lettre m'a privé de vous faire plustôt tous mes remerciements et les protestations de

 mon profond respect

 Le Blanc

 Addendum

 La forme quaternaire :

 axx + a'x'x' + a" x"x" + a'"x'"x'" + 2 bx'"x" + 2 b'x"'x'

 +2b"x"'x + 2 b"'x"x' + 2 b""x"x + 2 bvx'x
 _ (a a' a" a'" \
 ~\bb' b" b'" b"" bv J

 est réducible aux formes ternaires lorsque la déterminante

 V = a'bb + aa"b'b' + a'a"b"b" + aa'"b'"b'" + a'a"'b""b"" + a"a"'bvbv

 -(bbbvbv + b'b'b""b"" + b"b"b'"b'")+2bb"b'"bv+2bb'b""bv+2b'b"b'"b""

 -2(abb'b'" + a'bb"b"" + a"b'b"bv + a"'b"'b""bv) - aa'a'a'"

 est égale à zéro.

 Pour le prouver mettons T> dans la forme:

 a(a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b"'b"' - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")

 -(bb - a"a"')bvbv - (b'b' - a'a'")b""b"" - (b'"b'" - a'a")b"b"

 -2(a'"b'" - bb')bvb"" - 2(a"b' - bb"')bvb" - 2(a'b - b'b"')b""b",

 nous trouverons

 V(bb - a"a'")

 = (abb - aa"a'")(a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")

 -{(bb - a"a'")bv + (a'"b'" - bb')b"" + (a"b' - bb'")b"}2
 -{(b'b' - a'a'")(bb - a'a'") - (a'"b'" - bb')2}b""b""

 -2{(bb - a"a'")(a'b - b'b'") - (,a"'b'" - bb')(a"b' - bb'")}b""b"

 ~{(b'"b'" - a'a")(bb - a"a'") - (,a"b' - bb")}b"b"

 = (abb - aa"a'")(a'bb+a"b'b' +a'"b'"b"'-2bb'b'"-a'a"a'")-{a"a'"bv-bbbv

 +bb'b"" + bb"b'" - a'"b"'b"" - a"b'b"}2 + (a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'"

 -2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")(a'"b""b"" - 2bb"b"" + a"b"b")

 = (a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")(abb + a"b"b" + a'"b""b""

 -2bb"b"" + -aa"a'") - (a"a'"bv - bbbv + bb'b"" + bb"b'" - a'"b'"b""

 -a" b'b")2.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 656

 V(a'"b'" - bb')

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 = (aa"b'" - abb')(a'bb + a"b'b' + a"'b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a" a")

 -{(bb - a"a"')bv + (a"'b"' - bb')b"" + (a"b' - bb"')b"}{(b'b' - aa'")b""
 +(a'"b'" - bb')bv + (a'b - b'b'")b"}

 -{(b"'b"' - a!a")(a"'b"' - bb') - (a"b' - bb'")(a'b - b'b'")}b"b"

 —{(a"'b"' - bb')2 - (bb - a"a'")(b'b' - a'a'")}b""bv

 — {(a"b' - bb'")(a'"b'" - bb') - (bb - a"a"')(a'b - b'b'")}b"bv

 -{(a'b - b'b'")(a'"b'" - bb') - (b'b' - a'a'")(a"b' - bb'")}b'"bv

 = (aa'"b'" - abb')(a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")

 -(a"a'"bv - bbbv + bb'b"" + bb"b'" - a"b'b' - a'"b"'b"")

 x(a'a'"b"" - b'b'b"" + bb'b1' + b'b"b'" - a'bb" - a'"b'"bv

 — (a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'")(b"b"b'" + a'"b""bv

 -bb"bv - b'b"b"")

 = (a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a!a"a!")(aa'"b'"

 -,b"b"b'" + bb"bv + b'b"b"" - abb' - a'"b""bv)

 -(a"a'"bv-bbbv+bb'b"" + bb"b'" - a"b'b" - a'"b'"b"")(a'a'"b"" - b'b'b""
 +bb'bv + b'b"b'" - a'bb" - a'"b'"bv),

 ou en faisant

 a'bb + a"b'b' + a'"b'"b'" - 2bb'b'" - a'a"a'" = A,

 abb + a"b"b" + a'"b""b"" - 2 bb"b"" - aa" a'" = A,

 ab'b' + a'b"b" + a'"bvbv - 2 b'b"bv - aa'a'" = A,

 ab'"b'" + a'b""b"" + a"bl'bv - 2b'"b""bv - aa'a" = A ,

 aa'b - bvbvb + b"b'"bv + b'b""bv - ab'b'" - a'b"b"" = B,

 aa"b' - b""b""b' + bb""bv + b"b'"b"" - abb'" - a"b"bv = B ,

 a'a"b" - b'"b'"b" + bb'"bv + b'b'"b"" - a'bb"" - a"b'bv = B",

 aa'"b'" - b"b"b'" + bb"bv + b'b"b"" - abb' - a'"b""bv = B ,

 a'a'"b"" - b'b'b"" + bb'b1' + b'b"b'" - a'bb" - a'"b'"bv = b" ,

 a"a'"bv - bbb1' + bb"b'" + bb'b"" - a"b'b" - a'"b'"b"" = Bv;

 V(bb - a" a'") = AA - BVBV, V(a'"b'" - bb') = AB - B" Bv ,

 et par des calculs semblables

 V(b'b' - a a'") = AA - B B", V(a"b' - bb'") = AB - B Bv,
 V(b'"b'" - a'a") = AA" - B'B , V(a'b - b'b'") = AB - B B";

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 657

 puis en mettant V sous la forme

 a'A - (bb - a"a"')bvbv - (b"b" - aa"')b"'b'" - (b""b"" - aa")b'b'

 -2(a'"b"" - bb")b'"bv - 2(a"b" - bb"")b'bv - 2(ab - b"b"")b'b'"

 [on a]

 [et] sous celle

 [on a]

 V(b"b" - ad") = A A" -

 V(b""b"" - aa") = A A'" - BB,

 V{a"'b'" - bb") = AB"" - B Bv,

 V(a"b" - bb"") = AB" - BBV,

 V(ab-b"b"") = AB-BB'";

 V(bvbv - aa') = A X" - BB,

 V(a"'bv - b'b") = A Bv - B'B ,

 D(a'b" - b'bv) = AB - B'B,

 V(ab' - b"bv) = AB - B'"B

 a"A - (b"b" - aa'")b'"b"' - (b'b' - a'a'")b""b"" - (bvbv - aa')bb

 -2{a!"bv - b'b")b'"b"" - 2(a'b" - b'bv)bb"" - 2(ab' - b"bv)bb"'

 et enfin sous cette-ci

 [on a]

 a'"A" - (b'"b'" - a'a")b"b" - (b""b"" - aa")b'b' - (,bvbv - aa')bb

 -2(a"bv - b'"b"")b'b" - 2(a'b"" - b'"bv)bb" - 2(ab"' - b""bv)bb'

 V(a"bv - b'"b"") = ABV - BB,

 D(a'b"" - b'"bv) = AB"" - BB",

 V(ab'" - b""bv) = AB" - BB.

 Ainsi, lorsque V = 0 il faut satisfair aux équations

 > a ) 'A 1 /// //// a i // i m un

 AA = BVBV, AB =B Bv, A Bv = B B ,

 n un nn / n ai .n _n _ nn

 AA =B B , AB =B Bv, A B = BB ,

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 658

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 AA = B B ,
 À A = B"b",
 A A" = BB,

 h m

 A A = BB,

 AB = B B ,

 A B =BB

 A'B"" = B"'BV,
 A B" =B'Bv,
 ab = b'b"\

 A" Bv = BB

 III tt/t H

 A B =BB

 tit m t

 A B =BB.

 pour cela nous pouvons supposer A = mS2, A! = ma2, A" — m/32, A"' = mv2\
 d'où il résulte, en se bornant aux valeur positives de B, B', etc., B = mfiv, B' = mav,
 B" = m8v, B'" = mafi, B"" — mSfi, Bv - mSa\ et comme la déterminante V peut
 encore être mise sous les quatre formes

 aA + bvBv + b""B"" + b"B", a'A! + bvB1' + b'"B"' + b'B',

 a" A" + b""B"" + b'"B"' + bB, a'" A!" + b"B" + b'B' + bB\

 nous avons pour le cas present quatre équations

 aS2 + bv8a + + b"8v = 0, a'or + bvSa + b'"afi + b'va = 0,
 a»p2 + b"»Sp + b'i'ap + bvp = o, a"'v2 + b"8v + b'av + bfiv = 0;

 ajoutant ensemble les trois premières de ces équations et mettent pour a"'v2 sa valeur
 tirée de la dernière nous aurons

 a82 + a'a2 + a" fi2 + 2b1'8a + 2b""8f) + 2b'" fia = a"'v2

 qui étant jointe aux autres équations trouvées par un calcul semblable donne

 a82 + a'a2 + a"/32 + 2bv8a + 2b""Sp + 2b'"fia = a'"v2 '
 a82 + a'a2 + a'"v2 + 2b1'Sa + 2b"5v + 2 b'va = a"p2
 aS2+a"p2+ a'"v2+ 2b""8/3+2b"8v+ 2bv/3 = a'a2 ()
 a'a2 + a"p2 + a"'v2 + 2b"'aP + 2 b'av + 2 bv/3 = a82

 et les quatre premières équations divisées respectivements pour S, a, fi, v se réduisent

 a8 + bva + b"" fi + b"v = 0
 a! a + bv8 + b'" P +b'v = 0
 a"P + b""8 + b"'a + bv = 0
 a'"v + b"8 +b'a + bp = 0

 enfin de ce deux système d'équations nous concluons

 „2 / a a
 M b y

 \_ (a' a" a'"\
 iv)~\b b' b'" )

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss 659

 2 (a a' a" a'" \ _ (a a" a'" \
 a b' b" b'" b"" bv)~\b b" b"" ) '
 r2 (a a' a" a'" \ _ /a a' a"' \
 P \b b' b" b'" b"" bv) ~ \b' b" bv )'

 v2

 /a a' a" a'" \ _ /a a' a"\
 \b h' b" b'" b"" bv)~\b'" b"" bv)'

 Exemple de calcul

 a82xx + a'S2x'x' + a"82x"x" + a'"82x'"x'" + 2 bS2x"'x" + 2b'82x'"x'

 +2 b"S2x"'x + 2b'"82x"x' + 2 b""S2x"x + 2 bvS2x'x

 = (a'a2 + a" f32 + a"'v2 + 2b'"a/3 + 2b'av + 2bvfi)xx + a'S2x'x'

 +a"S2x"x" +a'"82x'"x"'+2b8lx'"x"+2b'82x'"x'-2(a'"v+bp+b'a)8x'"x

 +2b'"S2x"x' — 2(a"j6 + b'"a + bv)8x"x — 2 (a a + b'" ft + b'v)8x'x

 = a'icrxx + S2x'x' — 2a8xx') + a"(/32xx + 82x"x" — 2f>8xx") + a'"(v2xx

 +S2x'"x'" - 2vSxx"') + 2b(v/3xx + 82x"'x" - P8x'"x - v8x"x)

 +2b'(avxx+82x"'x'—a8x"'x — v8x'x)+2b'"(afixx+S2x"x'—a8x"x — pSx'x)

 = a'(ax — Sx')2 + a" (fix — Sx")2 + a'"(vx — Sx'")2 + 2b(/3x — 8x")(vx

 -Sx'") + 2b'(ax - 8x')(vx - Sx'") + 2b'"(ax - 8x')(px - Sx").

 Lorsque D — 0, l'adjointe

 de la forme

 Car

 (A A' A" X" \
 \B B' B" B" B"" Bv)

 (a a' a" a'" \
 \b b' b" b'" b"" bv ) '

 se réduit à un quarré multiplié par m facteur commun des coefficients de ses terms.

 Axx + Âx'x' + A x"x" + A x"'x'" + 2Bx'"x" + 2B x'"x'+2B"x'"x

 +2B x"x' + 2B x"x + 2Bvx'x = m{S2xx + a2x'x' + fi2x"x" + v2x"'x'"

 +2f5vx'"x" + 2avx'"x' + 28vx'"x + 2 afix" x' + 28[fi]x"x + 2 Sax'x]

 = m (Sx + ax' + fix" + vx1")2, 60

 par conséquent a. bv, b'", b"\ bv, a', b'", b'\ b"", b'", a", b; et b", b', b, a'" sont les
 valeurs de x, x', x", x'" qui, dans ce cas, rendent l'adjointe égale à zéro.

 It should be 2Sf)x"x instead of 2&vx"x.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 660

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Si on ajoute ensemble les quatre équations (1) on trouve, après la divison par 2,

 aS2 + a! or + a" p2 + a"'v2 + 2 bvp + 2b'va + 2 b"vô

 +2 b'"j6a + 2b""/3S + 2bl'aS = 0

 c'est-à-dire que pour le même cas, S, a, fi, v sont les valeurs de x,x',x",x"' qui
 rendent la forme

 fa a' a" a'" \
 \b b' b" b'" b"" bv )

 égale à zéro.

 L'adjointe de la forme

 (A A A" A"' \
 \B B B" B'" B"" Bv )

 est celle-ci

 (aV2 a'V2 a"V2 a""D2 \
 \bV2 b'V2 b"V2 b"'V2 b""V2 bvV2) '

 en effet au moyen des équations, qu'il est aisé de verifier,

 Abv + Bb' + B" b"' + Bva' = 0,
 Ab"" + Bb + Bvb'" + B" a" = 0,

 Ab" + B""b + Bvb' + Ba'" = 0,
 Abv + Bb" + B'b"" + Bva = 0,

 ABB + ABB + ABB - 2 BB B - AAA = V2a

 abb + ABB + A B" B" - 2bb B" - AAA = V2a'

 ABB + ABB + A"BVBV - 2 B B Bv - AAA = V2a"

 m nt / un un n \i ~\i ni //// ■* i tu ^

 AB B +ab B +a BVBV -2 B B Bv - aa a = v2a"'

 AÀB - bVbVb + b'b"bv + BB""Bv - ABB - AB B" = v2b

 AA B - B'B" B + BB"BV + B"B"b" - ABB - A B bv = v2b'

 AAB - b'b'B + BB'"bv + BBB" - ÀBB" - A B Bv = V2b"

 AAB - BBB + BB"bv + B B B" - abb - À" B"" Bv = V2b"'

 A A B - BBB"" + BBBV + BBB - ABB - À" B Bv = V2b""

 on trouve:

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 661

 aa'Bv - BBBV + bb'b" + BB B" - ABB - A É" B" = V2bv

 Exemple de calcul

 ABB + ABB + ABB - 2BBB - AAA

 = A(BB - A"A") + B\a'B - BB'") + B (A B - BB)
 = VA(aa' - bvbv) + VB(b'a - b"bv) + VB"'(b'"a - bvb"")

 i . h ~\ y a j 11 m / nn n / n m m nn

 = D{a(A'a' + B b' + B b'" + Bvbv) - bv(Abv + B b" + B" b"" + Bva)}
 = V aA A Bv + BBBV + BB B + BB B -ABB-ABB
 = BV(AA" - BB) + B (BB - A B) + B""(BB - A"b")
 = VBv(bvbv - aa!) + VB (b"bv - b'a) + VB" (b""bv - b"'a)

 = V[ bv(Bvbv + Bb" + B'b"" + Aa) - a(Bv a' + B b' + B" b'" + Abv)]
 = V2bv

 V3 est la déterminante de l'adjointe ( , „ v ) car

 J \B B B B B Bv)

 . .r ,n / / .i.iiii" .m m m t m nn nn n m \ i •> i

 AABB + aabb+AABB+AABB +AA B B +A A BVBV

 •\ j •> ? i / nn nn n n m m n m -\ i

 La forme quaternaire I ^ y y, y„ y,„ ,v I est definie lorsque la forme ter

 (a a! a" a!" \

 / AV A'I» a" \

 naire I J dans laquelle

 bvbv - aa' = A", ba - b"b"" = B,

 b""b"" - aa" = A"", b'a - b"bv = B',
 »//»// „ in * n i///„ 1////1U Dn
 b b — aa = A , b a — b b = B ,

 est definie négative; elle est positive ou négative selon que a est positif ou négatif

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 -(bbbVbV + BBB b + b b b B ) + 2bb B B
 +2 bb'b""Bv + 2 bb'b'b'" - 2 (ABB B" + xbb"b" + A b B bv
 +â"b'"b""bv)-aâaa

 = a{ÀBB + A b'b + abb - 2BB b" - aaa}

 nn / /// nn / / //// / i / n nn t n m m •* •>

 +b"{aà'b" -b'"b'"b" + bb"bv + bb'b" - abb" - ab'bv}}
 +B {A A B -BBB + BB Bv + B B B - abb - A B Bv]
 +BV{A A Bv - BBBV + BB B + BB B -abb -A B B }

 ■\ ) .n .fn ? // in i nn _n i n . m m nn

 = V2{Aa + Bb" + B'b"" + Bvbv} = £>3

 662

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 C'est ce qui résulte de la transformation invariante

 la a' a" a'" \

 a \ b' b" b"' b"" bv )

 = aaxx + bvbv x'x' + b""b""x"x" + b"b"x"'x'" + 2 a(bvx' + b""x" + b" x'")x

 +2bvb""x"x'+2b"bvx"'x'+2b"b""x"x'"-(bvbv-aa')x'x'

 —(b""b""—aa")x"x" - (b"b" - aa"')x"'x"' + 2(ba - b"b"")x"x"'

 +2(b'a - b"bv)x'x"' + 2(b"'a - b""bv)x'x"

 = (ax + bvx' + b""x" + b"x'"f - [Avx'x' + A""x"x" + A"x"'x"'

 -2Bx"'x" - 2B'x"'x' - 2B"x"x'}.

 B B' B" ) so't

 (Av A"" A" \

 négative se réduisent a A", a A et V négatifs.

 Car d'après l'art. 271, les conditions sont B"B" — A"A"", AVD et Av négatifs,61

 d'où résulte S positif et on trouve

 B"B" - A""AV = (b'"a - b""bv)2 - (bvbv - aa')(b""b"" - aa")

 = aab'"b"' + aa'b""b"" + aa"bvbv - 2ab"'b""bv - aaa'a"

 BB" + B'A"" = (ba - b"b"")(b'"a - b""bv) + (b'a - b"bv)(b""b"" - aa")

 = aabb'"-ab"b'"b"" - abb""bv +ab""b""b'-aaa"b' +aa"b"bv

 B'B" + BAV = (b'a - b"bv)(b'"a - b""bv) + (ba - b"b"")(bvbv - aa')
 = aab'b'" - ab"b'"bv - ab'b""bv + abvbvb - aaa'b + aa'b"b""

 = aA

 = —aB

 = -aB

 D — AvBB + A""B'B' + A"B"B" + 2BB'B" - AvA""A"

 = A"(B"B" - AvA"") + B(BAV + B'B") + B'(A""B' + BB")

 = A" a A - BaB - B'aB

 = aA (b"b" — aa'") — aB(ba — b"b"") — aB (b'a — b"bv)

 = (à cause de A'"b"+Bb"' + B'bv + B"a = 0 et de A'"a'"+Bb+B'b'+B"b" = V)

 —a2 [A a"'+Bb+B b' + B b"] + ab"[A'"b" + Bb""+B'bv+B"a] = -a2V,

 aussi pour que X> soit positif il faut que V soit négatif.

 61 Here Germain wrote A instead on/t", probably forgetting the apex.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 663

 On trouve par un calcul semblable

 A"'{b B' B" B'" B"" Bv) = A A x"'x'" + BBx"x" + BBx'x'

 +BB xx + 2A"(Bx" + Bx' + B x)x'" + 2BBx"x' + 2BBx"x + 2BBx'x
 +(AA - b"b")xx + (A'A - BB)x'x' + (A A - BB)x"x"
 +2 (B'a" - BB)x"x + 2(B" A - BB)x"x + 2 (Bv À" - BB)x'x

 = (Ax'" + Bx" + Bx' + B" x)2

 +V[(b"'b'" - a'a")xx + (b""b"" - aa")x'x' + (bvbv - aa')x"x"

 +2(ab'" - b""b°)x"x + 2(a'b"" - bvb'")x"x + 2(a"bv - b'"b"")x'x}

 et on voit, en conservant les dénominations précédentes et en faisant de plus b'"b'" —
 a'a" — A'", b""a! — b'"bv = B'", bva" — b'"b"" = B"", que la forme

 (A A! A!' A!" \
 \B B' B" B'" B"" Bv)

 ne peut être définie au moins que cette

 (A'" A"" Av \
 ^ B" B'" B"" )

 B" B" — A""AV — a A" et AVD' négatifs. On trouve £>' positif car

 B" B'" B"" ) S0'1 sont' d'après l'art. 271,

 (A!" A!"' Av \

 ne le soit.

 B"'A"" - B"B""

 = 0b""a' - b'"bv)(b""b"" - cm") - {ab'" - b""bv)(a"bv - b'"b"")

 = a'b""b""b"" - b""aa'a" - b""b'"b""bv + aa"b'"bv-[aa"b'"bv-b""ab'"b'"

 -b""a"bvbv + b""b'"b""bv]

 = b""[ab'"b'" + a'b""b"" + a"bvbv - 2 b'"b""bv - a a'a"\ = b"" A

 B""Av - B"B'" = (bva" - b'"b"")(bvbv - aa') - (b'"a - b""bv)(b""a' - b'"bv)

 = bvÀ"

 £)' = A'"B"B" + A""B'"B'" + AVB""B"" - 2B"B'"B"" - A'"A""Av

 = A'"(B"B" - A""AV) + B'"(B'"A"" - B"B"") + B""(B""AV - B"B'")

 = A" {a A'" + b"" B'" + bvB""} = A"2

 par conséquent Av est négatif et comme ce cas est celui où la forme

 (A'" A"" Av \
 \B" B'" B"")

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 664

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 est définie négatif, il faut pour que

 (A x'" + Bx" + B x' + Bx)2 + V

 Aw Am, >

 B" B'" B""

 soit toujours positif, que V soit négatif: d'où on conclut que les conditions nécessaires
 pour que l'adjointe quaternaire

 soit définie sont Av, A et V négatifs; c'est-à-dire que les mêmes que l'on a déjà

 obtenues pour la forme a I y „ v I . Ainsi lorsque cette dernière

 (  A A A A

 B B B B" B" Bv.

 / ci ci' cl" cl'" \

 est définie, son adjointe l'est également mais à cause de A négatif, si la forme est
 définie négative, l'adjointe sera définie positive et viceversa.

 En supposant que la forme ternaire Ass + A'tt + A"uu + 2Btu + 2B'su +2B"st,

 ///

 dont la déterminante est D, soit représentée par la forme quaternaire

 (a a! a" a!" \

 a \ b b' b" b'" b"" bv ) ^°nt 'eS 'nc'®t^rm^n^es sont x = ps + mt + nu, x' =

 p's + m't + n'u, x" — p"s + m"t + n"u, x'" = p"'s + m"'t + n"'u\ le nombre D

 sera représenté par la forme ^ adjointe de

 /a a' a" a'" \

 a[b b' b" b'" b"" *»).«! faisant:

 je = p"(m'"n' - m'n"') - p'(m"'n" - m"n'") - p"'(m"ri - m'n")

 x' = p(m'"n" — m"n'") — p"(m"'n — mn") — p"'(m"n — mn")

 x" = p'(m"'n — mn'") — p(m'"n' — m'n"') — p'"(m'n — mn')

 x'" - p(m"n' — m'n") — p'(m"n — mn") — p"(m'n — mn')

 Cette proposition qui est entièrement analogue à celle de l'art. 280 se vérifie égale
 ment par le calcul. Par exemple dans le cas où a = a' = a" = a"' — 1, b —
 b' — b" = b'" = b"" — bv = 0 d'où résulte A — A = A = A" = —1,
 B = B' =B" = B= B"" = Bv = 0, on trouve

 D = A(BB - A'A") + B'(A'B' - BB") + B"(A"B" - BB')

 = (p2 + p'2 + p"2 + p'"2)[(mn + m'n' + m"n" + m'"n'")2

 — (m2 + m'2 + m"2 + m'"2)(n2 + n'2 + n"2 + n'"2)}

 +(pn + p'n' + p"n" + p'"n'"){(pn + p'n' + p"n" + p'"n'")(m2 + m'2

 +m"2+m'"2) — (mn + m'n' +m"n" + m'"n'")(pm + p'm' + p"m" + p'"m'")\

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 665

 +(pm + p'm' + p"m" + p'"m"'){(pm + p'm' + p"m" + p'"m'")(n2 + n'2

 +n"2 + n'"2) — (mn + m'n' + m"n" + m'"n'")(pn + p'n' + p"n" + p'"n"')}

 = (p2 + p'2 + p"2 + p"'2){m2n2 + m'2na + m"2n"2 + m"an"'2

 +2 m'"m"n'"n" + 2 m"'m'ri"ri + 2m'"mn'"n + 2m" m'n" ri

 +2 m"mn"n + 2 m'mn'n — (m2n2 + m2n'2 +m2n"2 +m2n'"2 +m,2n2 + m'2n'2

 +m'2n"2 + ml2n"'2 + m"2n2 + m"2n'2 + m"2n"2 + m"'2n2

 +m"'2n'2 + m"'2n"2 + m'"2n"'2)}

 +(pn + p'n' + p"n" + p'"n'"){m2np + m2n'p' + m2n" p" + m2n"'p'"

 +m'2np + m'2n' p' + m'2n" p" + m'2n'" p'"

 +m"2np + m"2n'p' + m"2n" p" + m"2n'" p'" + m'"2np + m'"2n' p' + m'"2n" p"

 +m'"2n"' p'" — (m2np + mm'np1 + mm"np" + mm'"np"' + m'mn' p

 +m'2n' p' + m'm'"n' p'" + m"mn" p + m"m'n" p' + m"2n" p" + m"'mn"' p

 +m"'m'n'"p' + m"'m"n'"p" + m'"2n'"p'")}

 +(pm + p'm' + p"m" + p'"m'"){mn2 p + m'n2 p' + m"n2 p"

 +m'"n2 p'" + mn'2 p + m'n'2 p' + m"n'2 p" + m'"n'2 p'"

 +mn"2p + m'n"2 p' + m"n"2p" + m'"n"2p'" + mn'"2 p + m'n'"2 p'

 +m"n"'2p" + m'"n'"2p'"

 —(mn2p + mnn' p' + mnn" p" + mnn'" p'" + m'n'np + m'n'2 p' + m'n'n" p"

 +m'n'n'" p'" + m"n"np + m"n"n' p' + m"n"2 p"

 +m"n"n'"p'" + m'"n'"np + m'"n'"n'p'

 +m'"n'"n" p" + m'"n'"2p'")}

 = 62 - (p2 + p'2 + p"2 + p'"2){(m'"n" - m"n'")2 + (m'"n' - m'n'")2

 +(m'"n — mn'")2 + (m"n' — m'n")2 + (m"n — mn")2 4- (m'n — mn')2}

 +(pn + p'n' + p"n" + p'"n'"){mp'(mn' — m'n) + mp"(mn" — m"n)

 +mp'"(mn'" — m'"n) + m! p(m'n — mn')

 +m' p" (m'n" — m"n') + m'p'" (m'n'" — m'"n') + m" p(m"n — mn")

 +m"p'(m"n' - m'n") + m"p'"(m"n'" - m'"n")

 +m'"p(m'"n - mn'") + m'"p'(m'"n' - m'n'") + m"'p"(m"'n" - m"n'")}

 +(pm + p'm' + p"m" + p'"m'")[np' (m'n — mn') + np"(m"n — mn")

 +np'"(m'"n — mn'") + n! p(mn' — m'n) + n'p"(m"n' — m'n")

 +n' p'" (m'"n! — m'n'") + n" p(mn" — m"n) + n" p'(m'n" — m"n')

 +n"p'"(m'"n" - m"n'") + n'"p(mn'" - m'"n) + n'"p'(m'n'" - m'"n')

 +n'"p"(m"n'" - m'"n")}

 62 S. Germain erroneously wrote m"'n"/2p"/2 instead of the right m!"n'"2p"'.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 666

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 = -p'2(m'"n" - m"n"')2 - p2(m"'n" - m"n'")2

 —p"2{m"'n' — m'n'")2 — p2(m'"n' — m'n'")2 — p"2(m'"n — mn'")2

 —p'2(m"'n — mn'")2

 —p'"2(m"n' — m'n")2 — p2(m"n' — m'n")2 — p'"2(m"n — mn")2

 —p'2(m"n — mn")2 — p'"2(m'n — mn')2 — p"2(m'n — mn')2

 +{(p"n" + p'"n'")(m'"p" - m"p'") - (p"m" + p'"m")(n'"p" - n"p'")

 _(//'2 + pna){m'"n" _ m"n"')}{m"'n" - m"n'")

 +{(P'n' + p'"n'")(m"p' - m'p'") - (p'm' + p'"m'")(n'"p' - nip'")

 — (p'2 + p'"2)(m'"n' — m'n'"))}(m'"n' — m'n'")

 +{(pn + p'"n"')(m'" p — mp"') — (pm + p'"m'")(n'" p — np'")

 — (p2 + p"l2)(m'"n — mn'")}(m'"n — mn'")

 +{(p'n' + p"n")(m"p' — m'p") — (p'm' + p"m")(n"p' — n p")

 — ip'2 + p"2)(m"n' — m'n")}(m"n' — m'n")

 +{(pn + p"n")(m"p — mp") — (pm + p"m")(n"p — np")

 — (p2 + p"2)(m"n — mn")}(m" n — mn")

 +{(pn + p'n')(m' p — mp') — (pm + p'm')(n' p — np')

 — (p2 + p'2)(m'n — mn')}(m'n — mn')

 +{(pn + p'n')(m'"p"-m"p'")-(pm + p'm')(n'"p"-n"p'")}(m'"n"-m"n'")

 +{(pn + p"n")(m'" p'—m' p'") — (pm + p'm')(n'" p'—n' p'")}(m'"n'—m'n'")

 +{(p'n'+p"n")(m'" p—mp'") — (p'm'+p"m")(n'" p—np'")}(m'"n—mn"')

 +{( pn+ p'" n'")(m" p'—m'p") — (pm+p'"m'")(n" p'—n' p")}(m"n'—m'n")

 +{(p'n'+p'"n'")(m" p—mp") — (p'm'+p'"m'")(n" p—np")}(m"n—mn")

 +{(p"n"+p'"n'")(m' p—mp') — (p"m"+p'"m'")(n' p—np')}(m'n—mn')

 = -p'2(m'"n" - m"n"')2 - p2(m'"n" - m"n'")2

 —p"2(m'"n — m'n'")2 — p2(m'"n' — m'n'")2 — p"2(m'"n — mn'")2

 —p'2(m'"n — mn'")2 — p'"2(m"n! — m'n")2 — p2(m"n' — m'n")2

 —p'"2(m"n — mn")2 — p'2(m"n — mn")2 — p'"2(m'n — mn')2

 —p"2(m'n — mn')2 + {pp"(m"'n — mn'") — pp'"(m"n — mn")

 +p'p"(m'"n' - m'n"') - p'p'"(m"n' - m'n")}(m'"n" - m"n'")

 +{pp'(m"'n — mn'") — pp'"(m'n — mn') + p'p"(m'"n" — m"n'")

 —p'p'"(m'n" - m"n')}(m'"n' - m'n'")

 +{pp'(m'"n' - m'n'") - p'p'"(mn' - m'n) + pp"(m"n'" - m'"n")

 —p" p'" (mn" — m"n)}(m'"n — mn'")

 +{pp'(m"n — mn") — pp"(m'n — mn') + p' p'"(m"n'" — m'"n")

 —p"p'"(m'n'" - m'"n')}(m"n' - m'n")

 +{pp'(m"n' — m'n") — p' p" (mn' — m'n) + pp'"(m"n'" — m'"n")

 —p"p'"(mn!" — m'"n)}(m"n — mn")

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 667

 +{pp" (m'n" .m"n') — p' p"(mn" — m"n) + pp'" (m'n'" — m'"n')

 —p' p"f (mn'" — m'"n)}(m'n — ran')

 = — p'"2 (m" n' — m'n")2 — p"2(m'"n' — m'n'")2

 —p'2(m'"n" — m"n'")2 + 2(m'"n" — m"n'")(m"'n' — m'n"')p' p"

 -20n'"n" - m"n"')(m"n' - m'n")p'p+ 2(m'"n' - m'n'")(m"n'

 —m'n")p"p'" — p'"2(m"n — mn")2 — p"2(m'"n — mn'")2

 -p2(m'"n" - m"n'")2 + 2{m'"n" - m"n'")(m'"n - mn'")pp"

 —2 (m'"n"—m"n'")(m"n —mn")pp'"+2(m'"n—mn'")(m"n —mn")p"p'"

 —p'"2(m'n — mn')2 + p'2(m'"n — mn'")2

 —p2(in'"n' — m'n'")2 + 2(m'"n' — m'n'")(m'"n — mn"')pp'

 —2(m'"n' — m'n'") (m'n — mn')pp"' + 2(m'"n — mn'")(m'n — mn')p'p'"

 —p"2(m'n — mn')2 — p'2(m"n — mn")2 — p2(m"n' — m'n")2

 +2 (m"n — m'n")(m"n — mn")pp' — 2(m"n' — m'n")(m'n — mn')pp"

 +2 (m"n — mn")(m'n — mn')p'p"

 = -{/Am'V - ™V") - p'(m'"n" - m"n'")

 —p'" {in" n' — m'n")}2 — {p{m'"n" — m"n") — p" (m"'n — mn'")

 +p'"(m"n — mn")}2 — {p'(m'"n — mn'") — p(m'"n' — m'n'")

 —p'" (m'n—mn')}2 — {p(m"n'—m'n") — p'(m"n—mn")+p"(m'n—mn')}2

 =-X2 - x'2 - x"2 - x'"2.

 <—>

 +2 bviiix"x + 2 bixx'x

 on trouve

 S = a""[aa'b""b"" + aa"bvbv + aa'"bbviib'" + a'a"bvibvi

 +a'a'"bviiibviii + a"a'"b'xb,x - aa'a'a'"

 -2 (ab""bvbvii + a'b""bvibviii + a"bvbvibix + a'"bvii bviii bix)

 -(bixbixb""b"" + bvbvbviiibviii + bvibvlbl'"bvU) + 2bixb""bvibvii

 +2bixb""bvbviii + 2bvibvllbvbviii] - (a'b""b"" + a"bvbv + a'"bviibvii

 -2b""bvbvii - a'a"a'")b""b'" - (tub""b"" + a"bvibvi + a'"bvliibv,ii

 -2b""bvibviii - aa"a'")b"b" - (abvbv + a'bvi bvi +a'"bixbix - 2bvbvibix

 "fj Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 En réfléchissant sur la nature des formes on est porté à croire qu'en général, lors
 que la déterminante est zéro, une forme composée de « variables est réducible en "n"
 manières différentes aux formes composées de n — 1 variables.

 Par exemple pour la forme quinaire

 axx + a'x'x' + a" x" x" + a'"x'"x'" + a""x""x"" + 2bx""x'" + 2 b'x""x"

 +2 b"x""x' + 2 b'"x""x + 2 b""x'"x" + 2bvx'"x' + 2 bvix'"x + 2 bviix"x'

 668

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 -aa'a"')b'b'-(abviibvii+a'bviiibviii + a"bixbix - 2bviibviiibix-aa'a")bb

 -2(aa'b"" - bixbixb"" + bvibviibix + bvbviiibix - abvbvii - a'bvibviii)bb'

 -2(aa"bv-bviiibviiibv-b""bviiibix +bvibviibviii-ab""bvii-a"bvibix)bb"

 -2 (a'a"bvi-bviibviibvi +b""bviibix+bvbviibviii-a'b""bviii-a"bvbix)bb"'

 -2(aa'"bvii-bvi bvibvii +b""bvi bix+bvbvii bviii-ab""bv-a'"bviiibix)b'b"

 -2 (a'a"'bviii-bvbvbviii+b""bvbix+bvbvibvii-a'b""bvi-a"'bviibix)b'b"'

 -2(a"a"'bix - b""b""bix + b""bvbviii + b""bvibvii - a"bvbvi

 -a'"bv'ibviU)b"b'"+V(a'b""b""+a"bvbv+a"'bviibvii-2b""bvbvi'-a'a"a'")

 = [aa'b""b""+aa"bvbv +aa"'bvii bvii +a'a"bvibvi +a'a"'bviii bviii

 +a"a"'bixbix - aa!a!'a!" - 2(ab""bvbvii + a'b""bvibviii + a"bvbvibix

 +a"'bviibviubix) - (bixbixb""b"" + bvbvbviiibviii + bvibvibviibvii)

 +2bixb""bvlbv,i + 2 bixb""bvbviii + 2bvibviibvbviii][a'a"bb + a'a'"b'b'

 +a"a"'b"b" + a'a""b""b"" + a"a""bvbv + a'"a""bviibvii

 -a'a"a'"a"" - 2(a'bb'b""+a"bb"bv +a"'b'b"bvii +a""bvbvibix)

 -(bbbvlibvii + b'b'bvbv + b"b"b""b"")\

 ~[(a'b""b"" + a"bvbv + a"'bviibvii - 2b""bvbvii - a'a"a'")b'"

 +{a"a'"bix ~b""b""bix +b""bvibvii +b""bvbviii - a"bl'bvi - a'"bvilbvil,)b"

 +(a'a"'bviii - bvbvbmii + b""bvblx + bvbvibvii - a'b""b" - a"'bvilb'x)b'

 +(aa'b"" - bixbixb"" + bv,bvi'bix + bvbviiibix - abvbvii - a"bvbix)b]2,

 ou en faisant aci'b""b"" + aa"bvbv + etc. = A, a'a"bb + a'a'"b'b' + etc. = A',
 (a'b""b"" + etc,)b'" + etc. = B et en réservant 21 pour représenter a'b""b"" + etc.
 2)21 = A4' — B2. On trouverait de même autant d'équations analogues qu'il y a de
 combinations possibles des quantités A, A', A" etc. prises deux a deux dans le cas où
 £> égalirait zéro, on entirerait résultats analogues à ceux que l'on a obtenues pour les

 formes ternaires et quaternaires.

 A Monsieur le docteur Gauss

 logé chez Ritter, Steinveg n°. 1917
 A Brunsvick63

 Monsieur

 L'intérêt du aux hommes supérieurs suffit pour expliquer le soin que j'ai pris, de
 priere le général Pernety de faire savoir à qui il jugerait convenable, que vous avez
 droit à l'estime de tout gouvernement éclairé.

 63 Beside the address and inscribed into a rectangle, Gauss wrote "Nro 9 Mârz 9 // Sophie Germain." Gauss

 likely received the letter on March 9 and this letter was the ninth among those he received in March. Gauss
 also numbered this letter "Nro 4."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 669

 En me rendant compte de l'honorable mission dont je l'avais chargé Mr. Pernetty
 m'a mandé qu'il vous avait fait connaitre mon nom: cette circonstance me détermine
 à vous avouer que je ne vous suis pas aussi parfaitement inconnue que vous le cro
 yez: mais que, craignant le ridicule attaché au titre de femme savante, j'ai autrefois
 emprunté le nom de Mr. Le Blanc pour vous écrire et vous communiquer des notes
 qui, sans doute, ne méritaient pas l'indulgence avec laquelle vous avez bien voulu y
 répondre.

 La reconnaissance que je vous dois pour l'encouragement que vus m'avez accordé,

 en me témoignant que vous me comptiez au nombre des amateurs de l'arithmétique
 sublime dont vous avez développé les mystères, était pour moi un motif particulier de
 m'informer de vos nouvelles, dans un moment où les troubles de la guerre pouvaient
 inspirer quelques craintes et j'ai appris avec une véritable satisfaction que vous étés
 resté dans vos foyes aussi tranquille que les circonstances le permettaient: je crains

 cependant que les suites de ces grands événements ne nous privent encore longtemps
 des ouvrages que vous préparez sur l'astronomie et sourtout de la continuation de vos

 recherches arithmétiques, car cette partie de la science a pour moi un attrait particulier

 et j'admire toujours avec un nouveau plaisir l'enchainement des vérités exposées dans
 votre livre: malheureusement la faculté de penser avec force est un attribut reservé à

 un petit nombre d'esprits privilégiés et je suis bien sure de ne rencontrer aucun des
 développements qui, pour vous semblent une suite inévitable de ce que vous avez fait
 connaître.

 Je joins à ma lettre une note destinée à vous témoigner que j'ai conservé pour l'ana
 lyse le goût qu'a développé en moi la lecture de votre ouvrage et qui m'a autre fois
 inspiré la confiance de vous adresser mes faibles essais, sans autre recommandation
 auprès de vous que la bienveillance accordée par les savants aux admirateurs de leurs
 travaux.

 J'espère que la singularité dont je fais aujourd'hui l'aveu ne me privera pas de l'hon

 neur que vous m'avez accordé sous un nom emprunté et que vous ne dédaignerez pas
 de consacrer quelques instants à me donner directement de vos nouvelles, croyez,
 Monsieur, a l'intérêt que j'y attache et recevez l'assurance de la sincère admiration
 avec laquelle j'ai l'honneur d'être

 votre très humble servante

 Sophie Germain

 Paris, ce 20 fevrier 1807

 PS. Mon adresse est: M.elle Germain

 chez son père rue S.te Croix de
 la Bretonnerie n°. 23 à Paris.

 Addendum

 De quelque manière que l'on sépare un nombre quelconque de la forme h2 + nf2 en

 deux parties (n étant un nombre premier de la forme 4k + 3) la somme des puissances
 n-ième de chacune de ces parties sera aussi de la même forme h2 + nf2.

 En effet dans l'équation 4^fy- = Y2 + nZ2, Z est fonction invariable de x et 1,
 et Y est une fonction telle qu'elle change de signe seulement par la permutation de x

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 2; et qu'ainsi K et Z sont des nombres entiers dans l'équation 4—= Y~ + nZ ,

 670

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 XH _l yt'? ^

 en 1 et de 1 en x; or, les valeurs de Y et Z dans l'équation 4 ^ = Y + nZ sont
 composées de x et —y, comme celles de l'équation précédante le sont de x et de 1,
 et il est clair que le nombre des termes de ces valeurs est, en y comprenant ceux dont
 les coefficients peuvent être zéro, + 1 = 2(k + 1); puisque ce nombre exprime
 combien il y a de puissances paires de xy dans le premier membre de l'équation, on
 sait d'aillieurs que le premier et le dernier terme de la valeur de Y sont multipliées par
 2: à l'égard des autres termes de la même valeur, et de ceux de la valeur de Z ils se
 réduisent, en prenant séparément les sommes de ceux qui appartiennent à un même
 coefficient, a k differences ou sommes de deux puissances semblables, l'une de x

 l'autre de y multipliées par une puissance de xy : d'où il résulte que, quelques soient x

 et y, ces k sommes et par conséquent aussi les valeurs de Y et de Z, sont divisibles par

 • • ] y" 0 0

 et cela posé, il est évident que si x + y — h2 + nf2, x" + y" = H2 + nF2.

 Réciproquement, si la somme des puissances n-ièmes, de deux nombres quelcon
 ques est de la forme h2 + nf2 la somme de ces nombres eux-mêmes sera de la même

 •*~r y

 forme.64

 La proposition ci dessus résulte de celle ci, si l'un des facteurs de la formule h2±nf2
 (n étant un nombre premier) est (1, ±n) l'autre facteur appartient nécéssairement à
 la même forme.

 Cette dernière proposition doit peut-être être admise sans démostration, cependant,

 nous la prouverons de la manière suivante: si on suppose que le produit de (a, b, c)
 par (1, ±n), soit (1, ±n) les neufs équations (fi) nr. 235 deviennent

 a = pq" - p"q, 2b = pq'" - qp'" + p'q" - p"q', c = p'q"' - p"'q'
 s = pq' — p'q, 0 = pq'" - qp'" — p'q" + p"q', ±n = p"q'" - q"p'"
 s = q'q" - qq'", 0 = pq'" + qp'" - p'q" - q'p", ±n = p'p" - pp'"

 (fi)

 des cinquième et huitième on tire les deux suivantes pq'" — p'q" = 0, qp'"—q'p" — 0
 pour y satisfaire il faut, à cause q'" et q", q et q' premiers entre eux (conditions résul

 tantes de la septième équation fi) que l'un des deux systèmes suivants d'équations
 aient lieux

 p = <-i", p' = q'", p'" = q', p" = <?;
 pq'" = 0, p'q" = 0, qq'" = 0, q'p" = 0.65

 La comparaison des septième et neuvième équations (fi) montre que le premier
 doit être rejeté puisque il porterait a conclure —1 = ±n mais on tire du second
 2b = 0, — ac = ±» et parce que n est un nombre premier on a nécéssairement a = 1
 ou ±n,c = ±n ou 1 donc etc.

 64 On the sheet of Germain's letter, at this point. Gauss wrote down a numerical counterexample to her
 claim (see Gauss's response).

 65 In Germain's manuscript appears pq'" instead of qp'".

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4 ^ — Y- — nZ~ sont des nombres impair il faut être sur que ce terme du mileu
 est lui-même un nombre pair: c'est ce qui à toujours lieu lorsque x + y est un nombre

 impair: ainsi on peut établir en employant les mêmes raisonnements que pour le cas
 ou n est de la forme 4k + 1 : que de quelque manière que l'on sépare un nombre
 impair de la forme h2 — nf2 en deux parties (n étant un nombre premier de la forme
 4k + 1 ) la somme des puissances n-imes de chacune de ces parties sera aussi de la

 Et réciproquement que, si la somme des puissances n-ème de deux nombres l'un

 pair et l'autre empair est de la forme h2 — n f2 la somme de ces nombres eux-mêmes

 forme h2 — nf2.

 sera de la même forme.

 Les différentes proposition que nous venons de démontrer sont susceptibles de la

 même généralisation que l'équation fondamentale 4^^£~- = Y2 ± nZ2, c'est-à-dire,
 qu'elles seraient encore vraies si au lieu des puissances n-èmes on prenait les puis
 sances ns-ème s un nombre quelconque.

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 671

 L'équation 4 t^y = Kz — «Z (n étant un nombre premier de la forme 4k + 1) ne

 peut se réduire, indépendamment de la valeur de n, à xx^_yy — Y2 —nZ2, que dans le
 cas ou l'un des nombres x et y est pair parce que le nombre (n — l)/2 + 1 = 2k +1 des

 termes des valeurs de F et de Z est impair: et que Y et Z étant ici fonctions invariables
 de x et —y, leurs termes, excepté celui du milieu, appartiennent deux à deux à un
 même coefficient, de sorte que pour affirmer, que les valeurs de Y et Z dans l'équation

 yfî l_ y/I 0 0 • • • •

 Gauss's reply.

 Votre lettre du 20 fevrier, mais qui ne m'est parvenue que le 12 Mars, a été pour
 moi la source d'autant de plaisir que de surprise. Combien l'acquisition d'une amitié
 aussi flat[t]euse et précieuse est-elle douce à mon coeur. L'intérêt vif, que Vous avez

 pris à mon sort pendant cette guerre funeste mérite la plus sincère reconnaissance.
 Assurément, Votre lettre au Général Pernety m'eût été fort utile, si j'avais été dans
 le cas d'avoir recours à une protection spécielle de la part du gouvernement français.
 Heureusement les evènéments et les suites de la guerre ne m'ont pas touché de trop

 près jusqu'ici, bienque je sois persuadé, qu'elles auront une grande influence sur le
 plan futur de ma vie. Mais comment Vous décrire mon admiration et mon étonnement,
 en voïant [voyant] se métamorphoser mon correspondant estimé Mr. Leblanc en cet
 illustre personnage, qui donne un exemple aussi brillant de ce que j'aurais peine de
 croire. Le goût pour les sciences abstraites en général et surtout pour les mystères
 des nombres est fort rare: on ne s'en étonne pas; les charmes enchanteurs de cette

 sublime science ne se decelent dans toute leur beauté qu'à ceux qui ont le courage de

 l'approfondir. Mais lorsqu'une personne de ce sexe, qui, par nos moeurs et par nos

 préjugés, doit rencontrer infiniment plus d'obstacles et de difficultés, que les hommes,
 à se familiariser avec ces recherches épineuses, sait néanmoins franchir ces entraves

 et pénétrer ce qu'elles ont de plus caché, il faut sans doute, qu'elle ait le plus noble
 courage, des talents tout à fait extraordinaires, le génie supérieur. En effet rien ne

 pourrait me prouver d'une manière plus flat[t]euse et moins équivoque, que les attraits
 de cette science, qui a embelli ma vie de tant de jouissances, ne sont pas chimériques,

 que la prédilection, don Vous l'avez honorée.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 672

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Les notes savantes, dont toutes Vos lettres sont si richement remplies, m'ont donné

 mille plaisirs. Je les ai étudiées avec attention, et j'admire la facilité avec laquelle Vous
 avez pénétré toutes les branches de l'Arithmétique, et la sagacité avec laquelle Vous
 les avez su généraliser et perfectionner. Je Vous prie d'envisager comme une preuve

 de cette attention, si j'ose ajouter une remarque à un endroit de Votre dernière lettre.
 11 me semble, que la proposition inverse, savoir "si la somme des puissances n-emes
 de deux nombres quelconques est de la forme hh + nff, la somme de ces nombres
 eux-mêmes sera de la même forme" est énoncée en peu trop généralement. Voici un

 exemple où cette règle est en défaut :

 15" + 811 = 8649755859375 + 8589934592 = 8658345793967

 = 15958262 + 11- 7453912

 néanmoins 15 4- 8 = 23 ne peut se réduire sous la forme xx + \ l yy.

 Il en est de même de la proposition : "si l'un des facteurs de la formule y y + nzz
 (n étant un nombre premier) est de la forme (1, 0, n), l'autre appartient nécessaire

 ment à la même forme ". Votre démonstration ne preuve que ce, qu'aucune autre forme

 indéfinie, que telle qu'est équivalente à (1, 0, n), multipliée par la forme (1, 0, n) ne

 peut donner le produit (1, 0, n), mais cette démonstration ne s'étende pas sur le nom

 bres définis. Soit, pour le déterminant —C une classe de formes quelconque, mais ni

 équivalente à la principale ni à une autre classe anceps, soit D la classe résultante de la

 duplication de C (qui sera différente de la principale), enfin soit D'la classe opposée à
 D. Il s'ensuit, que de la composition deC + C + D' résulte la classe principale. Ainsi
 si les deux nombres /, g peuvent être représentés par une forme de la classe C, et le
 nombre h par une forme de la classe D', le produit fg x h peut se réduire à (1, 0, n),
 mais il est facile [de voir] que fg ne se réduit pas seulement à D ou D' mais aussi à
 (1, 0, n). Nous avons donc ici le cas, qu'un facteur fg, et le produit fg ■ h sont de la
 forme (1, 0, n) sans que pourtant l'autre facteur y appartienne nécessairement. Au re

 ste on voit facilement que le premier facteur doit être composé, sans cela la proposition

 serait juste. Dans l'exemple ci dessus le facteur 15 ^ enveloppe le diviseur 67.

 Depuis cinq ans des travaux astronomiques—au[x]quels pour le dire en passent je
 dois surtout l'heureuse situation, dont j'ai joui pendent la vie de notre duc,66 le vic

 time malheureux de son attachement fidèle à la maison de Prusse—m'ont empéché de
 me délivrer autant qu'auparavant a ma prédilection pour l'Arithmétique et les autres
 branches de l'analyse. Je n'ai pas pourtant négligé celle ci tout à fait. Tout au contra

 ire j'ai rassemblé peu à peu un grand nombre de recherches, qui un jour fourniront
 un autre volume—si non deux—certainement pas moins intéressant que le premier.
 Même dans le dernier hiver j'ai réussi à y ajouter une branche entièrement nouvelle.
 C'est la théorie des résidus cubiques et des résidus biquarrés, portée à un degré de

 perfection égal à celui, qu'a atteint la théorie des résidus quarrés. Je mets cette théorie,

 qui répand un nouveaux jour sur les résidus quarrés parmi les recherches les plus
 curieuses dont je me sois jamais occupé. Je ne saurais Vous en donner une idée sans

 66 Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand [1735-1806] duke of Brunswick, to whom Gauss dedicated the D.A. He died

 as a consequence of a severe wound received in the war against Napoleon when he was commander-in-chief

 of the Prussian army.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 673

 écrire un Mémoire express. Voici pourtant quelque théorème spécial, qui pourra servir
 d'un petit échantillon.

 I. Soit p un nombre premier de la forme 3n + 1. Je dis, que 2 (c.a.d. +2 et —2) est
 résidu cubique de p, si p se réduit à la forme xx + 27yy ; qui 2 est Non-résidu
 cubique de p si 4p se réduit à cette forme. P.E. 7. 13. 19. 31. 37. 43. 61. 67. 73.
 79. 97. Vous ne trouverés que 31 = 4 + 27, 43 = 16 + 27, et 2 = 43(mod 31),
 2 = (—9)3 (mod 43)

 II. 67 Soit p un nombre premier de la forme 8« + 1. Je dis que +2 et —2 seront rési

 dus ou non-résidus biquarrés de p, suivent ce que p est ou n'est pas de la forme
 xx+ 64yy. Par ex. parmi les nombres 17.41. 73. 89. 97.113.137. Vous trouves que
 73 = 9 + 64, 89 = 25 + 64,113 = 49 + 64 et 254 = 2(mod 73), 54 = 2(mod 89),
 204 = 2(mod 113).68

 Les démonstrations de ces théorèmes et de ceux qui sont plus généraux sont intim

 ement liées à des recherches délicates. Voici une autre proposition relative aux résidus

 quarrés, dont la démonstration est moins cachée : je ne l'ajointe pas, pour ne pas Vous

 dérober le plaisir de la développer Vous-même, si Vous la trouverés [trouverait] digne
 d'occuper quelques moments de Votre loisir.

 Soit p un nombre premier. Soient les /? — 1 nombres inférieurs à p partagés en deux

 classes

 A ... 1,2,3,4, ...,(/> - l)/2

 B ... (p+ l)/2, (p + 3)/2, (p + 5)/2,..., p - 1

 Soit a un nombre quelconque non divisible par p. Multipliés tous les nombres A par
 a; prenés [prenais] en les moindres résidus selon le module p, soient [soyent], entre
 ces résidus, a appartenants à A et fi appartenants à S de sort que a + P = (p — l)/2.
 Je dis que a est résidu quarré de p lorsque est pair, non résidu lorsque /S est impair.
 On peut tirer de cette proposition plusieurs conséquences très remarquables ; entre
 autres, elle donne le moïen [moyen] d'étendre l'induction, par laquelle on rassemble
 des cas spécials du théorème fondamental aussi loin qu'on veut, ce qui ne pourrait se
 faire par les méthodes exposés art. 106-124.

 J'ai donné dans mon ouvrage deux démonstrations rigoureuses de ce fameux

 théorème et j'en possède encore trois autres toutes entièrement différentes entre elles;
 deux d'entre elles même peuvent être conduites de deux différentes manières cha
 qu'une [chacune]: ainsi je pourrais soutenir que je peu le démontrer de sept manières
 différentes. Les autres démonstrations que je préférerais pour l'élégance aux deux
 données dans mon ouvrage, seront publiées aussitôt que j'y trouverai l'occasion. A
 propos, dans la première démonstration qui se trouve dans la IV section il s'est glissé

 une faute légère qui je n'ai apereçue qu'après que je ne pouvoir plus l'indiquer. Il faut
 donc faire la correction suivante:

 67 This theorem was communicated to the Royal Society of Gôttingen on April 5, 1825, and inserted in
 the memoir entitled Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum commentatio prima (Gauss 1828a).

 68 The last congruence is not correct, in fact we have 204 s — 8(mod 113), but one has 274 = 2(mod 113).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 674

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 p. 146 (cas (4)) 1.12, lisés [lisais] comme il suit "Facile vero perspicitur, ex ista aequ
 ationededuci possehaeca'pRh ... (a), ±ahRa'... (fi), ±ahRp ... (y). Ex (a) segu
 itur, perinde ut in (2), h vel utriunque a', p vel neutrius residuum esse. Sed casus prior

 ideo est impossibilis, quod ex h Ra' et (fi) sequeretur aRa' contra hypoth. Quamobrem
 necessario est hNp adeoque, per (y), aNp. Q.E.D"

 Au reste à la page 144 il se trouve une faute d'impression non indiquée, savoir art.

 139 ligne 3 au lieu de ±aNp il faut lire ±aRp.

 J'aurais répondu plus tôt à Votre lettre, mais la découverte d'une nouvelle planète

 par Mr. Olbers m'a un peu distrait.69 Par le premier essai que j'a fait sur son or
 bite je trouvé, son mouvement considérablement plus vite celui de Cérès, Pallas et
 Junon, savoir 978" par jour. L'inclinaison de l'orbite de T6'. L'excentricité 0,1. Cette
 planète a beaucoup plus de clarté que Cérès, Pallas et Junon et j'espère la trouver
 parmi les observations de l'histoire céleste, peut être même parmi celles de Flams

 teed.70 Je viens d'achever un ouvrage étendu sur les méthodes qui me sont propres, à

 déterminer les orbites des planètes. Mais quoique je l'aie écrit en allemand, je trouve
 beaucoup de difficulté d'y engager un libraire. La guerre a suspendu tout commerce,
 plusieurs de nos plus grands libraires l'ont refusé. Je suis à present à traiter avec un

 autre qui se montre un peu plus courageux. S'il trouvera son conte à cette entreprise,

 peut être il sera encouragé par là à risquer la publication d'un second volume de mes
 disquisitiones.

 Continuez, Mademoiselle, de me favoriser de Votre amitié et de Votre correspon
 dance, qui font mon orgueil, et soïes [soyes] persuadée, que je suis et serai toujours
 avec la plus haute estime.

 Votre plus sincère admirateur
 Ch. Fr. Gauss

 Bronsvic [Brunswick] ce 30 Avril 1807
 Jour de ma naissance

 Monsieur

 Je vous dois mille remerciements pour les choses flatteuses dont votre dernire let

 tre est remplie, je ne les prends qu'à titre d'encouragement et certainement, ma plus

 grande ambition sera toujours de ne pas me montrer indigne de l'honneur que vous me

 faites en me promettant de continuer une correspondence à laquelle j'ai tout à gagner.

 Vous avez pris la peine d'examiner une proposition inverse que je vous ai com
 muniquée et de m'indiquer l'erreur que j'ai commise. Je reconnais la justesse de votre

 observation et vous remercie bien franchement de m'en avoir donné avis; si je ne craig
 nais même d'abuser de votre complaissance je vous prierais de me render à l'avenir, le

 même service que je considérerai toujours comme une marque de votre bienveillance.

 On March 27, 1807, the astronomer Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers discovered a new asteroid (at that time

 called "minor planets")- He allowed Gauss to name it "Vesta".

 70 John Flamsteed, astronomer [1646-1719], In 1675 he was appointed Royal Astronomer and for him
 was built the Greenwich Observatory. His work Atlas Coelestis, the largest star atlas that ever had been
 published, appeared posthumously in 1725.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 675

 Combien j'ai eu de plaisir en lisant vos trois théorèmes sur les résidus! J'en ai
 cherché les démonstrations, je les joins à ma lettre pour les soumettre à votre juge
 ment, car elles ne me paraitront hors de doute que lorsqu'elles auront votre aprobation.
 Vous ne pourrez, à l'avenir, me faire de plus grand plaisir qu'en m'envoyant les
 premières propositions arithméthiques qui vous tomberont sous la main: en essayant
 de les démontrer j'acquérirai l'habitude d'un genre de considération qui est pour moi

 plein de charme; mais dont la difficulté serait trop grande si j'étais réduite à mes pro
 pres forces car, pour vous dire la vérité, j'avais déjà voulu examiner les résidus des
 puissances plus elevées que le quarré, mais je n'avais pu pénétrer cette théorie qui est
 restée l'objet de ma curiosité.

 Voici pourtant le petit nombre de proposition auquelles j'étais parvenue et que je
 n'oserais vous communiquer si je ne comptais sur l'indulgence à laquelle vous m'avez
 accoutumé:

 p étant un nombre premier, si q est un nombre premier à p — 1, tous les nombres de
 la série 1,2,...,/?— 1 seront résidus puissance g-ièmes (mod. p).

 En effet si il en était autrement il faudrait que plusieurs puissances g-ièmes fussent

 congruantes entr'elles (mod p)\ soit donc, si il était possible, aq = bq (mod p); quel
 ques soient a et b, on aurait, en prenant r pour racine primitive r" = a, rm = b, n
 et m étant des nombres < p — 1, par conséquent rnq = aq, rmq = bq, rnq = rmq,
 r(n-m)q s j. résultat impossible parce que q étant premier a p — 1, il faudrait que
 n — m, qui est essentiellement < que p — 1, fut égal à ce nombre.

 Si on a au contraire p — 1 = qs, il y aura parmi les qs nombres 1,2, ...,qs, s

 résidue et (q — 1)^ non résidus puissance g-ième (mod p).

 En effet, soit rd = a, rs+d = a', r2s+d = a",..., r(q-]*>s+d = aq~], on aura

 évidemment aq = a'q s a"q ■ ■ ■ = (aq~l)q; par conséquent, puisqu'il y a q pissanc
 es g-ièmes congruantes entr'elles, l'élévation à la puissance g-ième des qs nombres
 moindres que p ne furnira que 5 nombres résidus puissance 4-ième différents entr'eux,

 et il y aura parmi ces nombres (q — l)s non résidus.

 Le produit de deux résidus puissance q-ième (mod p = sq + 1), est également
 résidu puissance g-ième, même modul, et en général le produit de a = rm par b = rn
 est ou n'est pas résidu puissance g-ième (mod p), suivant que m + n est ou n'est = 0
 (mod q).

 Si on désigne par 2m,q, q', ect. les différents facteurs de k dans p = 2k + 1, — 1

 sera résidu puissance (2m~')-ième, g-ième, g'-ième, ect. (mod p); car, r étant une
 racine primitive, on aura rk = — 1 et il est clair que rk = (rqq ")2m = (r2m<? •)<? =
 (r2mq-y' = etc_

 Pour les nombres premiers 22' + 1, 2, est résidus (22'_!_1)-ième puissance; car

 c'est en effet ce qui résulte immédiatement de la congruance 22'+1 = l(mod 22' + 1).

 Comme les nombres 22' + 1 peuvent être mis sous la forme 2,+1 • 22'-'-1 + 1

 on voit qu'il y a 2!+1 résidus (22'~'~')-ième puissance et que ces 2!+1 résidus sont
 1, 2, 22, 23,..., 22'"1, -1, -2, —22, —23,..., -22'_].

 Il résulte de cette proposition qu'elle ont sait a priori que dans la résolution de

 l'équation du second dégré dont les racines sont les périodes (2!, 1), (2', gA ) (g
 étant la racine primitive), le signe + du radical appartient à la première et le signe —
 à la seconde; car en dernière analyse

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 et en comparant térmes a térmes les valeurs de ces deux périodes, on voit que ceux de

 (2', 1) sont plus grands que leurs correspondants dans (2', g ), dont le dernièr est

 même négatifs, d'où il résulte (2', 1) > (2g

 ). On trouve de même (2' , 1 ) >

 22<—,-l

 i-l

 (21

 ) etc., et plus généralement (en considérant comme plus grandes celles

 des périodes qui ont une valeur négative moins grande, et employant les différentes
 puissances de deux à la place des puissances de la racine primitive qui leurs sont
 congruantes, puissances qui dépendent du choix de cette racine)

 676

 (2', 1)

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 P 2 2P 2 4P 2 6P

 22 >-2p

 = 2

 cos —h cos h cos h cos b b cos

 n n n n n

 2 2P

 2 4P

 2 6P

 2*P

 COS 1- COS — b COS b COS b
 4 n 4 n 4 n 4 n

 cos -

 22' P

 4 n

 2l —i — 1

 (2 i,g2'

 )

 2P

 = 2

 cos h cos h cos h cos b • • • + cos

 n n n n n

 2 3P 25P 21P 22'-\

 = 2

 23 P 254 P 2* P 2 9P 2-+{P

 cos h cos h cos h cos (-••• + cos

 4 n 4 n 4 n 4 n 4 n

 (2/_1, 1) > (2,_l, 2) > (2'_1, 4) > (2'_1, 8)
 (2'~2, 1) > (2'~2, 2) > (2'-2, 4) > (2'~2, 8) >

 (21-2, 24) > (2'-2, 25) > (2'~2, 26) > (2'-2, 27)

 (2, 1) > (2, 2) > (2, 22) > (2, 23) > • • • > (2, 22'-1).

 Par exemple pour p = 22' + 1,2 est simplement résidu quarré et on trouve (4, 1) >
 (4, g) pour g = 3 donne et g14 = 2, g12 = 4, g10 = 23, (2, 1) > (2, 2) > (2, 22) >
 (2, 23), [pour] g = 6 [donne] g2 = 2, g4 = 22, g6 = g3.

 Je vois avec regret que l'ouvrage que vous faites imprimer est écrit en allemand, car

 cette langue m'est entièrement inconnue, mais je serais tentée de l'apprendre un peu,
 comme j'ai fait [avec] la latine affin de n'être pas privée de la connaissance de vos

 méthodes. Je crois aisément que la librairie a beaucoup soufert de cette malheureuse

 guerre, je fais des voeux pour que ce contrétémps ne nuise pas à impression des vos
 ouvrages et pour que vous restiez toujours à l'abri de ses suites. Croyez, Monsieur, à
 la sincérité de l'intérêt qui les dicte et agréez l'assurance de la reconnaissance et de
 l'admiration avec lequelles je suis

 votre servante Sophie Germain

 Ce 27 juin 1807

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 677

 Addendum

 Théorème I (éxtrait de votre lettre du 30 avril dernier)

 "Soit p un nombre premier de la forme 3n + 1. Je dis que 2 (c.a.d. +2 et —2) est
 résidu cubique de p si p se réduit à la forme xx + 27yy, que 2 est non résidu cubique
 de p si 4p se réduit à cette forme."

 Démonstration.

 On a toujours (voyez nr. 358) 4p = (6a — 3b — 3c — 2)2 + 21 (b — c)2 et, par
 conséquent, lorsque p = xx + 21 yy, on a 6a — 3b — 3c — 2 = 2x, b — c = 2y\ mais
 a cause de n = a + b + c (v. num. I)71 si b + c est un nombre pair a sera également
 un nombre pair et a — 1 = (ÂÂ) un nombre impair; or, comme en général, lorsque
 h et h + 1 sont deux nombres compris dans Â, p — h — 1 et p — h sont également
 contenus dans A; (&&) est toujours un nombre pair, a moins que l'une des valeurs de
 h ne soit telle que p — h — 1 = h, (p — l)/2 = h.

 A cause de p — 1 résidu cubique, si (p — l)/2 est résidu cubique, 2 l'est pareill
 ement; donc 2 est résidu cubique lorsque p = xx + 21 yy, et non résidu lorsque 4p,
 seulement, appartient à la forme x2 + 21 y2 C.Q.E.D.

 Théorème II

 "Soit p un nombre premier de la forme 8n + 1. Je dis que +2 et —2 seront résidus

 ou non résidus bi-quarré de p, suivant que p est ou n'est pas de la forme xx + 64yy."
 La démonstration du present théorème exige beaucoup de calculs préalables parce

 que le livre ne présente aucun résultat dont on puisse faire un usage direct.

 Je considère d'abord, comme pour le cas des nombres 3n + 1, l'ensemble des

 moindres restes des puissances d'une racine primitive comprise dans les périodes
 (2n, 1) = p, (2n, g) = p', (2n,g2) = p", (2n, g3) = p"', ensembles que je dés
 igné par A, A!, A", A!", et conformément a ce qui à été pratiqué nr. 358, je désigné
 également par (ÂÂ) le nombre des nombres de la serie 1, 2, 3,..., p — 1 qui tant par
 eux mêmes qu'étant augmentés de l'unité sont compris dans ii A cause de — 1 résidu
 bi-quarré on démontre comme au nr. cité, que, (jifî'j réprésentant le nombre des
 nombres compris dans j? qui étant augmentés de l'unité sont compris dans 8! et
 (Â'Â) désignant le nombre des nombres compris dans $!, qui étant augmentés de
 l'unité son compris dans on a (8$!) = (Â'Â) et de même aussi (ÂÂ") = (Â"&)
 etc. (R'R") = (&"Â') etc. A réprésente l'ensemble de tous les résidus biquarrés
 (mod 8« + 1) et, en général, si h et h + 1 sont deux de ces nombres, p — h — 1 et
 p — h seront également contenus dans A, de sorte que (Jîiï) sera toujours un nombre
 pair a moins qu'il n'existe une valeur de h telle que p — h — 1 = h, (p — l)/2 = h,
 c'est-à-dire, a moins que {p — l)/2 ne soit résidu bi-quarré et comme p — 1 est lui

 même résidu bi-quarré. cette condition ne peut avoir lieu que lorsque 2 est aussi résidu

 biquarré il ne reste plus autre chose a prouver, si ce n'est que (ÂÂ) est toujours un
 nombre impair lorsque 8« + 1 = xx + 64yy et un nombre pair lorsque 8n + 1 n'est
 pas de cette forme.

 71 She is referring to equation number I, which appears in art. 358 of the D.A.

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 678

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Soient (MM) = a, (MM') = b, (MM") = c, (MM!") = d, (Â'Â") = e, (M"M") = f,

 (M'M') = d', (M'M'") = e', (M"M'") = e", (M'"M"') = b'; on trouve

 pp' — bp + dp' + ep" + e' p'",

 pp" = ep + ep' + fp" + e"p'"

 p'p" = bp' + dp" + ep'" + e'p,

 p'p'" = cp' + ep" + fp'" + ep

 p"p'" = bp" + dp'" + ep + e'p',

 pp = 2n + ap + bp' + cp" + dp'"

 p" p = bp'" + dp + ep' + e'p",

 p'p' = 2 n + ap' + bp" + cp'" + dp

 p" p" = 2 n + ap" + bp'" + cp + dp',

 p'"p'" = 2n +ap'"+bp + cp' + dp"

 et en cherchant directement la valeur de pp'"

 pp'" = dp + e'p' + e"p" + b'p'".

 La comparaison des deux valeurs du produit pp'" donne e' = e, e" = e', b' = b:

 on a par la nature des quantités a, b etc.

 2n — \ = a + b + c + d

 2 n = d' + b + e + e' ou 2n — d' + b + 2e

 2n = f + c + e + e" ou 2n = / 4- c + 2e
 2 n = b' + d + e' + e" ou 2n = b + d + 2e

 la comparaison des deux dernières valeurs de 2n donne / + c = b + d celle des l.re
 et 3.me donne d' = d et on tire de la dernière combinée avec la valeur de 2n — 1 la

 condition a — 2e — c — 1.

 En développant le produit

 PP' p" P'" = c2pp' + ce(p'p' + p'" p') + cfp'p" + ce(pp" + pp)

 +ee(p'p" + p'p + p'"p" + pp'") + ef(p"p" + pp") + fcpp'"
 +ef(p'p'" + p'"p'") + ffp"p'"

 = (c2 + e2)pp' + cep' p' + (ce + ef)p'" p' + (cf + ee)p'p"

 +(ce + ef)pp" + cepp

 +(e2 + f2)p" p'" + (ee + fc)pp'" + efp"p" + efp'"p'"

 = (c2 + e:)[bp + dp' + ep" + ep'"} + ce{2n + ap' + bp" + cp'" + dp)

 +(ce + ef){cp' + ep" + fp'" + ep) + (cf + ee){bp' + dp" + ep'" + e'p}

 +(ce + ef){cp + ep' + fp" + ep'"} + ce{2n + ap + bp' + cp" + dp'"}

 +02 + f2){bp" + dp'" + ep + ep'} + (cf + ee){bp"' + dp + ep' + ep"}

 +ef{2n + ap" + bp'" + cp + +dp'} + cf{2n + ap'" + bp + cp' + dp"}

 — 4n (ce + ef)

 +p{(c2 + e2)b + ce(d + a) + (ce + ef)(c + e) + (cf + ee)(e + d)

 +(e2 + f2)e + ef(b + c)}

 +p'{(c2 + e2)d + ce (a + b) + (ce + ef)(c + e) + (cf + ee)(b + e)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 679

 +(e" + f2)e + ef(d + c)}

 +p"{(c2 + e2)e + ce(b + c) + (ce + ef)(e + /) + (cf + ee)(d + e)
 +(e2 + f2)b + ef(a + d)}
 +p'"{(c2 + e2)e + ce(c + d) + (ce + ef)(f + e) + (cf + ee)(a + b)

 ~h(e2 + f')d + ef (b + a)}.

 On trouve par la comparaison des coefficients de p et p'

 (c2 + e2)(b — d) + ce(d — b) + (cf + ee)(d — b) + ef(b — d)

 — (b — d){c2 + e2 — ce — cf — e2 + ef}

 - (b- d){c(c - /) + e(f - c)} = (b - c)(c - e)(c - /) = 0

 d'où il résulte que l'une des trois conditions b = c, c = e, c = /, doit avoir lieu.
 La comparaison des coefficients de p" et p"' donne

 ce(b — d) + (cf + ee)(d — b) + (ee + ff)(b — d) + ef(d — b)

 = (b - d){ce - cf - ee + ee + ff - ef}

 = (b- d){(c - f)e - f(c - /)} - (b- d)(c - f)(e - /) = 0

 et conduit ainsi a l'une des trois conditions b — d, c = /, e = /; parmi ces conditions

 il s'en trouve deux qui ont déjà été donées par l'équation précédente et si on supposait
 que ni l'une ni l'autre de celles-là ne doivent être admises, il faudrait s'en tenir à e = /
 qui a cause de la troisième condition c = e fournie, par la dite équation précédente,
 ramènerait à conclure c = f contre l'hypothèse. On a donc plus a choisir qu'entre les
 deux conditions b = d,c = f.

 On tire de la comparaison des coefficients de p et p"

 [c2 + e2 — e2 — f2}(b — e) + ce(d + a — b — c) + (ce + ef)(c — f)

 +ef(c + b — a — d)

 — (c — f){(c + f)(b — e) + ce + ef + e(d + a — b — c)}

 = (c — f){cb + fb + ed + ea — be — ce}[= 0]

 c'est-à-dire c = f ou (c + f)b + e(d — b) + ea — ec — 0. Si on supposait d — b,
 cette dernière équation deviendrait, en mettant pour c + f la valeur d + b = 2b (v.
 p. 2)72 2b2 + ea = ec.

 Dans la vue de décider si on peut s'en tenir à la supposition d = b j'ai recours aux

 développements des produits,

 pp'p" = bpp" + dp'p" + ep"p" + ep"p'"

 = b{cp + ep' + fp" + ep'"} + d{bp' + dp" + ep"' + ep}

 +e{2 n + ap" + bp'" + cp + dp'} + e{bp" + dp'" + ep + ep'}

 72 S. Germain means page 2 of the addendum where the equality f + c = h + d is obtained.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 680

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 = 2 ne + p{bc + de + ec + e2} + p'[be + bd + ed + e2}

 +p"{bf + d2 + ea + eb} + p"'[be + de + be + de]

 p' p" p = bp' p + dp" p + ep'"p + epp

 = b{bp + dp' + ep" + ep'"} + d{cp + ep' + fp" + ep'"}

 +e{bp'" + dp + ep' + ep"} + e{2 n + ap + bp' + cp" + dp'"}

 = 2 ne + p{b2 + de + de + ea} + p'[bd + de + e2 + be}

 +p"{be + fd + e1 + ec} + p"'{be + de + be + de}

 et la comparaison des coefficients de p, p', p" et p'", dans ces produits.

 La comparaison des coefficients de p donne bc+ec+e2 +de = b2 +dc + ea+de,
 ec + e2 = (b — c)b +dc + ea\ celle des coëfficients de p' donne bf +d2 +ea +be =
 fd + e2 + ec + be, ec+e2 = (b — d)f + d2 + ea: a l'eguard des coëfficients
 de p" et p'" ils sont identiques dans l'un et l'autre developpemens et ne fournissent
 parconséquent aucune nouvelle condition. En examinent même les deus équations
 ec + e2 = {b — d)f + d2 + ea, ec + e~ — (b — c)b + de + ea on voit a cause de
 (b — c)b + dc = (/ — d)b+dc = (on a mis dans le 2-éme membre pour b — c sa valeur
 f—d tirée de b+d = f+c (p. 2)) = fb+d(c — b) = fb+d(d — f) — (b—d)f+d2
 qu'elles se réduisent a une seule savoir ec + e2 = (b — d) f + d2 + ea, laquelle devient
 ec + e2 — d2 + ea par la supposition b = d;et si on compare ce résultat à l'équation
 2b2 + ea = ec qui doit avoir lieu en même temps, on trouve ec — b2 — ec + e2 ou
 e2 +b2 = 0 d'où on conclut enfin que l'on doit choisir la condition f = c.

 La valeur de 2 n se réduit par là à 2c+2e et on a b+d ~ 2c (p. 2). En reprenant l'équa
 tion ec + e2 = (b — d)f+d2+ea on en tire ec+e2 = (2c — 2d)c+d2 + e(2e — c — 1)
 (on a mis pour a sa valeur v.-.2), e = 2c1 — 2dc + d2 + e2 — 2ec — (c — d)2 + (c — e)2,
 4(8n+ 1) = 32(c + e)+4 = 64(c — e)2 + 32(c — e) + 4 + 64(c — d)2, on aévidement
 c — d = 2y lorsque 8n + 1 = xx + 64yy\ la question est doc réduite a prouver que a
 est un nombre impair lorsque c — d est un nombre pair. Pour y parvenir il faut encore
 avoir recurs a la reflection suivante: pour les nombres de la forme 8« + 1, 2 il est

 toujours résidus quarré aussi bien que An, et il résulte delà qu'il y a un nombre impair
 de nombres qui tant par eux mêmes qu'étant augmentés de l'unité sont résidus quarrés

 (mod 8n + 1). Supposons en effet qu'il y ait un nombre pair de nombres qui tant par
 eux mêmes qu'étant augmentés de l'unité soient résidus quarré, on ne trouvera aucune

 valeur de h qui satisfasse à l'équation (p — 1 )/2 — h ou An = h, c'est-à-dire que An
 ne sera pas résidu quarré contre l'hypothese donc etc.

 Il est clair que les nombres qui tant par eux mêmes qu'étant augmentés de l'unité
 sont résidu quarré sont l'un et l'autre contenus dans Â, l'un et l'autre contenus dans

 Â", ou contenus l'un dans M et l'autre dans A": l'ensemble de ces nombres peut donc
 être exprimé par (AÂ) + (&&") + (A"A") = a + c + d il résulte delà que a est pair
 ou impair suivant que c + d est lui même impair ou pair et je crois être parvenue a la
 démonstration du théorème en question.

 "Soit p un nombre premier. Soient les p —
 classes

 1 nombres inferieus a p partagés en deux

 Troisième théorème

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 681

 A... 1,2, 3,(p- l)/2

 B ... (p+ l)/2, (p + 3)/2, (/> + 5)/2,..., p - 1,

 soit a un nombre quelconque non divisible par p. Multipliez tous les nombres A par
 a. prenez en les moindres résidus selon le modul p, soient, entre ces résidus, a ap
 partenans a A et fi appartenans a B de sorte qui a + fi — (p — l)/2. Je dis que a est
 résidu quarré de p lorsque fi est pair, non résidus lorsque fi est impair."

 Démonstration

 Les fi résidus qui appartiennent à la classe B sont le fi nombres, pris avec le signe
 —, qui sont contenus dans la classe A et ni font pas partie des a résidus compris
 directement dans cette classe, car il est impossible, quelques soient n,r et r' (r et
 r' représentant cependant toujours deux nombres de la classe A) que l'on ait à la
 fois ar = n, ar' = p — n, puis qu'il en résulterait a(r + r') = 0(mod p): et, par
 conséquent tous les nombres de la classe A, se trouvent parmi les moindres résidus en
 question, soit avec le signe +, soit avec le signe —. Je suppose donc que l'on fasse le
 produit de tous le nombre de la classe A, par eux mêmes et par a(p-1)/'2 et que l'on
 fasse aussi le produit de tous le moindres résidus: on aura en nommant P ce produit,
 a(p-\)/2p _ ±p. je sjgne _|_ ^ dernière nombre répond au cas où fi est pair et le
 signe — à celui où fi est impair: mais on a = ] ou a(P-V/2 = — 1, suivant
 que a est ou non est résidu quarré, donc fi est pair dans le premier cas et impair dans
 le second. C.Q.S.V

 On trouve quelque chose d'analogue pur les résidus biquarré. En effet:

 soit p = 4k + 1 un nombre premier, soient les 2k résidus quarré (modp) partagés en
 deux classes A et B, la première comprenant les résidus qui ne sont pas plus grand
 que 2k et l'autre des mêmes résidus qui surpassent 2k. Soit a un résidu quelconque
 {modp) soient entre ces résidus a appartenans à A et p appartenans à B de sorte que
 a + fi = 2k. Je dis que a est résidu biquarré de p lorsque fi est pair et similement
 résidu quarré lorsque fi est impair.

 La démonstration est absolument la même que celle du cas précédant, excepté qu'au

 lieu de moultiplier le produit de tous les nombres de la classe A par a(p~1)//2, il faut
 moultipliericipara(p_1^4 parcequ'en effet (p — l)/4 = k est le nombre des nombres
 compris dans cette classe; et on conclut = 1 ou = —1 suivant que
 fi est pair ou impair.

 En général si on connoissait tous les résidus (2m~')-ième puissance (mod p) (p =
 2mk + 1) on déciderait si l'un de ces résidu est aussi résidu (2'")-ième puissance, en

 partagent les résidus (2m-1)-ième puissance entre deux classes l'une renfermant ceux
 qui sont au dessous et l'autre ceux qui sont plus grands que 2m~lk et examinant si
 parmi les moindres restes des produis du résidu en question par les nombres de la
 première classe, il s'en trouve un nombre pair au impair compris dans la secondieme
 dans le premier cas, ak = 1 et dans le second ak = — 1.

 ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 682

 Gauss's reply.

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Gottingue, ce 19 janvier 1808

 En vous remerciant de tout mon coeur pour votre dernière lettre et les intéres

 santes communications que vous m'y faites, Mademoiselle, je vous prie mille fois
 pardon, d'y répondre aussi tard. Cette négligence est pour la plus grand partie une
 suite de changements qui se sont faits dans ma situation. J'ai changé ma demeure,
 pour accepter la place de professeur d'astronomie à Gottingue qu'on m'avait offerte
 depuis longtemps. Je ne vous dis riens des circonstances fâcheuses qui m'ont enfin

 déterminé à faire ce pas ni des nouvelles tracasseries auxquelles je me trouve exposé
 ici : j'espère que l'interposition de l'Institut où j'ai eu recours y mettra fin. Ne con
 templons à présent que la belle perspective que j'ai de pouvoir avec plus d'aisance,
 du moins dans la suite, veiller à mes travaux surtout arithmétiques, et de les publier
 successivement dans les mémoires de la Société de Gottingue. J'ai le plaisir de vous
 envoyer les prémisses,73 lesquelles, comme j'espère, vous feront quelque plaisir. Vous
 me pardonnerez que cette fois je ne puis m'étendre davantage sur la belle démonstra
 tion de mes théorèmes arithmétiques. J'admire la sagacité avec laquelle vous avez
 pu en si peu de temps y parvenir. J'espère de pouvoir bientôt publier toute la théorie

 dont ces propositions élégantes font partie, avec une foule d'autres choses. Que mes

 occupations arithmétiques, me rendent heureux dans un temps où je ne vois autour de
 moi que le malheur et le désespoir! Ce ne sont que les sciences, le sein de la famille

 et la correspondance avec ses amis chéris où l'on puisse se dédommager et se reposer
 de l'affliction générale.

 L'ouvrage sur le calcul des orbites des planètes, dont je vous ai parlé dans ma
 dernière lettre, est enfin sous presse. J'espère qu'il sera achevé dans quelques mois.
 Je n'ai pas redouté la peine de le traduire en Latin, afin qu'il puisse trouver un plus
 grand nombre de lecteurs.74

 Soyez toujours aussi heureuse, ma chère amie, que vos rares qualités d'esprit et de
 coeur le méritent, et continuez de temps en temps de me renouveler la douce assurance

 que je puis me compter parmi le nombre de vos amis, titre duquel je serai toujours
 orgueilleux.

 Ch. Fr. Gauss

 A Monsieur

 Monsieur le docteur Gauss Professeur

 D'Astronomie dans l'Université de Gottingue

 A Gottingue75
 Monsieur,

 73 The paper in question is Theorematis aritmetici demonstratio nova (Gauss 1808).

 74 Gauss is referring to his tract Theoria motus corporum coelestium in sectionibus conicis solem ambi

 entium (Gauss 1809), whcih he wrote in German and the publisher asked for its translation in latin, at that
 time a more common language among scientists.

 75 Beneath the address and inscribed into a rectangle, Gauss wrote "Nro 31 Mârz 29 // Sophie Germain".

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 683

 Il est sans doute inutile de vous dire combien je prens de part aux malheurs dont
 cette funeste guerre est pour vous l'occasion, il est triste pour ceux qui trouvant leurs
 plus grand plaisirs dans la jouissance des fruits de vos traveaux, de penser que tandis
 que vos meditations le préparent, vous n'étés environé que de sujet de peine: esperons
 qu'un mérite si supérieur sera enfin connu des chefs du gouvernement et qu'il sent
 irons que leur glorie est intéressé a vous faire joir des advantages au quels vous avez
 droit.

 J'ai lu avec le plus grand plaisir la mémoire que vous avez bien voulu m'envo
 yer,76 j'admire comment le premier théorème que vous m'avez déjà fait connaître est
 devenu dans vos mains le source d'une des plus belles démonstrations que présente

 l'arithmétique; je suis chargée par Mr. Le Gendre vous remercier de l'exemplaire que

 je lui ai remis de votre part et je m'estime heureuse en vous disant combien il fait de
 cas de votre démonstration, d'avoir a vous présenter un homage plus digne que le mien

 de vous être offert. En effet vous ne pouvriez avoir pour juge un savant plus au fait de

 la difficulté dans cette matière, aussi vous rend-il tout la justice qui vous est due et cela

 avec un plaisir, qui honore son caractère et dont je ne puis m'empêcher de vous faire

 part, parce qu'il arrive trop souvent que Fassentement le plus difficile a obtenir est just

 ement celui des gens qui ont traité les mêmes questions où l'on fait des plus grand pas.

 Je vois avec plaisir que vous avez pris la peine de faire passer dans la langue latine
 l'ouvrage sur les orbites,77 il est de nature à intéresser un grand nombre de lecteur,
 et je vous assure que je n'aurais pas voulu rénoncer à l'etudier lors même qu'il eut
 été écrit en allemand, j'avais même déjà acheté grammaire et dictionnaire à ces effet,

 mais l'étude des langues n'est pas gueré de mon goût il n'eut fallu moins que la haute
 extime que j'ai pour vos traveaux pour m'engager à m'y livrer.

 En relisant ma démonstration de votre théorème: 2 résidu biquarré des nombres
 xx + 64yy, je me suis aperçu que je me suis trompée dans l'endroit où j'ai voulu
 prouver que a est un nombre impair lorsque c — d est pair, j'ai dit à tort que le nom
 bre des nombres qui tout par eux mêmes qu'étant augmentés de l'unité, sont résidus
 biquarré est (ÂÂ) + (ÂM") + (£"£") tandis qu'il est (&£) + 2(ii£") + (£"£"),
 par une seconde erreur j'ai écri (ÂÂ) + (ÂÂ") + = a + c + d au lieu de
 (ÂÂ) + 2(ÂÂ") + = a + 3c ce qui rend mon raisonemment entièrement
 défecteuse. Pour y supplier je reprens les 2 équations 2n — 1 — a + b + c + d,
 2n = b + d + 2e et j'observe que parmi les quantités a, b, c, d trois sont paires et
 une seulement est impaire, que par consequént, lorsque c — d est pair il faut que c
 et d soient également paires et que lorsque d est paire la seconde équation rapportée
 montre que b est pair aussi, d'où il résulte que a est alors impaire.

 Au reste cette démonstriation peut être singulairement abrégée par la considération

 du système suivant de 6 congruances

 rQ+Y-Y' _rY s J

 rQ+Y'-Y _rY' s j

 rQ+Y_rY-Y's j

 76 Gauss is referring to Theorematis aritmetici... (Gauss 1808).

 77 She is referring to Theoria motus corporum... (Gauss 1809).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 684

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 rQ+Y' _ rY'-Y s j

 rQ-Y _ r2Q-Y' = j

 rQ-y _ r2Q-Y = i

 dans lesquelles 2Q = P — 1, r représente une racine primitive, et Y, Y' désignant des
 nombres quelconques moindres que 2Q. On voit aisément que l'une quelconque de
 ces 6 congruances peut servir a faire trouver le 5 autres.

 Voici à present le partie que l'ou en peut tirer:

 Si on nomme .ft, A, A', A" etc. les périodes qui contiennent les puissances n-ième,
 (n + l)-iéme, (n + 2)-ième, (n + 3)-ième etc. de la racine primitive, que l'on dés
 igné pour [Aft'] etc. le nombre des congruances appartenantes à un même système,

 et dont les premiers membres sont les differences entre une puissance n-ième et une
 puissance (.n + l)-ième etc., que l'on suppose —1 résidu puissance n-ième, cette
 à-dire Q divisible par n et que l'on fasse Y = yn + 8, Y' = y'n + S on trouve
 [Aft*5] = [Ân~sÂn~s] et comme chaque système contenant la différence des puissanc
 es n-ième et (n + <5)-ième fournit la même équation, on en conclut, en disignant par
 (.ft.ft5) etc. le nombre des nombres contenus dans 8 qui étant augmentés de l'unité
 sont dans 8s etc. (&ÂS) = (&"~sÂn~s).

 On voit par cette conditions pourquoi une seulement des quantité (.ftJÎ5) est impair

 puisque 2 est nécessairement contenu dans l'une des périodes .ft, .ft', Â", 8!" etc.

 Si on fait ensuite Y = yn + d, Y' = y'n + S, on trouve en raisonnant de même

 (&n+d-S£n+d) _ (fin-dgn-S) _ çgn+S-dfin+Sy

 On voit encore par la considération des systèmes de 6 congruences que (Aft) est de
 l'une des formes 6h + 3, 6h suivant que 2 est résidu ou non résidu puissance n-ième.
 Si on fait n = 4, qui est le cas de la démonstration citée, on a les équations

 (M) = (.ft.ft") = (£"£"), (&&'") = Cft'ft');

 Cft'-ft") = (&"&"') =

 que j'avais deduites de la comparaison entre différentes formes de mêmes produits.

 Si on fait ensuite n = 2 on a l'équation (.ft'.ft') = (Aft'), d'où on peut con[ ] 2

 résidu pour les nombres 8m + 1 et non résidu pour les nombres 8m + 5.78

 En effet on a

 4 m = (Â'Â') + (M) = 2(A.ft'), 4m + 2 — (.ft'A) + (ÂÂ') = 2(â'â')

 c'est-à-dire (.ft'A) pair dans le premier cas et impair dans le second ou (Aft) impair
 pour les nombres 8m + 1 et pair pour ceux 8m + 5.

 Lorsque n = 2n' et que Q est seulement divisible par n', c'est-à-dire [lorsque]79

 — 1 est résidu puissance n'-ème et non pas puissance n-ème les équations [résultantes

 78 Opening the letter, Gauss probably damaged the sheet of paper and of the word "conclure" only "con"
 remained readable, over it Gauss wrote the complete word.

 79 See the previous footnote, here Gauss added in his hand "lorsque".

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 685

 de la]80 en consideration des [du] système de 6 congruances sont:

 (fin'+d~sfid) = (fin'+s~dfi&) = (fin'+dfid~s) = (Ân'+sÂs~d)

 = (fin'-dfin's) = (Â"'~sÂ"~d)

 et en fesant S = d

 (fin'fid) = (fin'+dfi) = (fin'-dfin~d).

 On a aussi lorsque n' = 1, (fi! fi!) = (fifi) = (fifi!).
 Si on prend un nombre quelconque a tal que a soit dans fi! et a + 1 dans M, P — a

 sera dans M. et P — a — 1 dans Â1 de sorte que (ÂÂ') sera un nombre pair, à moins que
 il n'y ait un valeur de a telle que P — a — 1 = a ou a = (P — l)/2, si cela arrive 2
 sera dans Â c'est-à-dire résidu.

 On peut conclure delà: 2 résidu pour les nombres 8m + 7 et non résidu pour les

 nombres 8ot+3 car on a dans le premier cas 4m+3 = (8! fi!) + (ÂÂ') +1 = 2(fifi!)+l
 c'est-à-dire (fifi!) impair et dans le second 4m +1 = (fi'fi') + (fifi!) +1 = 2 (fifi!) +1
 c'est-à-dire (fifi!) pair.

 Votre dernier mémoire contient une nouvelle démonstration de ces propositions qui

 sans doute est bien preferable a cette ci,81 aussi ne vous la present ainsi que comme
 una témoiniage de mon goût pour ce genre de question et de la confience en votre
 indulgence que m'inspire la bienvoillance dont vous m'honorez, recevez en, Monsieur

 mes sincères remerciments et croyez que j'aurez toujours pour vous l'admirations et

 l'intérêt dans votre superiorté

 Ce 19 mars 1808

 Sophie Germain

 VII

 Monsieur

 Je vous dois mille et mille remerciements pour le beau mémoire que Mr. Le Gen
 dre m'a remis de votre part il me charge de vous témoigner combien il attache lui

 même de pris a ce present et je me félicite d'avoir a vous transmettre un suffrage plus
 éclairé que le mien.8- J'ai lu cet ouvrage avec toute l'attention dont je suis capable,
 j'admire la généralité des recherches qui en sont l'objet, elles me paruissent faire suite
 a celles qui remplessent les prop. 356 et 357 de votre premier livre sur l'arithmétique

 où vous traitez seulement des nombres premiers. J'ai vu avec le plus grand plaisir
 la démonstration du théorème fondamental présenté comme un cas particulier d'une
 proposition beaucoup plus générale.

 Vous me mandez d'être occupé dans ce moment de la belle théorie des résidus

 cubiques et biquarré, elle m'inspire le plus grand intérêt et la curiosité la plus vive; je

 80 This was added by Gauss.

 8 ' Theormetis cirithmetici demonstratio nova (Gauss 1808).

 She is referring to Summatio quarumdam serierum singularium commentationes, which Gauss presented

 in 1808 to the Gôttingen Academy of Sciences (Gauss 1811).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 686

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 ne crois pas qu'il existe ni pour les uns ni pour les autres de ces résidus aucune loi de
 réciprocité analogue a celles qui composent le théorème fondamental; il y a sans doute

 de grandes différences entre ces résidus et les résidus quarrés ainsi, par exemple, quoi

 qu'il soit vrai que tout nombre, excepté les quarrés, pris positivement, soit non résidu

 quarré pour quelque nombre premier 2k +1, il n'est pas vrai que tout nombre, excepté
 les biquarrés pris positivement soit non résidu biquarré pour quelque nombre premier

 de la forme 4k + 1, car —4 est résidus biquarré pour tous ces nombres, parce que — 1 et

 4 sont toujours à la fois résidus biquarrés ou simplement résidu quarrés; je crois qu'a
 la vérité 4 est le seul quarré, qui pris avec le signe —, soit résidu biquarré pour tout
 nombre premier de la forme 4k+ 1, vous trouverez, peut être, que cela est assez clair

 de soi même pour qu'il soit inutile de le démontrer puisque si q2 par exemple jouissait

 de cette propriété, il en résulterait que sa racine q devait être résidu quarré pour tous
 le nombre premiers de la forme 8k + 1 et non résidu quarré pour tous les nombres
 premiers de la forme 8k + 5, au reste je n'ai pas pu réussir à cette démonstration pour

 les quarrés paires, je suis seulement venu au bout de prouver, comme il suit, que tout

 quarré impair pris avec le signe — est non résidu biquarré de quelque nombre premier
 de la forme 8k + 5.

 Soit (2h + l)2 un quarré impair quelconque, le nombre (2h + l)2 + 4 sera de la
 forme 8k + 5, par conséquent il sera premier ou il sera le produit de deux facteurs des
 formes 8k+ 3 et 8k+ 1 ou de celles 8k +1 et 8k + 5; mais (2h +1)2 + 4 étant la somme

 de deux quarrés ne peut avoir pour facteurs que des nombres qui soient pareillement la
 somme de deux quarrés, or les nombres des formes 8k + 3,8k + l ne jouissent pas de

 cette propriété ainsi le nombre (2h + 1 )2 + 4 a nécessairement un facteur premier de
 la forme 8k + 5, soit p ce facteur, on aura (2/7 + l)2 = —4 (mod p) et à cause de —4
 résidu biquarré (mod p) (2h + l)2 sera aussi résidu biquarré même modul donc, enfin,
 — (2h + l)2 sera simplement résidu quarré, c'est-à-dire non résidu biquarré (mod p).
 De —4 résidu biquarré pour tout nombre premier p = 4k + 1 il résulte qu'en pri
 nant [prennent] n2 pour le plus grand quarré contenu dans k et q pour le quotient de
 la division de k par n2, q est résidu biquarré (mod p) à cause de —4qn2 = 1 (mod p),
 car tous les facteurs premiers de n sont résidus quarrés et par conséquent n2 résidu
 biquarré (mod p) cela est clair si n ne contient que des facteurs impairs et la même
 chose a lieu lorsque n est multiple de 2, parce que 2 est dans ce cas résidu quarré
 (mod p) puis que ce nombre et alors de la forme 8k + 1. Si on fait q = 2 on trouve que

 2 est résidu biquarré pour les nombres premiers de la forme 8«2 + 1 et il en résulte

 qu'un nombre de cette forme 8n2 + 1 ne peut être premier à moins que rr ne satisfasse

 à l'équation n2 = 2-^ + 8.r2.

 En étudiant votre mémoire du 15 Janvier 1808,83 qui m'a inspiré tant d'admira
 tion et d'étonnement par la simplicité des formules qu'il contient et par les belles
 conclusions que vous en avez deduites, je me suis avisée de chercher ce qu'elles don
 neraient si on les appliquaient aux résidus biquarrés; pour cela, au lieu des nombres
 1, 2,..., (p — l)/2 je prens les résidus quarrés < de (p + l)/2 que je désigné parles

 83 Germain is probably referring to Theorematis aritmetici demonstratio nova which Gauss presented to
 the Gottingen Academy of Sciences on January 15, 1808, (Gauss 1808).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 687

 lettres r, r'r" etc. et je represente par (k, p) le nombre des produits kr, kr', kr" etc.
 dont les moindres restes selon le modul p sont > de {p — l)/2.

 L'équation f.VI devient

 (k, p)

 r 2kr~

 l

 (N

 +

 L p \

 L p \

 +

 [~ 2kr" "|
 L P J

 + 2  —  -2

 'kr 1

 r kr'l

 L p J

 l P \

 -2

 [kr"~\
 L P J

 puisque —1 est résidu quarré mod (p = An + 1), il est clair qu'il-y-a n résidus

 quarrés r, r', r" etc. moindres que {p + l)/2 par conséquent

 (~k, p) =

 2 r(p-k)

 2r'(p - k)

 2 r"(p-k)

 +

 +

 + ■ ■

 P

 2

 I" r(p-k)l
 [ P

 1

 i

 1

 1

 1

 -2

 -2

 L P J

 L P

 2r + 2r' + •

 • — n —

 ~7kr~

 ~2kr'~

 \2kr"~\

 . P .

 . P .

 . P .

 -2(r + r' H ) + 2n + 2

 kr

 kr'

 'kr"'

 + 2

 + 2

 + ■

 P J

 . P .

 . P .

 et (k, p) + (—k, p) = (p — l)/4, d'où il résulte comme f.VII que k et — k sont à la
 fois résidus ou non résidus biquarrés lorsque p = 8k' + 1 et au contraire l'un résidu
 et l'autre non résidu biquarré lorsque p est de la forme 8n' + 5.

 Si on prend p — 8rc' + 1 et k = 2 on aura

 4 r
 —  +

 L p J

 |~4rH
 L P \

 +

 ["4r"l
 L P J

 + 2  — - 2

 -2

 f 2r 1

 L P J

 r v]
 L p \

 I" 2r" "I

 L p J

 et comme 4 n'est la plus grande des quantités r, r', r" etc. la seconde ligne disparaîtra
 et (2, p) sera égual au nombre des résidus quarrés compris entre 2n' exclusivement et
 An! inclusivement, c'est en effet ce à quoi se réduit la premère ligne dont tous les ter
 mes sont nuls, jusqu'et y compris r" = 2n'. Ainsi 2 est résidu ou non résidu biquarré
 (mod p = 8n' -1- 1) suivant qu'il y a un nombre pair ou impair de résidus quarrés
 compris entre l'unité et 2n' inclusivement. Cette proposition est analogue a celle-ci
 qui a lieu pour les nombres premiers An + 1: 2 est résidu ou non résidu quarré suivant

 que n est pair ou impair.

 On voit que la suite des résidus quarrés remplace, pour les résidus biquarrés celle

 des nombres naturels pour les résidus quarrés.

 Je ne m'étonne pas, Monsieur, de l'attrait que vous porte vers les recherches arith

 métiques, lorsque je vois chaque jour vos travaux courronnés par de nouveaux succès:

 combien je vous remercie de l'honneur que vous me faites en me les faisant connaître
 et en acceuillant avec indulgence le petit nombre d'idées que je prends la liberté de
 vous communiquer, elles doivent vous paraître, en quelque sorte, pueriles, si vous
 les comparez à celles qui se présentent en foule à votre génie createur devant lequel
 il s'ouvre à chaque instant de nouvelles routes! Ce que vous me dites touchant une

 "0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 688

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 équation analogue, pour le cube, à ce que l'équation xx — Dyy = 1 est pour le quarré,
 présenterait sans doute des difficultés inespugnables, à tout autre qu'a vous, il sem
 ble en effet que les deux facteurs dans lesquels on peut séparer une pareille équation
 n'étant plus du même ordre l'un que l'autre il doive être difficile, par exemple, d'en

 trouver toutes les solutions au moyen d'une seule. Au reste je ne préténds nullement
 sonder la profondeur de vos recherches, je sens que mon esprit est trop loin du vo
 tre quoique nos goûts soient semblables, car j'ai comme vous une grande prédilection

 pour les questions arithmétiques, je trouve que cette partie de la science est susceptible
 d'un genre particulier d'elegace que les sciences physico-mathématiques ne peuvent
 atteindre, il semble qu'en toutes choses l'intérêt des idées soit en raison inverse de
 l'utilité qu'elles présentent pour la pratique, on ne s'en étonne pas lorsque l'on con
 sidère que l'esprit humain travaillant pour son unique satisfaction doit rencontrer de
 plus grandes beautés intellectuelles que lorsqu'il est dirigée par un motif étranger.
 Cependant quelque soit l'objet auquel vous consacrerez vos veilles je régarderai touj
 ours le temps que je mettrez à en étudier les produits comme celui que j'aurai le mieux
 emploié pour ma satisfation et mon instruction.

 J'ai tant de remerciements a vous faire que je ne puis les épuiser; vous m'avez déjà
 envoyé plusieurs beaux mémoires, vous me promettez un ouvrage plus éténdu sur
 l'astronomie, vous me faites esperer, pour un avenir plus éloigné la belle théorie des

 résidus cubiques et biquarrés enfin vous daignez prendre la peine de me rendre compte

 de vos travaux et d'encourager un goût qui fait mon bonheur. Je vous prie, Monsieur,
 d'agréer à tous de titres l'expression de ma reconnaissance de mon admiration et de
 tous les sentiments distingués dus à vos talents et à l'intérêt que vous voulez bien me

 Ce 22 mai 1809 Sophie Germain

 témoigner.

 VIII

 Gottingue

 Monsieur,

 A Monsieur

 Monsieur Le docteur Gauss

 Professeur d'Astronomie à l'Université de Gottingue

 L'empressement que je mets à connaître vos ouvrages m'avait engagée à faire
 demander a Lipsie votre livre sur la détérmination des orbites dans un temps où je
 ne prévoyais pas que vous me feriez l'honneur de me l'offrir.84 J'ai été servie avec

 tant de promptitude que je viens de le recevoir: je croirais abuser de votre générosité
 si en vous remerciant de tout mon coeur de la promesse que vous m'avez faite de
 m'envoyer, je ne vous faisais savoir que je l'ai déjà entre les mains.

 Je n'avais pas voulu différer plus longtemps de répondre à la lettre et au present

 dont vous m'avez honnorée et cependant j'ai cru vous témoigner d'avantage le cas
 que je fais de vos ouvrages et de la généreuse bonté avec laquelle vous voulez bien me

 She is referring to Theoria motus corporum coelestium...(Gauss 1809)

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 PS. Quelqu'occupée que je sois à lire l'ouvrage sur les orbites et à relire encore

 votre dernier mémoire je soupire toujours après votre théorie des résidus biquarrés et
 je ne crains pas de vous témoigner pour cette partie un goût que je ne puis, comme
 vous, justifier par des succès.

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 689

 les envoyer en attendant que j'usse le livre pour vous dire que je réserve votre bonne
 volonté pour les mémoires dont je n'aurais aucune connaissance si vous ne preniez la
 peine de me les faire passer, j'ajoute dans la sincérité de ma reconnaissance qu'ils ont
 un prix de plus à mes yeux lorsqu'ils me sont offerts par vous.

 J'ai parcouru l'ouvrage dont il s'agite avec une attention suffisante pour remar
 quer la simplicité et la clarté qui y règne, j'admire comment un auteur habitué à des
 recherches si élevées soit pourtant se rendre, pour ainsi dire, élémentaire lorsque les
 besoins de la pratique l'exige. J'ai vu dans la prémière partie avec quel ordre vous
 avez rangé les matériaux qui doivent servir dans celles qui suivent, les calculs pour
 les différentes section coniques sont d'une grande simplicité vous emploié les mêmes
 quantités sous des formes appropriés à chaque cas. Je n'avais pas encore vu l'emploi
 de quatre observations, au reste je me réserve d'établir toutes les parties de l'ouvrage
 avec le soin que mérite tout ce qui sorte de votre savante plume. Mais je n'ai pas
 voulu attendre que j'en ai eu le temps pour vous mander que ce livre est venu jus
 qu'à moi c'est cette circonstance qui m'engage à vous écrire à un si court intervalle]
 j'espère, Monsieur, que vous excuserez mon importunité et que vous accueillerez avec
 bien vaillance l'assurance répété de mon admiration et de mon respect

 Ce 26 mai 1809 Sophie Germain

 IX

 Paris (Rue de Braque n.4) ce 12 mai 1819
 Monsieur,

 Je regrette infiniment que vous n'ayez pas accompagné Monsieur votre ami; j'au
 rais eu le plus grand plaisir a vous entendre parler des belles théories qui sont l'objet
 de vos études favorites et pour lequelles j'ai moi même une véritable passion.

 Les démonstrations nouvelles que contient votre mémoire m'ont enchan-tée.85 Vous

 paraissez préférer la dernière à cause de la liason qu'elle établit entre des vérités qui
 au premier coup d'oeil semblent être indépendants. J'ai sans doute été fort sensible
 à ce genre de surprise que déjà plusieurs endroits des disquisitiones m'avoient fait
 éprouver. Cependant je vous avourez que l'énoncé du théorème nr. 2 m'a plû encore
 d'avantage. Cette phrase qui le termine: Tune très numeri n, N, 1/4(m — \)(N — 1),
 vel omnes simul pares erunt, vel unus par duoque reliqui impares m'a frappé d'un

 genre d'admiration en quelque sorte contraire a celui dont je viens de parler car on y
 sent la démonstration toute entière et par cette raison elle me semble avoir atteint le

 plus haut degré d'elegance que l'on puisse immaginer.

 85 The paper in question is Theorematis fundamentalis in doctrina de residuis quadraticis, demonstrationes
 et ampliationes novae (Gauss 1818).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 690

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 C'est toujours avec un nouvel intérêt que l'on considère des points de vue différents
 d'une même vérité: l'applications entièrement neuve que vous faites du théorème foun

 damental à la detérmination de la question de résidu ou non résidu présent un autre
 genre de jouissance: c'est une véritable acquisition qui peut être d'un grand usage.

 Je regrette que vous différiez depuis si longtem[p]s de nous donner vos recherches

 sur les résidus cubiques et biquarrés en traitant ces questions il est probable que vous
 auriez le moyen d'aller encore plus loin, je veux dire d'étendre la théorie aux résidus
 puissance quelconque.

 Je n'ai pas encore eu le tem[p]s de lire le mémoire sur les attractions,86 je me pro

 pose de l'étudier car cet objet m'est beaucoup moins familier que la théorie des résidus.
 J'ai voulu me réserver avant le départ de Monsieur votre ami, le tem[p]s de vous faire

 les remerciements que je vous dois et aussi de vous communiquer les recherches que
 m'ont occupées depuis l'époque à laquelle j'ai eu l'honneur de vous écrire.

 Quoique j'ai travaillé pendans quelque tem[p]s à la théorie des surfaces vibran
 tes (à laquelle j'aurais beaucoup de choses à ajouter si j'avais la raison de faire les
 expériences que j'ai imaginés concernants les surfaces cylindriques) je n'ai jamais
 cessé de penser à la théorie des nombres. Je vous donnerai une idée de ma préoccu
 pation pour ce genre de recherces en vous avouant que même sans aucune expérance

 de succès je la préfère à un travail qui me donnerait nécessairement un résultat et qui
 pourtant m'intéresse... quand j'y pense.

 Longtem[p]s avant que notre académie ait proposé pour sujet de prix la démon
 stration de l'impossiblité de l'équation de Fermât, cet[te] espèce de défi porté aux
 théories modernes par un géomètre qui fuit privé des res[s]ources que nous possédons

 aujourd'hui, me tourmentait souvent. J'entre-voyais vaguement une liaison entre la
 théorie des résidus et la fameuse équation, je crois même vous avez parlé ancienne
 ment de cette idée car elle m'a frappée aussitôt que j'ai connu votre livre.

 Voici ce que j'ai trouvé:
 L'ordre dans lequel les résidus (puissances égales à l'éxposant) se trouvent placés
 dans la série des nombres naturels détermine les diviseurs nécessaires qui appartien
 nent aux nombres entre lequels on établit non seulement l'équa-tion de Fermât mais
 encore beaucoup d'autres équations analogues a celle-là.

 Prenons pour exemple l'équation même de Fermât qui est la plus simple de toutes

 celles dont il s'agit ici.

 Soit donc, p étant un nombre premier, zp = xp + yp.

 Je dis que si cette équation est possible, tout nombre premier de la forme 2Np + 1

 (N étant un entier quelconque) pour lequel il n'y aura pas deux résidus /j-ième puis
 sance placés de suite dans la série des nombres naturels divisera nécessairement l'un

 des nombres x, y et z.

 Cela est évident, car l'équation zp — xp + yp donne la congruance [congruence]

 1 = rsp — rtp dans la quelle r représente une racine primitive et .s et t des entiers.

 On sait que l'équation a une infinité de solutions lorsque p — 2. Et en effet tous
 les nombres, exceptés 3 et 5 ont au moins deux résidus quarrés dont la difference est

 l'unité. Aussi dans ce cas la forme connue savoir h2 + f2, 2 fh, h2 — /2 des nombres

 86 The paper in question is probably Theoria attractionis corporum sphaeroidicorum ellipticorum homo
 geneorum methodo nova tractata (Gauss 1813).

 <£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 691

 z [x], y et z montrc-t-cllc que l'un de ces nombres est multiple de 3 et aussi que l'un
 des mêmes nombres est multiple de 5.

 Il est aisé de voir que si un nombre quelconque k est résidu puissance p-ième mod
 2Np + 1 et qu'il y ait deux résidus puissance /?-ième même mod. dont la différence
 soit l'unité, il y aura aussi deux résidus puissances /?-ième dont la différence sera k.

 Mais il peut arriver qu'on ait deux résidus p-ième dont la différence soit k, sans

 que k soit résidu /?-ième.

 Cela posé voici l'équation générale dont la solution me semble dépendre comme

 celle de Fermât de l'ordre des résidus:

 kzn=xp±yp

 car d'après ce que vient d'être dit on voit que tous nombre premier de la forme 2Np +1
 pour lequel deux résidus p-ièmes n'ont pas le nombre k pour différence divise le nom
 bre z [l'un des nombres x, y, z]. Il suit delà que s'il y avait un nombre infini de tels
 nombres l'équation serait impossible.

 Je n'ai jamais pû [pu] arriver à l'infini quoique j'ai reculé bien loin les limites
 par un méthode de tâtonnement trop longue pour qu'il me soit possible de l'exposer
 ici. Je n'oserais même pas affirmer que pour chaque valeur de p il n'existe pas une
 limite au-delà de laquelle tous les nombres de la forme 2Np + 1 auraient deux résidus
 p-ièmes placés de suite dans la série des nombres naturels. C'est le cas qui intéresse
 l'équation de Fermât.

 Vous concevrez aisément, Monsieur, que j'ai dû parvenir à prouver que cette équa
 tion ne serait possible qu'en nombres dont la grandeur effraye l'imagination; car elle
 est encore assujettie à bien d'autres conditions que je n'ai pas le tem[p]s d'examiner
 à cause des détails nécessaires pour [en] établir la réalité. Mais tout ce la n'est encore

 rien, il faut l'infini et non pas le très grand.

 Chemin fesant [faisant] je me suis aidée d'un système de six congruances [con
 gruences] dont une quelconque redonne les cinq autres. Lorsque pour un nombre de
 la forme 2Np + 1,2 est non résidu puissance p-ième et qu'en même tem[p]s N est
 premier à 3 les six congruances [congruences] ne sont pas réductibles à un moindre

 nombre. On peut être sûr alors (n étant un nombre entier différent pour chaque valeur
 de 2Np + 1) qu'il y a toujours 6n résidus p-ièmes (mod 2Np + 1) placés deux à deux
 près l'un de l'autre dans la série des nombres naturels. J'ai fait beaucoup d'efforts pour
 trouver les cas dans laquelles n — 0. La méthode que j'ai emploié [employée] montre

 que le nombre des conditions à remplir pour que n ne soit pas zéro dépend de la valeur

 de N dans le nombre 2Np + 1 que l'on prend pour modul[e]: elle est parfaitement
 indépendante de celle de p (par conséquent [dans] tout [ce] qui suit p ne répresente
 plus exclusi[ve]ment les nombres premiers mais des entiers quelconques c'est ce qui

 est évident par les exemples que je citerai dans la suite) en sorte que toute les fois que je
 calculais des valeur de N pour lesquelles 2N +1 ou AN +1 étaient premiers je trouvais

 toujours moyen de remplir les conditions exigées. Cela doit être en effet puisqu'il y a

 toujours deux résidus puissance placés de suite dans la série des nombres naturels et
 qu'excepté pour 3 et pour 5 il y a toujours aussi deux résidus quarrés placé de suite.
 Lorsque N n'est pas trop grand on n'a qu'un petit nombre de conditions à essayer
 et si on ne trouve aucun nombre qui y satisfasse on peut être sûr que quelque soit p

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 692

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 on n'a jamais deux résidus p-ièmes (mod 2Np + 1) placés de suite dans la série des
 nombres naturels.

 La méthode donne toutes les valeurs de p pour lesquelles il y a deux résidus qui se

 suivent, elle donne aussi pour chaque valeur de p la totalité des cas où un résidu p-ième

 est suivi d'un semblable résidu. Elle donne avec un égale facilité les cas où l'intervalle

 qui sépare deux résidus p-ièmes est k mais si k est > 1 le système des six congruences
 n'a plus lieu. Cette méthode n'a d'autre inconvénient que la longueur lorsque N est
 un peu grand. À la vérité certains artifices de calcul qui se présentens naturellement
 peuvent l'abréger un peu. Au reste les calculs qu'elle exige sont extremêment simples
 et faciles.

 Voici quelques exemples extraites d'une note déjà ancienne que je n'ai pas le tem[p]s

 de vérifier:

 En excluant p = 1 et p = 2 on trouve qu' aucun nombre premier des formes 4p +1,

 8/? + 1 ne peuvent avoir deux résidus p-ièmes dont la difference soit l'unité: que le

 seul nombre premier de la forme 10/? + 1 qui ait deux résidus de suite est 10 • 3 + 1 :
 Que les seuls nombres de la forme 14/? + 1 qui ayent [ayant] deux résidus de suite
 sont 14-3 + 1 et 14-9 + 1: que le seul nombre de la forme 16 p + 1 qui ait deux
 résidus de suite est 16 • 16 + 1: que le seul nombre de la forme 20/7+1 qui ait deux
 résidus de suite est 20 • 16 + 1.

 Je suppose que vous avez sous les yeux le mémoire ou plutôt le projet de mémoire
 de Mr. Poinsot car il faut faire soi-même le travail que l'auteur s'est épargné.87 Quoi
 qu'il en est soit son idée m'a parue fort heureuse. J'ai admiré comment étant partis
 de principes si différents, il m'avait fourni en quelque sorte la méthaphisique de
 ma méthode. En effet en fesant [faisant] usage de la remarque de cet auteur on voit
 comment j'ai dû arriver aux résultats que je viens d'exposer car il s'agit ici de traiter
 les racines de l'équation binôme du degré 2N, et quoique les quantités résultantes de
 la combinaison de ces racines (ou ce qui revient au même, et est plus conforme à la
 méthode que j'ai employée de la combinaison de leurs puissances) ne puisse devenir
 réeles que pour certaines valeurs de 2Np + 1 et par conséquent aussi de p, leurs
 rapports entr'elles [entre-elles] sont indépendants des valeurs de p.

 J'ai cherché aussi à appliquer les idées de Mr. Poinsot aux nombres de la forme

 2sp + 1 qui donnent à résoudre une équation binôme de l'ordre 2S.

 J'aurais voulu établir un rapport entre les valeurs des racines de cette équation
 et celle de l'équation du degré 2S qui donne les résidus p-ièmes puissances (mod
 2s p + 1). Si on pouvait trouver dans quels cas le nombre 2sp + 1 se trouve parmi
 les racines de l'équation de l'ordre 2S et vice-versa dans quels cas 2s p + 1 se trouve

 parmi les racines de l'équation de l'ordre 2S cela serait fort jolie et tout à fait analogue

 au théorème fondamental, mais je n'y suis pas.

 La notation de Mr. Poinsot m'a encore fourni une nouvelle manière de prouver que

 2 est résidu quarré des nombres de la forme 8« + 1 e non résidu quarré de ceux de la

 forme 8/; + 5: je ne sais pourquoi cette vérité se montre sous tant de faces différentes.
 Voici ce que c'est: 2yf-\ = (1 + sf—îj1 parconséquent 2V/—T est résidu quarré: si

 87 She is referring to the memoir of Louis Poinsot [ 1777-1859], Extrait de quelques recherches nouvelles
 sur l'algèbre et la théorie des nombres (Poinsot 1818).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 693

 le modul[e] est 8n + 1, V—T est résidu quarré: si le modul est 8« + 5, V—T est non
 résidu quarré donc etc.

 On voit aussi au moyen de cette notation que si 2 est résidu /?-ième (mod 2Np + 1),

 p étant toute fois un nombre impair, on aura trois résidus p-ièmes qui se suivront dans
 la série des nombre naturels. Ces trois résidus seront -J—\ — 1, V—T, a/—T + 1. En
 effet si 2 est résidus p-ième ±2^/^T et par conséquent aussi (V^T ± 1 )2 et ± 1
 seront également résidus /?-ième donc etc.

 Je réclame votre indulgence pour le peu de soin avec lequel est rédigée cette longue

 lettre. Je n'ai pas eu le tem[p]s nécessaire pour mettre plus d'ordre dans mes idées. J'ai

 écrit d'abondance et de souvenir et par conséquent trop lâchement. Je n'ai pas voulu
 manquer l'occasion de vous consulter sur l'importance qu'il est permis d'attacher aux
 idées que j'ai l'honneur de vous communiquer. Je serais surtout curieuse de savoir ce
 que vous pensez du parti que l'on peut tirer de l'ordre dans lequel les résidus p-iémes
 se trouvent placés dans la série des nombres naturels. Je crois que cette considération

 est particulière et j'ai trop peu de confiance dans mon jugement pour oser décider si
 elle mérite d'être suivie.

 Je puis vous assurer, Monsieur, que c'est l'étude de votre livre qui a changé en
 passion le goût que j'avais déjà pour l'analyse indéterminée. Ce n'est pas ici le lieu de
 revenir sur les belles choses qu'il contient; elles ont été trop bien appréciées par tous
 ceux qui l'ont étudié pour qu'il me reste quelque chose de nouveau à en dire. Qu'il
 me soit permis cependant de vous témoigner à quel point la simple substitution des

 congruances [congruences] représentées par le signe = m'a paru importante. La notion

 d'égalité indiquée autrefois par le signe = e me semblait toujour en contradiction avec
 la marche de l'analyse et je ne puis exprimer combien de netteté et par conséquent de

 facilité j'ai trouvé dans cette branche de calcul, avec le secours de votre notation.

 Il faut avoir manié le calcul pour sentir ces choses-là. A la vérité avec ce secours je

 n'ai pas encore été bien loin.

 Je vous aurais [aurez] la plus grande obligation si vous êtes assez bon pour prendre
 la peine de me dire ce que vous pensez de la marche que j'ai suivie. Quelque soit votre
 avis je le recevrez [recevrais] avec respect et reconnaissance.

 Agréez, Monsieur, l'assurance de la sincère admiration avec laquelle j'ai l'honneur

 votre très humble servante

 Sophie Germain

 d'être

 Monsieur,

 je profitte du retour auprès de vous, de votre savant disciple, Monsieur Bader,
 pour vous remercier de votre bon souvenir et aussi pour vous envoyer de nouveaux
 exemplaires de mes mémoires.

 J'ai lu avec un grand plaisir, votre mémoire sur les résidus biquarrés que ce jeune

 savant m'a remis de votre part.88

 ^ She is referring to Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum commentatio prima, which was presented to
 the Gôttingen Academy of Sciences in 1825 (Gauss 1828a).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 694

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Il suffirait pour entréténir en moi le goût des recherches arithmétiques, de me rap

 peller qu'il m'a procure l'honneur de recevoir autrefois, plusieurs lettres des vous
 Monsieur, croyez que je regrette vivement d'être privée depuis longtem[p]s de ces
 savantes communications auxquelles je n'ai jamais cessé d'attacher le plus haut prix.
 En causant, avec Mr. Bader, de l'objet actuelle de mes études, je lui ai donné

 occasion de me parler, et par suite, de me communiquer, le savant mémoire dans

 lequel vous comparez la courbure des surfaces à celle de la sphère (j'aurais bien désiré

 pouvoir me procurer ce mémoire; je l'ai rendu à regret et par pure discrétion, car je ne
 sais où le retrouver).89

 Je ne puis vous dire, Monsieur, combien j'ai été à la fois étonnée et satisfaite
 en apprenant qu'un grand géomètre avait eu, presqu'en même tem[p]s que moi
 même, l'idée d'une comparaison qui me semble tellement rationelle que je ne concois
 [concevais] ni comment on ne s'en est pas avisé plutôt, ni comment on a voulu faire
 aucune attention, ici, à ce que j'ai déjà publié à cet égard.

 Indépendamment de la supériorité qui caractérisé tout ce qui sort de votre savante
 plume, il existe une difference essentielle entre vos recherches et les miennes. Les
 vôtres. Monsieur, sont tout à fait géométriques: les miennes au contraire sont en quel

 que sorte méchaniques et n'empruntent à la géométrie que ce qui est nécessaire pour
 établir dans les cas ou il y a lieu, l'identité des forces dont l'expression est depuis
 longtem[p]s l'objet presqu'exclusif de mes recherches.

 Je vais essayer de vous donner un aperçu de la manière dont j'ai été conduite à
 comparer la courbure d'une surface à celle d'une certaine sphère: vous savez, Mon
 sieur, qu'en nommant r et r' les deux rayons de principales courbures d'une surface
 élastique, naturellement plane, qui aurait changé de figure par l'effet d'une cause ex
 térieure, j'ai soutenu que la force avec laquelle la surface tend à reprendre sa figure
 naturelle est proportionelle à \/r + l/r'. J'ai [seu] (car pour le dire en passant je
 n'ai obtenu la connaissance des objetions de Mr. Poisson contre ma théorie que d'une
 manière detournée et plus ou moins incertaine) qu'un des commissaires, se fondant
 sur ce que dit Euler touchant le nombre infini des courbures différentes qui résultent
 des intersections des divers plans qu'on peut faire passer par le point donné de la
 surface, avait pensé que je n'avais pas justifié le choix des courbures principales et
 que je n'étais pas autorisée à dire qu'elles donnent la nature de la courbure de cette

 surface dans le point choisi.

 En cherchant à combattre l'objetion j'ai remarqué qu'en prenant la somme des rai
 sons inverses des rayons de courbure de deux des courbes d'intersections normales, il

 suffisait de choisir celles qui sont contenues dans deux plans perpendiculaires entr'eux
 pour obtenir une quantité constante et égale à la somme des raisons inverses des deux

 rayons de courbures principales. J'ai encore remarque que si les deux plans d'inter

 sections choisis font l'angle de 45° avec ceux qui contiennent les lignes de courbures
 principales, les rayons de courbures des courbes contenus dans les plans choisis sont
 égaux entr'eux et au rayon d'une sphère qui couperait la surface de telle manière que

 deux des quadrants seraient au dessus et les deux autres au dessous de la surface. Cette

 sphère est celle que j'ai nommé de moyenne courbure.

 She is referring to Disquisitiones gene rales circa superficies curvas, which was presented to the Gôttin

 gen Academy of Sciences in 1827 (Gauss 1828b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss

 695

 Je suis en état de démontrer, par des considérations qui se sont présentées a moi
 dans ces derniers temps et qui sont sans comparaison preferables à ce que j'ai dit à
 cet égard dans les mémoires que j'ai publiée, que quelque soit la figure de l'élément
 de la surface, c'est-à-dire, quelque soit la manière dont la courbure de l'élément est
 repartie autour du point de tangence, la force qui serait employée à détruire la cour

 bure de cette élément demeurera constante tant que le rayon de la sphère de moyenne
 courbure demeurera lui-même constant.

 Ces remarques trouveront leur place dans des questions que je n'avais pas en vue

 lorsque je me suis livrée à leur premier examen: ainsi par exemple elles pourront servir
 à comparer la force de l'élément d'une voûte en dôme à celle de l'élément d'une voûte

 en berceau et en effet on voit que la courbure moyenne peut être la même et dans une

 surface courbe en tous sens et dans une surface ou la courbure n'existerait que dans
 un seul sens.

 Cette dernière observation m'a donne lieu d'établir la proposition suivante qui
 résulterait également de vos formules, Monsieur, et qui, par cette raison, me devient
 plus precieuse:

 "Si on compare la superficie courbe d'un cylindre à celle du quart de la sphère
 décrite d'une rayon double du rayon de la sphère inscrite au cylindre on trouvera que

 ces deux surfaces, qui ont pourtant des figures fort différentes, ont en même tem[p]s

 qu'une entendue égale, une quantité égale de courbure: leurs parties aliquotes jouissent
 aussi de cette double égalité".

 Je regrette d'être privée de l'avantage que je trouverais à jouir comme Monsieur
 Bader, de votre savante conversation: ce qu'il m'en rapporte ne m'étonne pas mais est

 pour moi un objet d'envie. Indépendamment de ce que je purrais apprendre de vous,
 je regrette encore de ne pouvoir soumettre à votre jugement une foule d'idees que je
 n'ai pas publiée et qu'il serait trop long d'écrire.

 Veuillez au moins Monsieur, me conserver une place dans votre souvenir et agreez

 l'assurance de mon profond respect

 votre servante

 Sophie Germain

 Paris ce 28 mars 1829

 Consistency and editions of the correspondence

 Letters of Sophie Germain

 1. Mr. Le Blanc to Gauss, Paris 21 Novembre 1804 (Stupuy 1879, pp. 298-302;

 Boncompagni 1880);
 Addendum, partially published in Del Centina (2008, pp. 373-375).

 2. Mr. Le Blanc a Gauss, Paris 21 Julliet 1805 (Boncompagni 1880);

 3. Mr. Le Blanc to Gauss, Paris 16 Novembre 1805 (Stupuy 1879, pp. 308-311;

 Addendum, unpublished.

 Boncompagni 1880);
 Addendum, unpublished.

 «£i Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 696

 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 4. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 20 Fevrier 1807 (Schering 1877; Boncompagni

 1880);

 Addendum, unpublished.

 Addendum, unpublished.

 5. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 27 Juin 1807 (Boncompagni 1880);

 6. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 19 Mars 1808, unpublished.
 7. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 22 Mai 1809, unpublished.
 8. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 26 Mai 1809, unpublished.
 9. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 12 Mai 1819 (Del Centina 2008, pp. 356-362).
 10. Sophie Germain to Gauss, Paris 28 Mars 1829, partially published in English in

 Bucciarelli and Dworsky (1980, pp. 114-115).

 All letters and mathematical notes are held at the Niedersachsische Staats- und Uni

 versitatsbibliothek in Gottingen: Cod. ms. Gauss Briefe A: Germain, n. 9. Abteilung
 Handschriften und Selten Drucke.

 Letters of Gauss

 A. Gauss to Mr. Le Blanc, Brunswick 16 Juin 1805 (Stupuy 1879, pp. 302-306).
 B. Gauss to Mr. Le Blanc, Brunswick 20 Août 1805 (Stupuy 1879, pp. 306-307).
 C. Gauss to Sophie Germain, Brunswick 30 April 1807 (Boncompagni 1879) and

 D. Gauss to Sophie Germain, Gottingue 19 Janvier 1808 (Stupuy 1879, pp. 318—

 (Gauss 1917, pp. 70-74).

 320).

 Letters A, B and D are held at the Bibliotèque National, Fonds Français n. 9118. Letter
 C is dispersed.

 Babbage, C. 1989. Science and reform. In: Selected works of Charles Babbage, ed. A. Hyman: 11-34.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Babbage, C., and Herschel, J. 1813. Preface. Memoirs of the Analytical Society 1: 1-22.

 Barlow, P. 1811. An elementary investigation of the theory of numbers, with its application to the indeter

 minate and diophantine analysis, the analytical and geometrical division of the circle and several other
 curious algebraical and arithmetical problems. London: Johnson.

 Bertrand, J. 1859. Correspondance. Comptes Rendus hebd. des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences 49: 45.
 Bertrand, J. 1877. Correspondance. Comptes Rendus hebd. des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences 84:

 Bertrand, J. 1879. Oeuvres de Sophie Germain. Journal des Savants Mai: 307-314.
 Boncompagni, B. 1879. Lettera inedita di Carlo Federico Gauss a Sofia Germain pubblicata da B. Bon
 compagni, Calcografia e autografia Achille Paris, Firenze. Printed version in: Archiv der Mathematik
 und Physik 63 ( 1880), Litterarischer Bericht 259: 27-31.

 Boncompagni, B. 1879-1880. Presentazione di opere. Atti dell'Accademia Pontificia de' Nuovi Lincei 33:

 Boncompagni, B. 1880. Cinq lettres de Sophie Germain à Charles Frédéric Gauss publiées par B. Bon
 compagni d'après les originaux possédés par la Société Royale des Sciences de Gôttingen, Berlin, Institut

 de photolithographie des frères Burchard, imprimerie de Gustave Schade. Printed version in: Archiv der

 Mathematik und Physik 65, Litterarischer Bericht 257: 5-9 and Archiv der Mathematik und Physik 66,
 Litterarischer Bericht 256: 4-10.

 References

 1017.

 427.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss 697

 Boncompagni, B. 1883. Lettre de Charles-Frédéric Gauss au D.r Henri-Guillaume-Mathias Olbers en date

 de Braunschweig den 3 September 1805, publiée par B. Boncompagni d'après l'original possédés par
 la Société Royale des Sciences de Gottingen, Berlin, Institut de photolithographie des frères Burchard,
 imprimerie de Gustave Schade (the letter and its Italian translation by A. Sparagna, were printed in
 Bullettino di Bibliografia e Storia de lie Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 16:215-220).

 Boncompagni, B. 1884. Intorno ad una lettera di Carlo Federico Gauss al Dr. Enrico Guglielmo Mattia

 Olbers. Atti dell'Accademia Pontificia de' Nuovi Lincei 36: 201-295.

 Boncompagni, B. 1895. Catalogo délia insigne biblioteca apparlenuta alia chiara memoria del Principe

 Baldassarre Boncompagni, Parte /. Roma, Cecchini.

 Bucciarelli, L.L., and Dworsky, N. 1980. Sophie Germain: An essay in the history of the theory of elasticity.

 Studies in the History of Modern Science, 6. Dordrect: Reidel.

 Cauchy, A. 1815. Mémoire sur les fonctions qui ne peuvent obtenir que deux valeurs égales et de sig
 nes contraires par suite des transpositions opérées entre les variables qu'elles renferment. Jour. Ecole
 polytechnique 10. Also in: Oeuvres complètes (2) 1: 91-169.

 Cauchy, A. 1829. Exercices de mathématique 4: 253-299. Also in: Ouevres complètes (2) 9: 298-341.
 Chasles, M. 1879. Comptes Rendus hebd. des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences 89: 800.
 Collison, M.J. 1977. The origins of the cubic and biquadratic reciprocity laws. The Archive for History of

 Comte, A. 1864. Cours de philosophie positive. Paris: Bachelier.
 Dahan-Dalmédico, A. 1987. Mécanique et théorie des surfaces: les travaux de Sophie Germain. Historia

 De Jonquières, E. 1896. Sur une lettre de Gauss du moi de Juin 1805. Comptes Rendus hebd. des Seances

 Exact Sciences 17: 63-69.

 Mathematica 14: 347-365.

 de l'Académie des Sciences 122: 829.

 Del Centina, A. 2005. Letters of Sophie Germain preserved in Florence. Historia Mathematica 32: 60-75.
 Del Centina, A. 2008. Unpublished manuscripts of Sophie Germain and a revaluation of her work on

 Fermat's last theorem. The Archive for History of Exact Sciences 62: 349-392.

 Del Centina, A., and Fiocca, A. 2004. L'archivio di Guglielmo Libri dalla sua dispersione aifondi della Bib

 lioteca Moreniana/The Archive of Guglielmo Libri from its Dispersal to the Collections at the Biblioteca
 Moreniana. Firenze: Olschki.

 Del Centina, A., and Fiocca, A. 2010. Guglielmo Libri matematico e storico della matematica. Firenze:

 Olschki.

 Springer.

 Dickson, L.E. 1971. History of the theory of numbers, 3 vols. New York: Chelsea.
 Dunnington, G.W. 1955. Gauss, titan of science. New York: Hafner. Reprinted by The Mathematical Asso

 ciation of America in 2004.

 Edwards, H.M. 1977. Fermât 's last theorem: A genetic introduction to algebraic number theory. New York:

 Eisenstein, G. 1844a. Beweis des Reciprocitâtssatzes fur die cubischen Reste in der Theorie der aus drit
 ten Wurzeln der Einheit zusammengesetzten complexen Zahlen. Journal fiir die reine und angewandte
 Mathematik 27: 289-310.

 Eisenstein, G. 1844b. Lois de réciprocité. Journal fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 28: 53-67.
 Folkerts, M. 2003. The fate of the manuscripts in the Boncompagni collection. In II Sogno di Galois. Scritti
 sulla storia della matematica dedicati a Laura Toti Rigatelli per il suo 60mo compleanno, 229-267.
 Siena: Centre Studi della Matematica Medievale.

 Gandhi, J.M. 1966. A note on Fermat's last theorem. The American Mathematical Monthly 73: 1106-1107.
 Gauss, C.F. 1799. Demonstratio nova theorematis omnem functionem algebraicam rationalem integram
 unius variabilis in factores reales primi vel secundi gradus resolvi posse. Also in: Werke, dritter Band,
 herausgegeben von der Koniglichen Gesellschaft 1866: 1-56.

 Gauss, C.F. 1801. Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Lipsia apud Gerh. Fleischer. Also in: Werke, erster Band,

 herausgegeben von der Koniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen 1863: 1-474.

 Gauss, C.F. 1808. Theorematis arithmetici demonstratio nova. Commentationes S.R. Scientiarum Gotting
 ensis 16. Also in: Werke, zweiter Band, herausgegeben von der Koniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissens
 chaften zu Gottingen 1863: 1-8.

 Gauss, C.F. 1809. Theoria motus corporum caelestium in sectionibus conicis solem ambientium. Hamburgi:
 Perthes et I.H. Besser. Also in: Werke, siebenter Band, herausgegeben von der Koniglichen Gesellschaft

 der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen 1906: 1-280.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 698 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Gauss, C.F. 1811. Summatio quarumdam serierum singularium. Commentationes S.R. Scientiarum Got

 tingensis recentiores 1. Also in: Werke, zweiter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft
 der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1876: 9—45.

 Gauss, C.F. 1813. Theoria attractionis corporum sphaeroidorum ellipticorum homogeneorum methodo nova

 tractata. Commentationes S. R. Scientiarum Gottingensis recentiores 2. Also in: Werke, funfter Band, her

 ausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1867: 1-22.

 Gauss, C.F. 1818. Theorematis fundamental in doctrina de residuis quadratici demonstrationes et ampli

 ationes novae. Commentationes S.R. Scientiarum Gottingensis recentiores 4. Also in: Werke, zweiter

 Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1863: 47-64.

 Gauss, C.F. 1828a. Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum commentatio prima, Commentationes S.R. Scien

 tiarum Gottingensis recentiores, IV. Also in: Werke, zweiter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen
 Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1863, pp. 65-92.

 Gauss, C.F. 1828b. Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas. Commentationes S.R. Scientiarum Got

 tingensis recentiores 6. Also in: Werke, vierter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft
 der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1873: 217-258.

 Gauss, C.F. 1832. Theoria residuorum biquadraticorum commentatio secunda. Commentationes S.R. Sci

 entiarum Gottingensis recentiores 7. Also in: Werke, zweiter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen
 Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen 1863: 93-148.

 Gauss, C.F. 1863a. Werke, erster Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften

 zu Gôttingen.

 chaften zu Gôttingen.

 zu Gôttingen.

 Gauss, C.F. 1863b. Werke, zweiter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissens

 Gauss, C.F. 1900. Werke, achter Band, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften

 Gauss, C.F. 1917. Werke, zehnten Bandes, Erste Abteilung, herausgegeben von der Kôniglichen Gesellschaft

 der Wissenschaften zu Gôttingen.

 Genocchi, A. 1852. Note sur la théorie des résidus quadratiques. Mémoires couronnés et mémoires des
 savants étrangers publ. par l'Académie royale des sciences, des lettres et des beaux-arts de Belgique
 25: 1-54.

 Genocchi, A. 1880. Il carteggio di Sofia Germaine Carlo Federico Gauss. Atli délia Accademia (telle Scienze

 di Torino 15: 795-808.

 Genocchi. A. 1884a. Alcune asserzioni di C.F. Gauss circa le forme quadratiche YY ± nZZ. Bullettino di

 Bibliografia e di Storia delle Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 17: 245-247.

 Genocchi, A. 1884b. Teoremi di Sofia Germain intorno ai residui biquadratici. Bullettino di Bibliografia e

 di Storia delle Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 17: 248-251.

 Genocchi, A. 1885. Ancora un cenno sui residui cubici e biquadratici. Bullettino di Bibliografia e di Storia

 delle Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 18: 231-234.

 Genocchi, A., and Realis, S. 1884. Intorno ad una proposizione inesatta di Sofia Germain. Bullettino di

 Bibliografia e di Storia delle Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 17: 315-316.

 Germain. S. 1821. Recherches sur la théorie des surfaces élastiques. Paris: Courcier.
 Germain, S. 1826. Remarques sur la nature, les bornes et l'étendue de la question des surfaces élastiques.

 Paris: Huzard et Courcier.

 Germain. S. 1828. Examen des principes qui peuvent conduire à la connaissance des lois de l'équilibre et

 du mouvement des solides élastiques. Annales de Chimie 38: 123-131.

 Germain, S. 1831a. Mémoire sur la courbure des surfaces. Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik

 7: 1-29.

 Germain, S. 1831b. Note sur la manière dont se composent les valeurs de y et z dans l'équation v" | =

 4(vP_n

 y2 ± z}, et celles de Y' et de Z' dans l'équation = Y'- ± Z'2. Journal fur die reine und
 angewandte Mathematik 7: 201-204.

 Germain, S. 1833. Considérations générales sur l'état des sciences et des letters, éd. M. Lherbette. Paris:

 Lachevardière.

 2

 Germain, S. 1880. Mémoire sur l'emploi de l'épaisseur dans la théorie des surfaces élastiques. Journal de

 Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées (3) 6: Appendice.

 Goldstein C., Schappacher N., Schwermer J. (eds.) 2007. The Shaping of Arithmetic after C.F. Gauss's

 Disquisitiones Arithmeticae. New York, Springer.

 Giinther, S. 1881. Die Briefwechsel zwischen Gauss and Sophie Germain. Historisch-literarische Abteilung

 der Zeitschrift fiir Mathematik und Physik 26: 19-25.

 <£j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The correspondence Germain-Gauss 699

 Gunther, S. 1882. Il carteggio tra Gauss e Sofia Germain (Italian translation by Alfonso Sparagna). Bullettino

 di Bibliografia e di Sloria delle Scienze Matematiche e Fisiche 15:174-179.

 Henry, C. 1879. Les manuscrits de Sophie Germain et leur récent éditeur, Documents nouveaux. Revised

 Philosophy 8: 619-641.

 Henry, C. 1880. Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques et Astronomiques. Comptes Rendus et Analyses (2)

 4: 273-276 [Review of the five letters by Sophie Germain to Gauss edited by Boncompagni],

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1827. De residuis cubicis commentatio numerosa. Journal fiir die Reine und Angewandte

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1841. De determinantibus functionalibus. Journal fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik

 Mathematik 2: 66-69.

 22:319-360.

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1846. Ùber die Kreistreilung und ihre Anwendung auf die Zahlentheorie. Journal fiir die

 reine und angewandte Mathematik 30: 166-184.

 Klein, F. 1826. Vorlesungen iiber die entwicklung der Mathematik im IÇ.jalirhundert, Band I, Berlin.
 Lacroix, S.F. 1804. Complément des Elemens d'algèbre à l'usage de l'Ecole Centrale des Quatre-Nations,

 Lagrange. J.-L. 1808. Traité de la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés, nouvelle édition

 3-eme édition revue et augmentée. Paris: Courcier.

 revue et augmentée par l'auteur. Paris: Courcier.

 Lagrange, J.-L. 1867-1892. Oeuvres, 14 vols. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
 Laubenbacher, R., and Pengelley, D., 2010. Voici ce que j'ai trouvé: Sophie Germain's grand plan to prove

 Fermat's Last Theorem. Historia Mathematica 37: 641-692.

 Legendre, A.-M. 1785. Recherches d'analyse indéterminée, Histoire de l'Académie Royal des Sciences
 année MDCCLXXXV, avec les Mémoire de Mathématiques et de Physique pour la même année (1788):
 465-559.

 Legendre, A.-M. 1798. Essai sur la théorie des nombres. Paris: Duprat.
 Legendre, A.-M. 1806. Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des comètes. Paris: Courcier.
 Legendre, A.-M. 1808. Essai sur la théorie des nombres, 2-ème édition. Paris: Courcier.
 Legendre, A.-M. 1827. Recherches sur quelques objets d'analyse indéterminée et particulièrement sur le

 théorème de Fermât. Mémoires Ac. des Se. de l'Ins. de France (2) 6: 1-60.

 Lejeune-Dirichlet, M.G. 1828. Recherches sur les diviseurs premiers d'une classe de formules du quatrième

 degré. Journal fiir die reine und angewandte Mathematik 3: 35-69.

 Lemmermeyer, F. 2000. Reciprocity law, from Eulerto Eisenstein. New York: Springer.
 Libri, G. 1832. Notice sur M.Ile Sophie Germain. Journal des Débats 18 mai 1832. Also in: Considérations

 générales sur l'état des sciences et des letters, éd. M. Lherbette. Paris: Lachevardière.

 Libri, G. 1829. Mémoires de Mathématique et de Physique. Firenze: Ciardetti.
 Maccioni Ruju, A., and Monstert, M. 1995. The life and time of Guglielmo Libri (1802-1869): Scientist,

 patriot, scholar, journalist and thief: A nineteenth-century story. Hilversum: Verloren.

 MacKinnon, N. 1990. Sophie Germain, or, was Gauss a Feminist? The Mathematical Gazette 74: 346-351.
 Mansion, P. 1880a .Nouvelle Correspondance Mathématique 6:217-219 [Review of Gauss's letter to Sophie

 Germain edited by Boncompagni],

 Mansion, P. 1880b. Nouvelle Correspondance Mathématique 6: 315-317 [Review of the five letters by

 Sophie Germain to Gauss edited by Boncompagni],

 Mansion, P. 1880c. Sur les lettres de Sophie Germain a Gauss publiées par B. Boncompagni. Nouvelle

 Correspondance Mathématique 6: 407^108.

 Peters, C.A.F., Ed. 1860. Briefwechsel zwischen C.F. Gauss und H.C. Schumacher, erster Band. Altona,

 Esch.

 Plackett, R.L. 1972. The discovery of the method of least squares. Biometrika 59: 239-251.
 Poinsot, L. 1818. Extrait de quelques recherches nouvelles sur l'algèbre et la théorie des nombres. Mémoires

 Ac. des Sc. de l'Institut de France 14(1813-1815): 381-392.

 Poinsot, L. 1820. Mémoire sur l'application de l'algèbre à la théorie des nombres. Jour. Ec. polytechnique

 11: 342-410. Also in: Mémoires Ac. des Se. de l'Institut de France (2) 4 (1824): 99-184.

 Raina, B.L. 1969. On Fermat's last theorem. American Mathematical Monthly 76: 49-51.
 Ribenboim, P. 1999. Fermat's last theorem for amateurs. New York: Springer.

 Sampson, J.H. 1990. Sophie Germain and the theory of numbers. The Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 41:157-161.

 Schering, E. 1877. Carl Friedrich Gauss' Geburtstag nach Hundertjahriger Wiederkehr Festrede, Abhandl
 ungen der Mathematischen Classe der K. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Gôttingen, Band 22. Italian
 translation in: Annali di Matematica pura e Applicata 9: 210-239.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 700 A. Del Centina, A. Fiocca

 Schering, E. 1879. Bemerkungen iiber Gauss' Brief vom 30 April 1807 an Sophie Germain, Nachrichten

 von der K. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften und der G.A. Universitàt zu Gôttingen: 381-384.

 Schering, E. 1880. Briefe der Sophie Germain an Gauss in Photographie verôffentlicht von B. Boncompagni,

 Nachrichten von der K. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften und der G. A. Universitàt zu Gôttingen: 367
 369.

 Schilling, C., Ed. 1900. Wilhelm Olbers sein Leben und seine Werke, zweiter Band, Briefwechsel zwischen

 Olbers und Gauss erste Abtheilung. Berlin: Julius Springer.

 Schmidt, F., and Stàckel, P. 1899. Briefwechsel zwischen Carl Friedrich Gauss und Wolfang Bolyai. Leipzig:

 Teubner.

 Sierpiriski, W. 1964. Elementary theory of numbers. Warszawa: Pergamon Press.

 Smith, H J.S. 1965. Report on the theory of numbers. In The collected mathematical papers by Henry John

 Stephen Smith, 38-366. New York: Chelsea.

 Stupuy, H. 1879. Oeuvres Philosophiques de Sophie Germain. Paris: Ritti.
 Stupuy, H. i 896. Oeuvres Philosophiques de Sophie Germain, Nouv. ed. Paris: Ritti.
 Truesdell, C. 1991. Sophie Germain: Fame earned by a stubborn error. Bollettino di Storia delle Scienze

 Waterhouse, W.C. 1994. A counterexample for Germain. The American Mathematical Monthly 101:140

 Matematiche 11(2): 3-24.

 150.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:06:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

