 

 

 

 

The Use of Scientometric Methods for Evaluating National Research Programs
Author(s): Loet Leydesdorff and  Peter van der Schaar
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring, 1987), pp. 22-31
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690460
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:46 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/690460?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Use of Scientometric Methods for Evaluating National
 Research Programs

 Loet Leydesdorff and Peter van der Schaar
 University of Amsterdam

 Abstract

 National science policy efforts can be understood, from an information science point of view,

 as deliberate attempts to change the relationship of research groups to the international liter-

 ature over time. These relationships can be either active (publishing and citing) or passive

 (being cited, co-cited, etc.). This study examines the development of two highly comparable

 Dutch national research programs (one on "wind energy" and one on "solar energy'" in terms

 of factors which can be associated with such relationships. The different outcomes of the

 two programs are analyzed in terms of the emergence of new journals in both areas. The

 key findings are: (1) An international core literature emerges between 1974 and 1984 in the

 solar but not in the wind energy literature. (2) The Dutch solar energy researchers, both in

 their journal articles and in their reports, link themselves to this literature. (3) The contribu-

 tions of the solar researchers are in turn recognized in the international literature. (4) The

 wind energy researchers have less opportunity to participate with a clearly defined external

 professional community.

 It has been argued that relationships among journals,
 individuals, references, and citations can be analyzed in
 terms of their structural properties, but the question re-
 mains whether one such analysis can be used as a baseline
 to calibrate our understanding of another.' This question
 becomes particularly relevant when we want to measure
 the effectiveness of national science policies: science poli-

 cies as a rule aim to change cognitive levels of scientific de-

 velopment by steering, through institutional factors such
 as funding.2 However, there is always also an "endoge-
 nous" cognitive development in the sciences-i.e., one in-
 dependent of external efforts to direct its development.

 Hence, we have to find ways to distinguish among (i) insti-
 tutional effects of science policies; (ii) cognitive develop-
 ments in scientific fields which take place independently
 of the specific national science policy; and (iii) changes in
 the quality of the national output which have been
 brought about, at least in part, by science policy
 efforts.3

 Author address: Science Dynamics, Nieuwe Achtergracht 166, 1018 WV
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands

 We want to thank Rob Zeeman, Nero Matthias, and Gert Timmerman

 for their help in developing the necessary software for this study. We also
 want to thank Susan Cozzens for her comments.

 Science & Technology Studies 5(1): 22-31, 1987.

 22 e SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 1

 Elsewhere4, we have argued that the relations among
 journals as measured through the factorial structure of

 their aggregated mutual citations can be used as a baseline
 for changes taking place at other levels of analysis.5 The
 structure at this level can thus-at least in the natural

 sciences6--be accounted for in terms of the differentiation
 between the fields and subfields as the most important ele-
 ment. In journal to journal citations, we find a structure
 which can be readily understood, easily plotted, and fol-

 lowed over the years on the basis of the data in the Journal

 Citation Reports (JCR) of the Science Citation Index (SCI). We

 have previously expressed the hope that this baseline of
 journal-journal citations may help to solve the calibration
 problem in the measurement of change in science, and
 hence of the relative success of using policy to promote the
 various forms of change which we have distinguished
 above.7

 In this article we attempt to use these techniques to as-

 sess the relative success of two national Dutch research

 programs in energy research over the period 1974-1984:
 one on solar energy and one on wind energy. We selected
 these two programs because they have been very similar,
 both in management structure and in financial input. In
 fact, the one (on solar energy) is a deliberate copy of the
 other (on wind energy). Both programs were set up by the
 Dutch government in response to the oil crisis of 1973, and

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 received over the relevant period an extra stimulus equiva-

 lent to about $20 million each. More important for the com-

 parison, however, was the creation of an almost identical

 strong management structure for the national research ef-
 forts in both fields.

 The results of these programs have included the produc-
 tion of 366 scientific reports from the National Research
 Program on Wind Energy in the period 1974-1982, and
 120 reports from the National Research Program on Solar
 Energy since 1976. The programs actually took off on a
 larger scale in 1977 and in 1978, respectively. Therefore,
 at first glance, the Wind Energy program seems to have
 been more productive in quantitative terms.

 However, Holland was not the only country which stim-

 ulated wind and solar energy research from 1974 onwards.

 In fact, both fields were internationally recognized as pos-

 sible alternative sources for energy in the long term, and

 since energy is a matter of state concern in many societies,

 both were made priorities of state science policies in many
 advanced countries. Hence, the subject matter was also an
 object of international competition, from a scientific and

 technological point of view as well as from a business point
 of view.

 be distinguished easily, leading to the following general
 scheme:

 xi

 y
 y, -

 In this scheme x1 stands for the international
 environment-later in this article to be operationalized as

 the journal-journal structures-and x2 for the policy ef-
 fort. The dependent variable y represents the research
 strategies and hence the choices made by the scientists
 involved.

 Further elaboration of the model

 This very general scheme of a local and cosmopolitan di-
 mension in the scientific enterprises indicates classes of
 variables which have to be elaborated for every specific

 In this study we limit our attention to the science policy

 case. In this study, x2 is held constant: we selected the two

 effects of the two programs, leaving the technological and

 policy programs because of their similarity. Both programs

 industrial outputs and implications as a matter for separate
 analysis. Our primary questions are: What can such input

 are supposed to induce changes in the choices (y) made by
 the relevant actors with respect to the international envi-

 from the political arena mean for the scientific enterprise
 at the national level? How do the relevant researchers react

 ronment (x,).

 in terms of their publications and their participation in the

 development of the relevant sciences? Did the policy initia-
 tive indeed stimulate the researchers involved to shift their

 attention and reorient their research towards new research

 goals? If so, was this achieved up-hill against the estab-
 lished matrix of the scientific disciplines, or was it facili-
 tated by cognitive developments at the level of
 internationally organized fields? Did the political incen-
 tive change the position of the Dutch researchers in these
 fields as net consumers or producers of international

 knowledge in these areas? Or to ask the question more cyn-
 ically: can an advanced industrial country-like the
 Netherlands-establish a leading edge in a new field by
 stimulating its scientists in certain directions, or is such a

 However, we should be aware that this distinction can-
 not be identified with the distinction between the social

 and the cognitive. Both cognitive and social elements play
 a role at both levels. We may conjecture that at the cosmo-
 politan level in the natural sciences, the social elements

 (such as reputational structure, reward structure, etc.) are

 largely derived from the scientific substance of the contri-

 butions of the authors, while at the local level politico-

 cognitive vocabularies function within what are primarily
 social relations.

 As a first operationalization for the international envi-

 ronment, the journal-journal citation structure may be a
 useful indicator. In line with the argument in the former
 section, the selections which researchers and research

 communities make in these environments can be specified

 national science policy merely an epiphenomenon of inter-

 as: (i) the journals in which they publish, and (ii) the jour-

 national scientific development, at best paving the way for

 nals from which they cite. The journals in which they are

 scientists to follow paths which are being traced by the in-
 ternational community anyhow?

 The answer to this question is likely to be that effective-

 cited, although not an active selection by the authors, also
 indicate a relationship between their articles and the inter-
 national literature.

 ness in science policy is dependent on some synergism be-
 tween the local and the cosmopolitan dimensions. On the
 one hand, resources must be available, and on the other,
 publication and career opportunities for scientists within
 the scientific community have to be favorable. Analyti-
 cally, however, the local and cosmopolitan dimensions can

 However, researchers who participate in programs like
 these produce both articles and reports. Therefore, one
 way for them to deal with the local and cosmopolitan di-
 mensions of science may be to keep the two audiences
 apart-to use citations from and publications in the inter-

 national literature as sources of legitimation for their (local)

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 1 e 23

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 International journal structure (x,)

 their specific delays, the publication and citation analyses
 were extended to the end of 1984.

 To generate the relevant journal set to form a baseline,
 we conducted short interviews by telephone with leading

 researchers in the groups involved. These interviews iden-
 tified a consensus about eight important journals in the

 case of solar energy; they were used as entry points for later
 analysis. But in the case of wind energy no agreement
 about important journals could be reached in this way.
 Therefore, in the latter case, those journals were taken as

 entry points which contained more than one publication

 by authors from the original list, with at least two different
 institutional addresses. This procedure resulted in five
 journal titles, of which one was not included in the SCI.
 Hence, four journals were taken as entries. (See Table 1 for
 both lists.)

 Local incentives

 Figure 1. Summary of the relevant selections. 1. Research groups

 publish in international journals. 2. Research groups quote from
 international journals. 3. Research groups are quoted in interna-

 tional journals. 4. Research groups use references in their local

 reports (transfer function).

 For 1974, 1978, 1982, and 1984, the two journals which

 cited each of these entry journals most heavily, and the two
 journals which were most heavily cited by each journal
 were located in the Journal Citation Reports of the SCI. This

 procedure was reiterated for the two new batches of jour-
 nals in the Cited and the Citing Journal Packages of the

 reports, while they address a different (scientific and inter-
 national) audience in their articles and books.9 Such be-
 havior might be stimulated by the language difference
 between the (mainly Dutch) reports and the (mainly En-

 Journal Citation Reports until the lists converged, or until we

 moved more than two citations links from any entry jour-

 nal. The journals in the set at this point were treated as the
 "core" of the international literature for the areas. A full

 glish) articles.10 Taking this into account, we specify as a
 fourth measure of relationship with the international envi-

 ronment the references in their reports, as distinguished
 from the references in their (international) articles. The

 four indicators are summarized in Figure 1.

 In sum, we maintain that from an information science

 journal-journal citation matrix containing the exact cita-

 tion rates was generated for the core journals for each year.

 (Rates of less than five were not included since they are not

 listed in the JCR). The full matrices were analyzed further

 as described in our earlier article, using factor analysis and
 multidimensional scaling.12

 point of view, science policy efforts amount to attempts to

 change the selections made by the relevant national (or at
 least institutionally defined) research communities with
 respect to the international literature." Only with a full
 text analysis could one determine precisely what is being
 channeled through these selections, but in the context of
 this article we limit ourselves to the formal relations be-

 tween developments in the international literature and
 changes in the selections which the relevant research

 groups make from them, since these can be measured with
 available scientometric techniques.

 Methods

 Table 1:

 Entry journals for solar and wind energy:

 Solar Energy
 1. Solar Cells

 2. Solar Energy
 3. Solar Energy Materials
 4. Applied Energy
 5. Energy Conversion (and Management)
 6. International Journal of Energy Research
 7. Journal of Applied Physics
 8. Journal of the Electrochemical Society

 Because both solar and wind energy programs were
 strongly managed from a central office, a complete list
 could be obtained of all the reports produced between
 1974 and 1982. A list of all the authors of these reports
 served as input for a publication search in the Science Cita-
 tion Index from 1974 onwards. For these publications refer-

 ences in them and citations to them are further analyzed.

 Wind Energy
 1. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society
 2. Journal of Aircraft*
 3. Applied Scientific Research
 4. Journal of (Wind Engineering and) Industrial

 Aerodynamics

 Because it is common practice for authors to write articles

 * The Journal of Aircraft is included in the Citing Joumal
 Package of the Science Citation Index only.

 about their research only after having finished their con-
 tracts, and because publications and citations each have

 24 e SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Figure 2. Stabilization of solar energy journals in 1982 and 1984. The figure represents the juxtaposition of MD-SCAL solutions
 for 1982 and 1984. The journals are labelled as follows: Solar Energy (SE1) Energy Conversion (SE2) Solar Energy (SE3) International

 Journal of Energy Research (SE4) Applied Energy(SE5) Journal of Solar Energy-Transactions of the ASME; Various physics (VP1)
 Solar Energy Materials (VP2) Solar Cells; Applied Physics (AP1) Journal of Applied Physics (AP2) Applied Physics Letters (AP3)
 IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics; Solid State Physics (SP1) Physical Review B-Condensed Matter (SP2) Solid State Communica-

 tions (SP3) Physical Review Letters; Electrochemistry (EC1) Journal of the Electrochemical Society (EC2) Electrochimica Acta (EC3)

 Journal of Electronanalytical Chemistry and Interfacial Electrochemistry; Heat Transfer (HT1) International Journal of Heat and Mass
 Transfer

 EC3 HTI

 EC2

 EC3

 HT 1

 ECl

 EC1

 SP2 VPI SE4
 SE2

 SP3 16 0.0 AP2 93SE

 spiAPI

 AP2

 VP2

 SE1

 SES

 VP2

 AP3

 AP3

 N dhat

 1982 16 0.093
 1984 17 0.081

 SE3 SE4

 SE3

 The lists for the four years of journals for solar and wind
 energy respectively were then combined and matched
 against lists of publications from the two research pro-

 4. citing references in the articles; and

 5. references in reports.

 Within each dimension we focus first on the solar energy

 grams to divide them into "core" and "non-core" solar- or
 wind-energy publications. Citations were down-loaded
 for all publications; the "core" publications only were fur-

 case and then on the wind energy case. In the last section,
 we then return to the central questions of the article to
 draw conclusions with respect to the effectiveness of these
 science policy-induced research programs.

 ther analyzed in terms of their citing patterns as well.13 For
 each set of reports-solar and wind energy-the refer-
 ences to journals were also divided into core and non-core

 Results

 groups.

 It should be noted that two different on-line versions of

 The development of journal structures

 the SCI were used, one available through DIALOG Infor-
 mation Services and one through the German DIMDI in-
 stallation since the citing references are included only in

 the latter one. Although there are slight differences in cov-

 erage between the two, these were not found to affect the
 analysis.

 Solar energy journals. The journal analysis for solar en-

 ergy, which started with the eight central journals of Table
 1, led to clear results. (These results are also used later in

 this article to explain some of the data on publications and
 citations.)

 In 1974, 21 journals constituted the environment of the

 In the following section we first present the results of the

 only solar energy journal of that time, Energy Conversion.

 analysis. The results are examined along following dimen-
 sions in turn:

 1. journals and the dynamic development of their

 relations;

 2. publications in international journals and local re-

 ports (output variables);

 3. citations;

 In that year, this journal exhibited a strong relation in its
 citation pattern to two electrochemical journals, the Jour-
 nal of the Electrochemical Society and Electrochimica Acta.

 In 1978 the structure of the matrix, now composed of 32
 journals, became much more complex, indicating that the
 field was going through transition. Two new solar energy

 journals, Solar Energy and the International Journal of En-

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 * 25

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Figure 3. Development of Wind Energy Journals between 1978 and 1984. Wind energy journals are labelled as follows: Heat Transfer
 (HT1) International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer (HT2) Journal of Heat Transfer-Transactions of the ASME; Nuclear Energy

 (NE 1) Transactions of the American Nuclear Society (NE2) Nuclear Science and Engineering (NE3) Nuclear Technology (NE4) Jour-
 nal of Nuclear Materials; Fluid Mechanics (FM1) Journal of Fluid Mechanics (FM2) Physics of Fluids (FM3) Proceedings of the Royal

 Society of London (FM4) Applied Scientific Research (FM5) Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics; Aeronautics
 and Acoustics (AA1) AIAA Journal.

 FM3

 AA1 / NE4

 FM3 / FM2 / NE2 N

 FM5 FMI /
 FMS/ E

 HTI HT2 / NEI

 I HTI

 FHT2 / NE2 NE

 AA1 / NE4 /

 / -

 N dhat

 1978 12 0.072
 1984 12 0.079

 FM4

 ergy Research, load together but only on a twelfth factor ex-

 plaining 4.1% of the common variance. In 1982, four solar
 energy journals, now also including Energy Conversion,
 load on a second factor which account for 17.7% of the

 In the wind core, ten journals form a stable background

 of the analysis. With solar energy, half or the journals (30
 out of 60) appeared in multiple years.

 common variance of a matrix of 27 journals. Other new

 journals such as SolarCells, Solar Energy Materials and Thin
 Solid Films are been included in the list by 1982, but load
 diffusely on various factors which can be associated with
 the different specialties of physics (such as solid state
 physics). By 1984, however, these "loose" solar journals
 also form a clear structure linked to "applied physics," and

 this factor (the first) explains 18.9% of the common vari-

 fordevelopment over the period 1974-1984. Among these,
 two journals emerge in 1978 as particularly relevant for
 our subject in the later years, the AIAA Journal and the

 Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics. In

 1982, four more journals appear which carry over to 1984.

 By their subject matter, these four are more connected with

 applied problems about "wind" in general (such as the con-

 struction of windmill facilities) than with wind energy re-
 search in a narrow sense.14

 ance. A second factor, "solar energy," now consisting of five
 journals, explains 15.1% of the common variance. The nu-

 Second, factor analysis of the journal-journal citation-
 matrices also fails to show the emergence of a separate

 cleus of 5 solar energy journals and 5 applied physics jour-
 nals, of which two explicitly use the adjective "solar" in
 their titles, has become stable.

 cluster of journals with "wind energy" as a topic. This can
 best be illustrated with the juxtaposition of the multidi-
 mensional scaling solutions for the 12 journals which were

 In Figure 2 the stability of this cluster in later years is il-
 lustrated by superimposing the multidimensional scaling
 solutions for the intersection of the 1982-journal list and
 the 1984-list for both years.

 Wind energy journals. Several features of the wind en-

 ergy analysis indicate that no clear focus on basic wind en-

 ergy research ever emerged in the international literature.

 First, in contrast with the solar energy journals the wind
 energy journals show rapid turnover between the years.
 Starting with four entries, our analysis located 72 related

 journals, of which only 20 play a role in more than one year

 present both in 1978 and in 1984 (Figure 3). Among these

 journals are three of the four entry journals for the analy-

 sis: the Transactions of the American Nuclear Society, Applied

 Scientific Research, and the Journal of Wind Energy and In-

 dustrial Aerodynamics.'5 The picture clearly shows the sta-
 bility of the "nuclear energy" and the "heat transfer"
 journals, while the "fluid mechanics" journals move away
 from "nuclear energy" during this period. Two journals
 which were already eccentric to the "fluid mechanics"

 group in 1978 move further away from it in the subsequent
 period: Applied Scientific Research turns somewhat back to

 26 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 As noted above, the starting point for the analysis of

 on Wind Energy, 156 authors produced 366 reports (an av-

 nuclear energy, but specifically to its "electronics" compo-

 nent (approaching much closer to the Journal of Nuclear

 Materials), while the Journal of Wind Engineering and Indus-

 trial Aerodynamics moves still further away from the "nu-
 clear energy" part of the picture.

 In summary, the pattern is dominated by movement and

 turnover of journals with low impact factors, particularly

 15

 among those with special interest to our subject. The most
 relevant journals which carry over move away from "nu-
 clear energy" toward new fields with an emphasis on ap-
 plication and engineering. In 1984, not only "water
 research" and "civil engineering," but also other fields of

 engineering such as "agricultural engineering" start to play

 a role in the journal matrix. The set is also becoming more

 diffuse: no fewer than 41 journals (reduced to only 16 fac-
 tors through factor analysis) are relevant in 1984.

 From these results we may generate the hypothesis that
 the research phase for wind energy never really gained
 momentum as a separate specialty. Before this could hap-
 pen, problems of implementation and diffusion took over.

 This hypothesis is consistent with background knowledge
 about wind energy research.

 Publications in international journals and local
 reports

 Dutch publications was the set of authors of local reports,

 archived in the managing office of the two programs. The
 publications of these authors in the international literature

 were retrieved from the Science Citation Index. Some publi-
 cations may have been missed by using the SCI. The in-
 between category of publications in less visible journals
 (such as engineering journals and trade journals in Dutch,

 for instance), could not be retrieved, nor is there a simple

 alternative procedure for finding them. In addition, partic-
 ularly in fields such as these, with high policy relevance
 and emerging journal structures, major publications may
 also have been published in journals which had not (yet)
 been included in the Science Citation Index.

 U in non-care journals

 1 in core journals

 1~4 17 1976 197 1978 1979 1989 1981 M1I 1983 1984

 Figure 4. Number of Publications for Dutch Solar Energy Au-
 thors in Solar Energy and Non-Core Journals. In non-core jour-
 nals, N = 24; in core journals, N = 39; total, N = 63.

 Thirty-nine of the 63 publications were published in the
 14 core journals. Hence, we can speak of a focus on these
 journals in the publications.

 Over the years, the number of publications also grew

 steadily from 1 in 1974 to 13 in 1983.18 (See Figure 4.) The
 share of the publications in core solar journals increased
 even more rapidly, as is also evident from this figure.

 Wind Energy. In the Dutch National Research Program

 erage of 2.4 per author). These 156 authors also produced
 61 SCI publications, which appeared in 44 journals. Only
 14 of these journals belong to the wind energy core. The

 full set of data for wind energy, in comparison with solar
 energy, is given in Table 2.

 In Table 2, we note that although the group of wind en-

 ergy authors is nearly three times as large as the solar en-
 ergy group (156 versus 57) and published also about three

 times as many reports (366 versus 120), both groups pub-

 However, from the perspective of our original question,
 a database restricted to journals which are included in the

 SCI is sufficient. We are primarily interested here in the re-

 lation between reports, which are oriented toward funding
 agencies, and the scientific contributions of the research-

 ers to their relevant professional communities. This rela-
 tionship can be dealt with adequately using the set of
 publications which pass the selection criteria of the Science
 CitationIndex.16

 Solar Energy. In the National Research Program on
 Solar Energy, 120 reports were written by 57 authors, for

 citations per

 an average of 2.1 reports per author.These 57 authors pub-
 lished 63 articles in 32 journals which are included in the
 on-line installation of the SCI on DIALOG."7 Of these 32
 journals 14 belong to the core journal set for solar energy.

 Table 2

 Comparison of Output data for
 Solar and Wind Energy Programs

 SOLAR ENERGY WIND ENERGY

 No. of reports 120 366
 Actually archived: 144 348
 No. of authors 57 156
 No. of SCI-publications 63 61

 Journals 14 18 32 14 30 44
 Publications 39 24 63 24 37 61
 Citations 83 40 123 36 76 112
 ( self-cites 28 9 37 9 18 27)

 pub. 2.1 1.7 2.0 1.5 2.1 1.8
 References 138 336 474 42 183 225
 Refs. in reports 99 80*) 179 44 183*) 227

 All other international journals

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 @ 27

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Solar energy journals Wind energy journals

 core non-core total core non-core total

 O in non-core journals

 a in core journals

 15

 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1988 1981 1982 1983 1984

 they are younger and appear in relatively newer journals.
 In the wind energy case the full set of 61 received about
 the same number of non-self citations, 112; but the 24 core

 wind energy documents received only 36 citations, a lower
 average number (c/p) than the publications in non-core
 journals. (See Table 2.)

 The development of the being cited patterns over the

 years is also different for solar and wind energy publica-
 tions. (See Figure 6.) However, in both cases a substantial

 percentage of the citations to publications in core journals

 come from core journals: 42% and 44% for solar and wind
 energy respectively.

 Figure 5. Number of Publications for Dutch Wind Energy
 Authors in Wind Energy and Non-Core Journals. In non-core
 journals, N 37; in core journals, N = 24; total, N = 61.

 Development of citing patterns

 What publications are cited in the articles published by
 Dutch authors in these two fields in the core of their inter-

 lished roughly the same number of publications in inter-
 national journals (61 versus 63). Moreover, the wind
 energy authors published in a much more scattered set of
 journals than their solar energy colleagues (44 versus 32)
 and they focussed less on core journals (only 24 publica-
 tions in core journals for wind energy as against 39 for solar

 confined our analysis to the document set which had been

 published in core solar energy journals and wind energy
 journals. A longitudinal analysis of "being cited" and "cit-

 ing" patterns for these core solar and wide energy publica-

 national literature? For reasons of cost-effectiveness, we

 energy). Clearly, the solar group has a more structured re-
 lationship to the international literature.

 tions was compared with citing patterns in the reports of
 the two programs.

 The absolute number of publications over the years in

 For this analysis we had to use the DIMDI-installation

 wind energy also follows a pattern which is different from
 that of the solar energy case. Although moderately pro-

 of the SCI since only on that edition the references in the
 source articles are included as well. However, in this instal-

 ductive in the earlier years (14 publications in 1977), in the
 1978-1981 period, this group of authors produced only 2

 lation we could find only 38 of the 39 solar energy articles
 which we found in the DIALOG installation. These 38

 or 3 publications per year, with none in the core set of jour-
 nals in 1978, 1979 or 1981. (See Figure 5.)

 solar energy articles contain 474 references while 24 wind

 energy publications contain 225. Hence,the average num-

 If we look at the journals in which these authors pub-

 lished in the different years, we see a connection between

 subject matter and production of international papers. Be-

 fore 1978 the wind energy authors were active in the nu-
 clear energy field. Only from 1982 onwards do we find

 ber of references in a core wind energy publication is some-
 what lower than in a core solar energy publication (9.4
 versus 12.5). The percent of references to core journals var-

 ies considerably over the years. (Figure 7 gives these per-

 centages for 38 solar energy core publications and 24 wind
 energy core publications distributed according to their

 publications which we can identify as having typical wind
 energy issues as their subject matter. However, even in
 these later years we find more publications of this group

 ~ Solar Energy

 in the "nuclear energy" journals than in the journals with

 , a UWind Energy

 the word wind in their title. One problem here, to which

 we will return in dealing with the citing patterns, is that
 perhaps more than in the case of solar energy, the new
 wind energy journals may have remained under the
 threshold of inclusion in the Science Citation Index (such as,

 6.

 for example, is the case for Wind Engineering).19

 Citations to "solar" and "wind" energy
 publications

 The full set of 63 articles in international journals from
 solar energy authors received 160 citations. Thirty-seven
 of these were self-citations, which we removed from the

 analysis, leaving 123 citations. The set of 39 articles, which

 were published in "core" journals for solar energy, received
 83 non-self citations. They were thus more frequently cited
 than the non-core publications, although on the average

 j 74 1975 1i16 19?? 1j7 19179 IB 1981 182 1983 j 34

 Figure 6. Percentage of Citation in Core Journals for Solar and
 Wind Energy Respectively, 1974-1984. Self Citations are in-
 cluded. Hence there are 63 publications and 160 citations in solar

 energy, and 61 publications and 143 citations in wind energy, for
 a total of 124 publications and 303 citations.

 28 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 S~ Solar Energy

 Wind Energy

 48

 291 1881811982 1983 1984

 j374 1975 1q7 1977117t 1979 1988 198 1 82 1983 1984

 Figure 7. Percentage of References in Articles from Core Journals
 for Solar and Wind Energy Respectively, 1974-1984. Self Cita-
 tions are included. Hence there are 38 publications and 474 refer-

 ences in solar energy, and 24 publications and 225 references in
 wind energy, for a total of 62 publications and 699
 references.

 need of an international literature to which they can refer,

 while the solar energy researchers can refer to this interna-
 tional literature in their reports-and do so to a much

 larger extent than in their international publications. In
 terms of the scheme we introduced earlier in this paper, we

 conclude that in the solar energy case, when an interna-

 tional journal set emerges, scientists support their local re-

 source relations by referring to an international context. In

 the case of wind energy, resource relations cannot be nour-
 ished with such legitimation, and we may expect other
 mechanisms in these relations to be more important.

 Conclusions

 1. The solar energy document set reflects the emergence

 of a solar energy journal set, while the wind energy doc-
 ument set shows some differentiation from what is es-

 sentially a nuclear energy document set. After a period

 in which the latter group of authors seems not to have

 published or only in journals which are not included in
 the Science Citation Index, in the more recent years
 some publications in journals devoted to wind energy
 issues can be found.

 publication years.20) However, in the case of solar energy
 this percentage is on the whole 10% higher than in the case

 of wind energy. Again, this indicates a stronger relation to

 the international literature in the solar energy case than in
 the wind energy case.

 2. Authors publishing in core solar energy journals make
 more references to other authors publishing in these

 References in the reports

 Finally, as has been noted above in both programs a sub-

 stantial number of reports were produced as well. The offi-
 cial records of the National Research Program on Solar
 Energy lists 120 reports by 57 authors, and those of the Na-
 tional Research Program on Wind Energy 366 reports by
 156 authors. In the archives of these programs we found

 journals than do their wind energy counterparts. How-

 ever, both groups have to gain a substantial part of their
 rewards in terms of "being cited" in non-core
 journals.

 3. In the case of wind energy, publications in non-core
 journals gained more credit, as measured in citations of
 these publications, than publications in the core jour-
 nals. The opposite situation occurs in the case of solar

 144 reports on solar energy (that is, 24 more than were reg-

 energy.

 istered) and 348 reports on wind energy (which is 18 fewer
 than were registered); hence what we located were ap-
 proximately the full sets. We compared the citing patterns

 4. In general, although both document sets cite, and are
 being cited in, more publications in non-core journals
 than publications in core journals, the solar energy core

 in these reports with the citing patterns in the articles pro-
 duced by the two groups of authors.

 The wind energy reports contain 7.4 references per re-

 set of publications (i) refer less to the non-core set jour-
 nals, and (ii) are being cited in the non-core journals is
 to about the same extent, but (iii) have a much higher

 port as against 6.2 for the solar energy reports. In the solar
 energy reports 20.1% of these references are to publica-
 tions in international (non-Dutch) journals, while this fig-
 ure is only 8.8% in wind energy. Of the international
 references in the solar case, 55.3% (79) are to publications
 in core solar energy journals, as against 19.4% (44) in the
 wind energy case.

 part of the total of relevant citations within the cluster.
 This confirms the points made in earlier sections on
 journal-journal citations and their developments in the
 two areas: in solar energy research, we are witnessing

 the growth of a much more stable structure both in terms

 of journals and in terms of authors referring to each oth-
 ers' work.

 5. The relevant Dutch scientific communities which have

 Also notable in the wind data is the growth of references
 to English and German journals which are not included
 in the SCI but which have the word wind in their titles.

 From 1978 onwards, 46 such references occur in the re-

 ports, amounting to another 20% of the international ref-
 erences. (Some references to these journals also appear in
 the international publications of this group.)

 Therefore, we see the wind energy researchers here in

 served as our entries to the analysis seem to follow these
 international developments with a modest contribution.
 At the national level, we can witness the emergence of

 a specialty and its participation in the specific interna-
 tional literature in the case of solar energy from 1978 on-
 wards. In wind energy the development of relevant
 journals occurs later (1982) and is weaker in its struc-

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 1 o 29

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ture, and the relevant Dutch community, which consists

 cal focus as a research field during the later 1970s and the

 of authors who left the nuclear energy field, did not find

 publication outlets in the intervening years in journals

 early 1980s. Although some theoretical questions arose in
 the beginning of the program (such as those concerning

 that are internationally visible. In later years they either

 returned to the nuclear energy journals or to a small ex-
 tent they started to publish in the "wind energy" core

 "tipvanes"), engineering problems definitively took over
 during the 1980s. The focus of the later program and its
 continuation lie in the commercial development of wind-

 journals. This smaller extent corresponds to the weaker
 position of these journals.

 Hence, our results suggest that in these fields the in-

 mills. Hence, the central problems have shifted from basic
 research questions to problems of industrial application.
 At the level of substance, we can understand this if we real-

 ternational publication (citing and being cited) patterns
 of the local communities are highly dependent on the
 development of international developments as mea-
 sured by journal-journal relations. If any, the effects of
 science policy efforts at this level are probably to en-
 hance such participation.

 6. Lacking international publication outlets, Dutch wind
 energy research seems to have remained a more local ac-

 tivity than solar energy research. Solar energy research-
 ers back up their reports with references to specific
 international literature, while wind energy researchers
 work much more in a local network whose members

 ize that aerodynamics is of major concern to the aircraft

 and space industries, and that major theoretical problems

 may have been solved in that context. But this is an ex post

 interpretation. In the beginning, there were no major dif-

 ferences between the two situations. In the early 19 70s, the

 major problems of both wind energy and solar energy be-
 longed to sciences with high industrial relevance: in the
 one case aerodynamics and in the other case solid state

 physics and electrochemistry. In terms of the methodology

 applied here, we can say at the very least that if there were

 any differences in substance they were not visible at that

 time yet. Over the years it seems that the balance between

 cannot easily refer to a specific set of international
 journals.

 research and industrial application has developed in the
 wind energy case completely differently from the former

 Discussion

 It has not been our purpose in this article to draw conclu-
 sions about whether the one program has been more suc-

 cessful than the other. This is a question for policy analysts,
 and one which deals precisely with a variable which we
 have held constant in the present study. Our topic here-
 the changing relationship with the international literature

 case: the researchers involved have produced reports in re-
 sponse to the demand. We speculate that as researchers

 they followed a strategy of publishing in non-wind energy
 journals in order to maintain their academic standing.
 However, only a percentage of them manage to do so,
 sometimes because they are still linked in their research ef-

 forts with the more prestigious field of "nuclear energy"
 from which they were originally recruited.

 by the relevant research communities in response to policy

 initiatives-strongly suggests only that there is a straight-
 forward dependence of the publication and citation be-
 havior of these communities on the development of
 structure among international journals.

 The efforts made in this study to look at the "citing" pat-
 terns as well have been less rewarding, given the amount

 of software development which was required for the pur-
 pose. The major point which could be made is that the solar

 energy researchers indeed used two types of referencing
 patterns for their two relevant audiences. (Even in the
 "wind energy" case we can detect some, although much

 from about the same level as the wind energy group, found
 its way to an emerging set of journals, from which in turn

 it could profit in terms of legitimation. Although it clearly
 failed to meet the original objectives of the National Re-

 search Program-producing relatively few reports, with
 hardly any commercial value21-the research community
 managed to gain autonomy over the years to such an ex-

 tent that when in 1982 the Ministry of Economic Affairs

 up to the international literature in more general journals,

 even if they publish in the narrowly focused journals of

 their specialty. However, in their reports they draw from
 their specialty journals, probably because that legitimizes
 the status of their specialty.

 weaker, attempts to do this.) On the one hand, when they

 publish in scientific journals, they link their publications

 had to decide on the prolongation of the program, it chose
 to support "more fundamental research".22 Since then,
 part of the funding for this research has been channeled

 Let us conclude by returning to the social and cognitive
 dimensions which we discussed in the introductory sec-
 tion. During the research, a shift has been made from the

 through a division of the National Research Organization
 for Fundamental Research.23 This suggests that not only
 were the selections made by the research community
 guided by international scientific developments, but that
 in this case the development was strong enough to force
 the polity to adapt.

 original "group of authors" as unit of analysis to the differ-
 ent "document sets" they produced.24 On the one hand, if

 we want to stick to the traditional science policy questions
 involved-where to spend money and why?-we are in-
 clined to see the proper unit of analysis as institutions, and

 hence, in terms of scientometric methods, as groups of au-

 On the other hand, wind energy never gained theoreti-

 thors. On the other hand, the results of this study suggest

 On the one hand, the solar energy group, which started

 30 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 a strong linkage between the outcomes of science policies

 and the development of the international scientific litera-

 ture. The base for this linkage is not "authors" but articles,
 or to put it more technically: document sets. The crucial

 question becomes: what makes a scientific article a signifi-

 cant contribution? From this perspective, science policy is-
 sues inevitably assume a more cognitive aspect.

 Notes and References

 1. K. E. Studer, D. E. Chubin, The Cancer Mission. Social Contexts of Bio-

 mledical Research (Beverly Hills/ London: Sage, 1980), 269.

 2. G. Kiippers, P. Lundgreen, P. Weingart, "Umweltprogramm und

 12. See for a detailed description of the methods L. Leydesdorff,
 "Frames." Additionally, in this study factors have been extracted obliquely
 to test whether they were related among each other.

 13. This limitation is introduced because of cost-effectiveness: searching

 citing-patterns in publications without access to the ISI-tapes requires con-
 siderable connect time with the host.

 14. These journals are: the Journal of the Structural Division ASCE, the

 Journal of the Water Pollution Control Federation, Water Research and the Jour-
 nial of Geophyiisical Research.

 15. The fourth entry journal, the Journal of Aircraft, has not been in-
 cluded in the quantitative analysis because it is included only in the Cited
 Journal Package of the JCR.

 16. About inclusion in the Science Citation Index, see S.Maricic, "Scien-
 tific Journals: Selection Criteria for Information Services," 4S-Letters 5
 (1980/1), 6-8; E. Garfield, Current Contefnts, November 5, 1979. (Also in

 Umweltforschung", in Geplanlte Forschung, ed. W. v.d. Daele, W.Krohn, P.
 Essays of an Information Scientist, vol. IV, 309-312 (Philadelphia: ISI-Press,
 1981).
 Weingart (Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1979), 239-286. On funding, see S.
 E. Cozzens (ed), "Funding and Knowledge Growth", theme section of So-
 cial Studies of Science, 16 (1986), 9-150.

 17. In the printed edition four additional book titles could be found, but
 10 article titles were not found! These differences seem to us a relevant

 3. Cf. I. Spiegel-R6sing, Wissenschaftsen twicklung und

 argument in the discussion about the use of the printed or the on-line edi-

 Wissenschaftssteuerunig, (Frankfurt a.M.: Athenaum Verlag, 1973),
 106-131.

 4. L. Leydesdorff, "The Development of Frames of Reference,"

 Scit'etomietrics 9 (1986), 103-125.

 5. In most cases the variables load on a second factor only in the second

 decimal, and hence the split is almost complete. The factorial complexity
 of citing or being-cited patterns can in such cases be used as an indicator
 of the "interdisciplinarity" of a journal.

 tion of the SCI for scientometric research. See, for example: J. Irvine, B. R.
 Martin, "Basic Research in the East and West: A Comparison of the Scien-
 tific Performance of High-Energy Physics Accelerators," Social Studies of
 Science 15 (1985),309; H. F Moed, A. E J. van Raan, "Critical Remarks on

 Irvine and Martin's Methodology for Evaluating Scientific Performance,
 Social Studies of Science 15 (1985), 545.

 18. The reason for the low values in 1984 is that the analysis was con-
 ducted until December 31, 1984 as the date of entry, while some of the
 1984 publications were not published and registered until 1985.

 6. In the social sciences, there is more evidence that particularistic criteria
 may be influential even at this level. See also: W. C. Yoels, "The Structure

 19. See note 15.

 of Scientific Fields and the Allocation of Editorships of Scientific Journals:
 Some Observations on the Politics of Knowledge," The Sociological Quar-
 terly 15 (1974), 264.

 7. L. Leydesdorff, "Various Methods for the Mapping of Science",
 Scientometrics 11 (1987) 291-320. See also Leydesdorff, "Frames," 122-
 8. A. W. Gouldner, "Cosmopolitans and Locals: Toward an analysis of
 latent social roles,"Administrative Science Quarterly 1 (1957), 281-306, and
 Administrative Science Quarterly 2 (1958), 444-480.

 20. One should keep in mind that the "wind energy" set is empty for

 1978, 1979 and 1981, and hence does not contain any references.

 21. A. Rip, P. v. d. Schaar, "Het Nationaal Onderzoeksprogramma
 Windenergie," in Implementatie van Prioriteiten in het Wetenschappelijk
 Oniderzoek bestudeerd aant de haind van enkelecasestudies, eds. A. Rip, R.
 Hagendijk, H. Dits ('s-Gravenhage: Staatsuitgeverij, 1986); M. Jochem,
 "Waarom Wind-enZonne-energie de markt nog niet hebben veroverd?"
 Wetenscliap & Samenleving 8 (1986), 20-25.

 9. R. D. Whitley, The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences

 22. Zoiine-eniergi ie i Nederland. Programma voor de tweede fase van het.

 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984).

 10. P. Groenewegen, "Attracting Audiences and the Emergence of Toxi-

 cology as a Practical Science," in The Social Direction of the Public Sciences:
 Causes andi Coinsequences of Co-operation between Scientists and Non-
 Sciertific Groups, Sociology of the Sciences Yearbook, vol. XI, eds. S. Blume,

 J. Bunders, L. Leydesdorff, R. Whitley (Dordrecht/ Boston: Reidel, 1987).

 11. Of course, in addition to this substantive purpose science policy may

 also strive to improve the institutional management of research.

 Nationaal Onderzoekprogramima Zonne-energie (1982-1985), Bureau Energie
 Onderzoek Projecten (BEOP)-15, (Petten: Energieonderzoek Centrum
 Nederland, 1982).

 23. Eiergicaspektei 1984, no.4,260; Energieaspekten 1985, no. 5/6, 14.
 24. On the choice of the unit of analysis in cognitive or social terms, see

 also: H. M. Collins, "The Possibilities of Science Policy," Social Studies of Sci-
 ence 15 (1985) 554-558; B. Martin, J. Irvine, "Evaluating the Evaluators:
 A Reply to Our Critics," Social Studies of Science 15 (1985): 559.

 Notes continued from page 21.

 4. Exemplary studies from the Tremont group include: Elihu Gerson,

 House, 1986). I also wish to thank Carl Briggs for photographic assistance.

 1978) or Oliver Thomas, The Real Coke, The Real Story (New York: Random

 "Scientific Work and Social Worlds," Knowledge 4 (1983): 357-77; S. Leigh
 Star, "Simplification in Scientific Work: An Example from Neuroscience
 Research," Social Studies of Science 13 (1983): 208-26; Adele E. Clarke, "Re-
 search Materials and Reproductive Science in the United States, 1910-

 1940," in Physiology in the Americani Conitext, 1850-1940, Gerald Geison, ed.
 (Bethesda: American Physiological Society, 1987), 323-50; Joan H.
 Fujimura, "Constructing 'Do-able' Problems in Cancer Research: Articula-

 tion Alignment," Social Studies of Science 17 (1987), forthcoming.

 5. Michael Schudson, Advertising, The Uneasy Persuasion (New York:
 Basic Books, 1984), quotations at 43 and 210. I have found the literature

 on adverising-much of it written by economists-dull and rarely perti-
 nent to the arguments here, with one notable exception: Roland
 Marchand's Advertising the Americani Dream (Berkeley: University of Cali-

 fbrnia Press, 1985) is a beautiful sociological study of the role of advertising
 in cultural reproduction.

 6. Hugh Rank, Howz to Analyze Ads: The Pitch:... (Park Forest, Illinois:

 The Counter-Propaganda Press, 1982), 98.

 7. Schudson, Advertising, 215.
 8. I am grateful to Mr. William Schmidt of the Coca-Cola Museum in

 9. Scientists are of two minds on the use of science in advertising and,
 more generally, on its presentation in mass media. The ambivalence is

 noted in Dorothy Nelkin's brand new book Selling Science: How the Press

 Covers SciCece and Technology (New York: W H. Freeman, 1987 at page
 169): "Scientists today see improved press coverage as a means of fulfilling
 their obligation to bring science to the public and attracting support from
 legislators, corporate leaders, and foundation executives. But they have
 also carried over values from a time when science was less accountable and

 more isolated from public affairs. ... [Scientists] worry about the corruptive
 influence on science of self-promotion and the encouragement of scientists
 more skilled in public relations than in research."

 10. I thank Anne Figert for this example.
 11. Schudson, Advertising, 27.

 12. The boundary between science and non-science has been the object
 of earlier work: Thomas E Gieryn, "Boundary-Work and the Demarcation
 of Science from Non-Science: Strains and Interests in Professional Ideolo-

 gies of Scientists," American Sociological Review 48 (1983): 781-95. This

 endnote is an advertisement for my forthcoming book, Boundaries of Sci-
 ence: Theoryi and Episodes.

 Elizabethtown, Kentucky, for the opportunity to photograph from his fine
 collection of Coca-Cola advertisements. For a history of Coca-Cola, cf. Pat
 Watters, Coca-Cola: An Illustrated Historn (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,

 Endorsing Referee:
 Michael Mulkay

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 1 * 31

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:46:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

