 

 

 

 

The natures of numbers in and around Bombelli's "L'algebra"
Author(s): Roy Wagner
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 5 (September 2010), pp. 485-523
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41342429
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:35 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2010) 64:485-523
 DOI 10.1007/S00407-0 10-0062-1

 The natures of numbers in and around

 Bombelli's L'algebra

 Roy Wagner

 Received: 1 September 2009 / Published online: 8 June 2010
 © Springer- Verlag 2010

 Abstract The purpose of this article is to analyse the mathematical practices
 leading to Rafael Bombelli's L'algebra (1572). The context for the analysis is the
 Italian algebra practiced by abbacus masters and Renaissance mathematicians of the
 fourteenth to sixteenth centuries. We will focus here on the semiotic aspects of alge-

 braic practices and on the organisation of knowledge. Our purpose is to show how
 symbols that stand for underdetermined meanings combine with shifting principles of

 organisation to change the character of algebra.

 1 Introduction

 1 . 1 Scope and methodology

 In the year 1572 Rafael Bombelli's L'algebra came out in print. This book, which
 covers arithmetic, algebra and geometry, is best known for one major feat: the first

 recorded use of roots of negative numbers to find a real solution of a real problem.

 The purpose of this article is to understand the semiotic processes that enabled this
 and other, less 'heroic' achievements laid out in Bombelli's work.

 Communicated by Niccolo Guicciardini.

 Part of the research for this article was conducted whilst visiting Boston University's Center for the

 Philosophy of Science, the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science and the Edelstein Center for
 the History, and Philosophy of Science, Technology and Medicine.

 R. Wagner (CE3)
 The Edelstein Center for the History and Philosophy of Science, Technology and Medicine, The Hebrew

 University in Jerusalem, Givat Ram, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel
 e-mail: rwagner@mta.ac.il

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 486 R. Wagner

 The context for my analysis of Bombelli's work is the vernacular abbacus1 tradition

 spanning across two centuries, from a time where "almost all problems that are done in

 the abbacus way reduce to the rule of three"2 to the Renaissance solution of the cubic

 and quartic equations, and from the abbacus masters, who taught elementary math-
 ematics to merchant children, through to humanist scholars. My purpose is to track

 down sign practices through vernacular Italian algebra to account for the emergence
 of Bombelli's almost-symbolic algebra.3

 One of the principal question concerning abbacus and Renaissance algebra revolves

 around the notational changes that culminated in using letters to represent unknowns

 and parameters, and in adopting the superscript numeral notation for exponents. These

 changes are recognised as having a crucial impact on mathematical development. But,
 as is argued in H0yrup (2009b), notation did not come in a flash of insight and did
 not technologically determine a superior mathematical practice. We are therefore left

 with the task of explaining how the slowly emerging algebraic notation was eventually
 adopted and disseminated.

 Indeed, the history of algebraic notation is all but linear. Clever notations were intro-

 duced quite early that did not catch on (e.g. de'Mazzinghi 1967 late fourteenth century
 manuscript and Chuquet's 1484 Triparty en la science des nombres ), and there is no
 clear correlation between the abstractness of notation and mathematical achievements

 (e.g. the highly evolved and just as verbose work of Cardano 1 545). Furthermore, some

 later authors included algebra only as an independent marginal section of their trea-
 tises (e.g. Benedetto 1974) whereas some earlier authors subsumed their entire work

 under its aegis (e.g. Dardi 2001). So even if we believe today that algebraic notation

 is a good tool for expressing, processing and organising mathematical knowledge, the
 choice between the newer notations and the older rhetorical style was not obvious at
 the time.

 The Algebra introduced in Italy was processed Arabic knowledge. Whilst the stan-
 dard claim is that the immediate source of the abbacist tradition is Leonardo Fibonacci,

 H0yrup (2007) has recently argued that it was imported into Italy from a Catalan-

 Provençal culture, of which we no longer have any manuscript remains. Either way,
 this does not explain how algebra took root and evolved in the Italian scene. The

 most notable existing analyses of the emergence of abbacus and Renaissance algebra
 include H0yrup (2007, 2009a) tracking down of the sources and intellectual moti-

 1 I follow other specialists in retaining the Italian double b to avoid confusion with the abacus as instrument
 of calculation.

 2 "quaxj tutte le ragionj, che per abbacho si fanno, si riducono sotto la reghola delle tre choxe" (Paolo 1 964,

 153). In only slightly anachronistic terms, this is the rule that says that if a given quantity yields a second,

 and in the same ratio an unknown quantity yields a third, then the unknown quantity equals the given times

 the third divided by the second. In more contemporary terms this is the rule that says that if a : b is as x : c,

 then x is y .

 3 In this article I quote from fourteenth century authors Jacopo de Firenze, Maestro Dardi, Paolo dell'Abb-
 aco and Antonio Mazzinghi, and from fifteenth century authors Piero della Francesca and Maestro Benedetto

 (Arrighi, the modern editor of the last four authors, erroneously attributed Benedetto's treatise to Pier Maria

 Calandri; the error was corrected in Van Egmond's catalogue (1980)). The authoritative survey of abbacus

 algebra is still that of Franci and Rigatelli ( 1 985). Another prominent figure in this analysis will be Girolamo
 Cardano, whose Ars Magna was the main text that Bombelli sought to clarify.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 487

 vations of abbacus masters; Rose (1975) attribution of mathematical development to
 the humanist culture; Heeffer (2008, 2005) analysis of mathematical developments
 in terms of rhetorical organisation and of an epistemic shift towards model-based
 reasoning related to economic practices; Cifoletti (1995) reconstruction of develop-
 ments in terms of imposing judicial rhetoric on mathematical texts; and in the field
 of didactics Radford's (2003, 1997) attempt to connect epistemico-historical analysis

 with the phenomenology of contemporary classrooms.

 The analyses cited above shed much light on the emergence of algebra, but leave a

 crucial aspect of the problem unresearched. This missing aspect is the semiotic pro-
 cesses that reformed sign practices. When our way of doing mathematics changes, the

 change is hardly ever immediate and abrupt. It most often involves micro-level changes
 in the way we operate signs. Whether the cause of mathematical change is epistemic

 shift, new textual input, new cultural practices, economic activity or the internal logic

 of signs, change must be enabled and expressed by practical shifts in sign usage that
 occur inside texts. It is the fact that signs are never completely confined to any specific

 practice or context - the fact that signs can always be copied or practiced outside the

 context that is supposed to govern them - which provides signs with a motility, which,
 I believe, is a necessary 'energetic' condition for mathematical change.4

 The analysis of Bombelli's own practice is in an even poorer state. Bortolotti's edi-

 torial work is careful and insightful, but at the same time entirely anachronistic, and

 understands Bombelli as a precursor of modern ring theory. Many accounts follow the

 well-known development from Dal Ferro's solution through Tartaglia, Cardano and
 Ferrari to Bombelli's achievements (most often in anachronistic terms), but the picture

 they paint is usually that of a linear progress followed by a leap of faith that is required

 in order to endorse roots of negative numbers. Relating this leap of faith or develop-

 ment to its conditions of possibility, which trace back to abbacus algebra, is, however,

 something that is not dealt with in contemporary literature. The one exposition I know
 of that takes a more detail-sensitive, non-anachronistic look at this development is

 La Nave and Mazur (2002) (some other aspects of Bombelli's algebraic practice are
 studied in the context of the immediately preceding evolution by Rivolo and Simi
 1998; for a discussion of Bombelli's geometric algebra see Giusti 1992 and Wagner

 (forthcoming)).

 In this article, therefore, rather than trace concepts, I will follow sign manipula-
 tions. I will show that at the micro-level the emergence of Renaissance algebra is

 not about rigid cognitive distinctions or a grand historical narrative. I will show that
 Renaissance algebra depends on a slow erosion of distinctions between kinds of math-

 ematical signs, on the import of sign practices from economy into the arithmetic world,

 and on a non-linear emergence and repression of practices that allow transcribing some

 signs by other signs. This approach shifts the focus from large, vague conceptual ques-
 tions such as 'how did algebra come to be' to a tractable concern with following the

 4 I do not include here a presentation of my philosophical framework; I have done this elsewhere (Wagner
 2009a, b, 2010) and will return to it in future texts. Other approaches that can serve as philosophical back-

 ground to this project range from the phenomenological/post structural notion of writing in Husserl's Origin

 of Geometry as reconstructed by Derrida (1989) all the way to Emily Grosholz' (2007) analytic understand-
 ing of mathematics' productive ambiguities and 'paper tools' .

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 488 R. Wagner

 evolution of aggregates of material practices with signs that we can recognise as more
 or less similar to what we usually call 'algebra'.

 I do not claim that the pointilliste portrait of mathematical practice I include here is

 superior or more exhaustive than others.5 I claim that it complements other approaches
 so as to enable a much more comprehensive understanding of how mathematical

 change occurs. Hopefully, the highly unstable portrait drawn here will help us acknowl-

 edge the unstable practices of contemporary, supposedly rigid and perfectly regimented

 mathematics, and the role of such practices in mathematical development.

 1.2 Bombelli and L'algebra

 Not much is known about Bombelli's life. According to Jayawardene (1965, 1963) he

 was born around 1526 and died no later than 1573. He was an engineer and architect
 involved in reclaiming marshland and building bridges. There is no record that he
 studied in a university, but he was obviously a learned man, so much so that a scholar

 from the university of Rome invited him to cooperate on a translation of the works of
 Diophantus.

 The writing of the manuscript draft of L'algebra , Bombelli's only known publica-

 tion, took place during a long pause in the Val di Chiana marsh reclamation, which

 Bortolotti (Bombelli 1929) dates to the early 1550s and Jayawardene (1965) to the
 late 1550s.

 The manuscript (Bombelli 155?), which was uncovered by Ettore Bortolotti, is

 divided into five books. The first three books of the manuscript appeared with revisions
 in the 1572 print edition (Bombelli 1572). Bortolotti published a modern edition of
 the remaining two books with an introduction and comments (Bombelli 1929), which
 was later combined with a modern re-issue of the 1572 edition (Bombelli 1966).6

 The first book of L'algebra is a treatise on arithmetic. It includes the extraction

 of roots up to the seventh order, and culminates in techniques for adding, subtract-

 ing, multiplying, dividing and extracting roots of sums of numbers and roots (mostly
 binomials, but also some longer sums).

 The second book introduces the unknown ( Tanto ), and opens with what in con-

 temporary terms would be an elementary algebra of polynomials up to and including
 division. Then the second book goes on to systematically present techniques for solv-

 5 In fact, Bombelli's sources include several Latin mathematicians, who rely on the classical tradition and

 on translations from the Arabic. Furthermore, Diophantus obviously made a strong impact on Bombelli,

 which resulted in some changes between the manuscript and print version. I also ignore the role of geome-
 try in Bombelli's work (not that geometry is not important for Bombelli- on the contrary - but I defer the
 analysis of Bombelli's geometry to Wagner (forthcoming)). My approach is therefore not exhaustive even

 in terms of intellectual sources and mathematical context, and does not presume to be. For my purposes,
 however, the algebra of the abbacus tradition gives more than enough to work with.

 6 In referring to Books III, IV and V, I use problem number and section number (the 1929 edition is

 available online, so it makes more sense to use section numbers than the page numbers of the out-of-print
 1966 edition). In references to Books I and II the page numbers of the 1966 edition are used, as there is no

 numerical sectioning. The translations from the vernacular Italian are my own. In translations I retained the

 original names of units, but not their shorthand notations. The exceptions are livre and once in the context
 of weight, which I translated as pounds and ounces.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 489

 ing quadratic, cubic and quartic equations, following the discoveries of dal Ferro,
 Tartaglia, Cardano and Ferrari.

 The third book is a collection of recreational problems in the abbacist tradition

 together with problems borrowed directly from Diophantus. The problems are solved

 using the algebraic techniques taught in the second book.

 The fourth book, which did not make it to print at the time, concerns what Bombelli

 calls algebra linearía , the reconstruction of algebra in geometric terms. It opens with

 some elementary Euclidean constructions, and then builds on them to geometrically
 reproduce the main techniques of Book II and some problems of Book III. Book V
 treats some more traditional geometric problems in both geometric and algebraic man-

 ner, goes on to teach some basic practical triangulation techniques, and concludes with
 a treatise on regular and semi-regular polyhedra. Book IV is not entirely complete.
 Many of the spaces left for diagrams remain empty. Book V is even less complete,

 and its sections do not appear in the manuscript table of contents.

 There are some substantial differences between the manuscript and the print edition.

 Several sections that appear as marginalia in the manuscript were incorporated as text

 into the print edition of books I and II. Some of the geometric reconstructions of the
 unpublished Book IV were incorporated into the first two books. The print edition
 also has a much more developed discussion of roots of negative numbers and some
 changes in terminology and notation that will be addressed below. Book III went
 through some major changes. Problems stated in terms of commerce in the manu-
 script were removed, and many Diophantine problems were incorporated (for a full

 survey of these changes see Jayawardene 1973). The introduction to the print edition

 states an intention to produce a book that appears to be based on the manuscript Book
 IV, but this intention was never actualised (Bombelli died within a year of the print

 publication).

 According to Bortolotti's introduction, L'algebra seems to have been well received

 in early modern mathematical circles. Bortolotti quotes Leibniz as stating that
 Bombelli was an "excellent master of the analytical art", and brings evidence of

 Huygens' high esteem for Bombelli as well. Jean Dieudonné, however, seems less
 impressed with Bombelli's achievements and renown (Dieudonné 1972; Bombelli
 1929, 7-8).

 1.3 Bombelli's sources

 Practically all the technical achievements included in Bombelli's work had already
 been expounded by Cardano. The exceptions include some clever tinkering with root
 extraction and fine tuning techniques for solving cubics and quartics (Bombelli's
 achievements in reconciling algebra and geometry were not published in print at the
 time). But Bombelli's one undeniable major achievement is the first documented use

 of roots of negative numbers in order to derive a real solution of a polynomial equation

 with integer coefficients. He is not the first to work with roots of negative numbers, but

 he is the first to manipulate them extensively beyond a basic statement of their rules.

 However, judging Bombelli's book through the prism of technical novelty does not

 do it justice. Indeed, Bombelli explicitly states in his introduction that he is repre-

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 490 R. Wagner

 senting existing knowledge. He explains that "in order to remove finally all obstacles

 before the speculative theoreticians and the practitioners of this science" (algebra) . . .

 "I was taken by a desire to bring it to perfect order".7

 The earlier authors that Bombelli mentions explicitly in his list of sources (Bombelli

 1966, 8-9) are the Greek Diophantus, the Arab "Maumetto di Mosè" (Al Khwarizmi),

 and their vaguely referenced Indian predecessors. Then he skips to authors of vernac-
 ular and Latin texts such as Leonardo Fibonacci, Oronce Finé, Heinrich Schreiber,

 Michael Stifel, Luca Pacioli, Girolamo Cardano, Ludovico Ferrari, Nicolò Tartaglia
 and "a certain Spaniard", which Bortolotti reads as Pedro Nuñez, but I suspect might
 be Marco Aurel (see footnote 64 below). Later in the text we can find references to

 Barbara's work on Vitruvius (in the context of the doubling of the cube by Plato's
 school and by Archytas) and to Albrecht Dürer (in the context of a nine-gon con-
 struction). Euclid is quoted, of course, but does not play a central role. Almost all
 explicit quotations from Euclid are found in the first 18 sections of Book IV, where

 Bombelli introduces his basic geometric constructions. From the reference to Euclid's

 VI. 12 in §18 of Book IV we can infer that Bombelli used either one of the circulating
 Greek editions or some edition of Zamberti's Latin translation from the Greek (The
 Campanus- Adelard Latin translation from an Arabic source has the Greek IV. 10 as

 his IV. 12). But in fact, Bombelli's list of sources suggests a thorough bibliographic
 research, and it is likely that Bombelli consulted several versions of the Elements , and

 was not committed to any one particular edition. Latin translators and commentators

 had already conflated arithmetic and algebra (e.g. Barlaam's commentary on Book
 II; but if we follow Netz 2004, we can retrace this trend to Eutocius' sixth century
 commentary on Archimedes), but Bombelli's reduction of Euclid's binomials to con-

 crete sums of roots or number and root is closest to what we observe in Tartaglia's
 Italian translation, which is based on an integration of Campanus' and Zamberti's

 translations, but which takes a further step towards an arithmetic reading of Euclidean
 geometry (Malet 2006).

 What this list of sources suppresses under a vague reference to some that came

 between Fibonacci and Pacioli, however, is 200 years of algebraic production carried
 out in the context of Italian abbacus schools. Whilst Bombelli does not consider abba-

 cist authors worthy of being mentioned by name, he lies squarely in the path of their

 tradition. First, in terms of organization of knowledge, Bombelli is probably the last
 innovative and important author to organise his work, like leading abbacus masters
 (Dardi, most notably), as a long list of cases of polynomial equations, followed by
 a list of recreational and commercial problems (many of these problems were later

 replaced by Diophantine problems in the print edition, but as Jayawardene has already
 showed, these problems are traceable to the vernacular Italian tradition). Bombelli's

 terminology too comes from the Italian tradition, although, again, he tried to break this

 link by changing his terminology in the print edition, claiming Diophatine inspiration.
 Finally, Bombelli's techniques and conceptual distinctions mostly trace back to the
 Italian vernacular tradition. Bombelli's attempt to obscure these links fits well with the

 humanist attempt to erase more recent traditions in favour of reconstructing a Greek

 7 "per levare finalmente ogni impedimento alli speculativi e vaghi di questa scientia e togliere ogni scusa
 a' vili et inetti, mi son posto nell'animo di volere a perfetto ordine ridurla" (Bombelli 1966, 8).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 affiliation, but does not change the fact that Bombelli is, in a sense, one of the last

 proponents of the abbacist tradition.

 be rendered as 5 ^ in print and as 5 in the manuscript. The manuscript Book II

 accompanies plain numbers with a ^ above them, but this is almost entirely discarded

 in the print edition and in the other manuscript books.

 The print edition also replaces the elegant script shorthand for square and cubic

 roots with R.q. and R.c., respectively. Bombelli uses a combination of underline and

 parentheses to specify the range of roots. Here too, the limitations of print made a
 difference (see Fig. 1), and the range of roots was bound between brackets formed by

 an L and a mirror-image L. Following my own print limitations, I use square brackets
 instead. The manuscript notation is obviously easier to follow, but after a hundred

 pages or so, one gets used to the print notation as well (after the first 1 ,000 pages one
 can even learn to quickly parse lengthy formulas and long calculations in the much
 more verbose style of abbacus masters).

 Bombelli uses the shorthand m. for meno (minus) and p. for più (plus). The modern

 edition replaces these signs with the contemporary - and +, but otherwise respects
 the notations of the 1572 edition. I follow this practice here. I revert to m. and p. only

 when discussing the issue of negative numbers, in order to be extra careful.

 2 Undermining 'natural' distinctions

 Bombelli, like many of his predecessors, distinguishes quantities (positive integers,

 roots, unknowns, geometric extensions) according to what he refers to as their natu-
 ra. He describes the rules that govern the arithmetic manipulations of each kind of

 quantity, and attempts to exhaust the ways of compounding kinds of quantities into

 8 For the benefit of readability I use the modern terms square, cube and fourth power when referring to

 Bombelli's equations (but I retain the term censo in the context of the cossist algebra of abbacus masters).

 The natures of numbers 491

 1.4 Bombelli's terms and notation

 The name of the unknown in Italian abbacus algebra is usually cosa (thing), and
 occasionally quantità (quantity). Bombelli writes in his manuscript that he prefers the

 latter, but uses the former, because that is the received practice. In the print edition, fol-

 lowing Diophantine inspiration, Bombelli changes the name of the unknown to Tanto
 (so much, such; I retain the Italian terms in this article in order to maintain a distance

 from modern practice). The second power is called Censo in the manuscript (Bombelli

 prefers quadrata , but again follows received practice) and potenza in the print edition.

 Cubo is the third power, and Censo di Censo or potenza di potenza is the fourth. Higher

 powers are treated and named as well, but are not relevant for this article.8

 Bombelli's manuscript notation for powers of the unknown is a semicircle with the

 ordinal number of the power over the coefficient. The print edition reproduces this
 notation in diagrams of calculations, but, due to the limitations of print, places the
 semicircle next to the coefficient in the running text. So a contemporary 5jc2 would

 2
 2 w

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 a
 e questo sarà eguale a 1 ¿ + R.c. 4 - R.c. 2, che levato il minor nu-
 mero si haverà 1 ¿ eguale a R.q. LR.c. 32 ¿ - R.c. 16 ±d + R.q.
 LR.c. 16 -f- R.c. 4 + 2J + R.c. 2 - R.c. 4; che agguagliato, il Tanto
 valerà R.q. LR.c. y - R.c. + R.q. LR.c. - R.c. y -f R.q. LR.c.
 16 + R.c. 4 + 2JJ.

 492 R. Wagner

 k čtýtafá + cùt/itato t'/mt-r
 tur Ж0-, 9i ÍMurffi едилА. V* m-ÊtCt
 £+s AMwrfiAo* й и* ял&пь %{%ìi 'Cf~ 9¡+p*L/{<¿±»i %/ý±s
 V¿i/ • <**

 Fig. 1 Bombelli (155?, 92v, 1966, 273): manuscript and print notation

 more complex combinations, culminating in the various cases of quadratic, cubic and
 quartic equations.

 But the process I am going to describe in this section is the process of erosion of

 the distinction between quantities according to their natures, which resulted from eco-

 nomic, arithmetic and algebraic practices. As we will see, whilst 'natural' distinctions

 lose their footing, Bombelli attempts to articulate them more firmly without actually

 giving up any of the fruits of their déstabilisation. But this is not in the least paradoxi-

 cal. To understand Renaissance algebra one must recognise the impact of both trends:

 conserving distinctions and undermining them. What makes these processes non-con-

 tradictory is the fact that they operate locally, across textual micro-practices, without

 ever having to be confronted explicitly as opposites (and when they are confronted,

 they form hybrids, not conflicts). The frequent interference of these processes is the

 texture of Bombelli's algebra.

 2.1 The natures of quantities

 In Bombelli's world each quantity has a "nature" ( natura ) that imposes strict distinc-

 tions. The term 'number' ( numero ), for example, refers only to integers larger than 1
 (which is not a number, but "works like the numbers").9 A square root {Radice quad-

 rata ), on the other hand, is the "side of a non square number".10 Bombelli clarifies that

 "the side of 20", that is, "a number, which multiplied by itself would make 20; such is
 impossible to find, 20 being a non square number: this side would be said to be Root
 of 20". 11 Therefore, roots are not numbers, and numbers are not roots. This stance

 radicalises Bombelli's manuscript articulation, which allowed for two kinds of root:

 9 "serve come li numeri" (Bombelli 1966, 11).

 10 "il lato di un numero non quadrato" (Bombelli 1966, 13).

 1 1 "come sarebbe se si havesse a pigliare il lato di 20, il che non vuol dire altro, che trovare un numero, il
 quale moltiplicato in se stesso faccia 20; il ch'è impossibile trovare, per essere il 20 numero non quadrato:
 esso lato si direbbe essere Radice 20" (Bombelli 1966, 13). The term Lato is not used in a consistent way
 throughout the text, and cannot serve as a term for unifying integer and irrational roots; indeed, on page 16

 Bombelli writes that 1 2 has no lato. The term quantità is closer to (but is not exactly) a term encompassing

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 493

 integer Radice discreta and non integer Radice sorda or irrationale (Bombelli 155?,

 1 v). For Cardano the distinction was even more violent: a number is a "true quantity",
 as opposed to an "irrational" (Cardano 1968, 50). Similarly, Bombelli clarifies that a
 binomial (Binomio) is a sum of two terms, only as long as they cannot be rewritten as

 "one quantity".12

 Natura is a term used by Bombelli to distinguish numbers from roots, binomials

 from simple quantities (as well as different kinds of binomials), negatives from posi-

 tives, and terms involving powers of unknowns from those that do not (e.g. Bombelli

 1966, 18, 63, 65, 282). Cardano further uses the term "nature" to distinguish num-

 bers from the "pure negative", "sophistic negative" and "entirely false" - the latter

 two referring to roots of negative numbers and the minuses of such roots (Cardano
 1 968, 220-22 1 ). Note that the distinction between quantities according to their natures

 relates both to well-established quantities (numbers and fractions) as well as to new

 and suspect constructs (roots, negatives and roots of negatives).

 Homogeneity of nature is used as a valid explanation for the possibility to perform

 arithmetic operations. Indeed, Bombelli explains that integers such as 6 and 2 can be

 added "for being all of the same nature",13 but "The subtraction of roots and numbers
 cannot be done except by way of minus" (e.g. R.q AS - 4) "because the quantities
 are of different nature"14 (at the same time, however, R.q. 24 and R.q. 5 can only be

 added with a plus sign, "even though they are similar in nature").15

 These 'natural' distinctions are not maintained with such analytical rigour by four-

 teenth and fifteenth century abbacists (indeed, Bombelli's more rigorous articulations

 seem to be reactions against this analytic weakness), but the presence of these distinc-

 tions as principles for organising knowledge is explicit, with or without the actual use
 of the term 'nature'. The ontology that these distinctions establish seems to be in line

 with the Aristotelian mode of organising knowledge in the late Middle Ages.16 I do
 not claim that abbacist mathematics was ever properly Aristotelian or systematically

 ontologised, but the distinction between kinds of quantities is not some superfluous
 frill encumbering abbacus and Renaissance algebra. As will be argued below, it is

 productive of algebraic development and constitutive of the organisation of abbacus
 and Renaissance algebraic knowledge. But this same algebra depends on the fluidity of

 quantities and on their convertibility just as it does on their distinctions; abbacist and

 Renaissance algebra is a process taking place between practices of rigid taxonomy and
 fluid conversion. The fact that these practices are contradictory did not preclude their

 productive implementation in unison, but did entail their ongoing mutual subversion.
 The rest of this section will describe the various ways whereby arithmetic and alge-

 braic practices undermine the distinction between quantities, which lies at their very
 foundation.

 all kinds of magnitudes, including unknown and geometric ones. In this article I will use quantity as a
 general term for various kinds of numbers and magnitudes.

 12 "una quantità sola" (Bombelli 1966,65).

 ^ "per essere tutti di una natura" (Bombelli 1966, 63).

 ,4 "Lo Sottrare di Radici, e numeri non si può fare se non per via del meno, per essere quantità di diversa
 natura" (Bombelli 1966, 24).

 5 "se ben sono simili di natura" (Bombelli 1966, 65).

 16 On the interaction between mathematics and philosophy in the relevant period see H0yrup (1994, Ch. 5).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 494 R. Wagner

 2.2 Fluid articulations of quantity

 The Renaissance and abbacist world of distinct kinds of quantities took place against

 a fluid economic practice with quantities (recall that abbacus masters taught practical

 arithmetic to merchant children). Benedetto's fifteenth century abbacus treatise (1974)

 opens with an introduction of Florentine money, weights and measures. Six leaves are

 required to list the various units and their subdivisions. The intricacies of this system

 abound. We find, for example, that a "barile of wine is larger than that of oil as that

 of oil is 8 quarti and that of wine is 10, that is the barile of wine is | larger than the
 content of that of oil".17

 When it comes to money, we learn that a "grassone is worth 20 quatrini, but at

 present goes for 21", 18 and whilst "the fiorino, to this money there is no fixed value,
 because sometimes it goes up by a few scudi and sometimes it goes down", there is
 "an imaginary value that's called golden scudo, which is always stable, so that the
 fiorino is worth 20 golden scudi and the golden scudo 12 golden denari".19 Another

 imaginary monetary unit, the fiorino di suggello , even though as imaginary unit it is

 supposed to be stable, has actually been devalued with respect to the fiorino largho,
 and has mostly fallen out of use. When one exchanges 100 golden fiorino for gold

 one gets "106 or 106 ^ or 107 according to the above daily posted prices".20 Some ten
 leaves are required to present the various real and imaginary unit systems of various

 cities and their relative exchange rate intervals, not failing to include how many days

 old the report of each exchange rate is. The bulk of the treatise is in fact concerned with

 converting units of money, merchandise and time (interest) into money. Arithmetic

 and algebraic recreational problems are there, according to the author, mostly "for
 pleasure".

 In this world, where a quarter need not mean one part in four, where one uses the

 same unit names for different values in different contexts and places, where exchange

 depends on imaginary units and daily postings, and where rates are not precise but

 range in intervals - in such fluid world notions of quantity cannot be too rigidly dis-
 tinguished. This fluidity of quantities also renders them universal enough to absorb

 non-quantitative entities as well. Many abbacus treatises monetarily quantified persons
 in partnerships (e.g. Benedetto 1974, Ch. 14; della Francesca 1970, 52; de'Mazzinghi
 1967, 32), time in the contexts of labour and interest, and even units of fatiche - the
 effort involved in digging a well (Benedetto 1974, 1 16).

 17 "Il barile da vino è maggiore che quello da olio imperò che quello da olio è 8 quarti et quello da vino è
 10, coè è il ¿ maggiore quello da vino della tenuta di quello da olio" (Benedetto 1974, 33).

 8 "grossone et vale 20 quattrini, ma al presente corre per 21" (Benedetto 1974, 34).

 "Il f. nonn à a cqueste monete valuta ferma perché quando sale qualche s. et quando scende di prego, al

 presente vale 6 lb. 3 s. 4 d. À bene un'altra valuta immaginata che si chiama a s. a oro che sta sempre ferma
 imperò che'l f. vale 20 s. a oro e'1 s. a oro 12 d. a oro" (Benedetto 1974, 34).

 "Coè s'intende che per ogni 100 f. d'oro inn oro si dia 106 о 106^ о 107 secondo che di per di sono

 posti e' sopradetti pregi" (Benedetto 1974, 34).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 495

 2.3 Economic practice and the natures of quantities

 The economic practices of unit conversion and monetary exchange did not just coex-
 ist along side the arithmetic practice of distinguishing quantities according to their
 natures. The cohabitation of such economic and arithmetic practices in abbacus trea-

 tises (even if the materials were borrowed by authors from anterior sources) led to pre-

 senting and reconstructing these practices as related. Thus, some economic practices

 helped homogenise different kinds of mathematical quantities despite their supposed
 difference in nature.

 An example for such economic practice is the rule stating that when it comes

 to finding a bottom line, "we reduce all the above kinds of money to one".21 This

 approach is valid not only for money and measurements but also for arithmetic oper-

 ations between quantities of different natures. In multiplying and dividing roots and

 numbers, for example, we must reduce all terms to "one nature" (Bombelli 1966, 17,

 33), that is, express all quantities as roots of the same order (note the tension between

 Bombelli's requirement here of reducing integers to the nature of roots and his articu-

 lation above of roots of square numbers as not having the nature of roots). As a result

 products of the form 2'fb are rare in abbacus and Renaissance mathematics, and are
 suppressed in favour of the form '/4'/3 = '/T2. Mathematical abbacist ontology
 sets quantities apart according to their various natures, but bringing calculations to a

 simple bottom line depends on practicing quantities as convertible in ways that tend to

 homogenise them. I do not claim that arithmetic conversion practices are the result of
 economic ones (the former may have originated independently of the latter); I claim
 that the cohabitation of economic and arithmetic conversion practices in abbacus texts

 projects the fluidity of economic entities onto arithmetic ones, and undermines the
 practice of distinguishing quantities according to a rigid taxonomy.

 To establish a clearer link between economic homognisation of units and arithme-

 tic homogenisation of kinds of quantities, consider the following oddity. Piero della
 Francesca requires reducing numbers to the same natura - here, a common denomi-

 nator - for performing addition, subtraction, division and multiplication of fractions
 (della Francesca 1970, 39-4 1).22 At least for multiplication this practice is rather
 awkward.

 Piero's motivation for this practice can be derived from observing the way he related

 economic and arithmetic practices. Let us consider the following example, where Piero
 asks to calculate the value of 8 ounces of silk, given that the pound is worth 5 libre

 and 3 soldi. To solve the problem Piero applies the rule of three: he multiplies the 8

 ounces by the 5 libre and 3 soldi to obtain 41 libre and 4 soldi (these units are explicitly

 included in Piero's statement of the multiplied terms and of the product). Now the rule

 of three requires that we divide by 1 pound, but Piero explains that it "wouldn't be

 21 "Ma quando ànno a saldare la scripture riducono tutte le sopradette monete a una secondo il sopradetto
 hordine" (Benedetto 1974, 34).

 22 Bombelli, who multiplies and divides fractions by direct and cross multiplication, no longer requires this

 kind of homogeneity. But when operating with integer and fractional terms (involving powers of unknowns),
 Bombelli first divides the integer terms by 1 so that both terms become fractions (Bombelli 1966, 168, 176).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 496 R. Wagner

 good, you'd better reduce to ounces, of which the pound is 12".23 Unless the weight
 units are homogenised, the conversion would turn out wrong.

 This rather trivial example becomes interesting when we consider how the practice

 of homogenising units is carried over directly to the next example in Piero's trea-

 tise, where he calculates with fractions rather than with subunits. Piero's practice of

 fraction denominators is literally the same as his practice with units. In the quotation

 below, meççi , quarti and octavi (halves, quarters and eighths) are practiced as hybrids
 between units and fraction denominators. "You know that 44 bracci are worth 48 libre

 |, and want to know what 24 bracci ^ is worth. So it is required that where there are

 meççi you reduce to meççï' . . . which "makes 49" (meççi) "now reduce 48 pounds |
 to quarti makes 195" (quarti). "Multiply 49 by 195 makes 9555, which you have to

 divide by 44 bracci ; but first reduce to the nature of the multiplied, which are octavi "

 (products of meççi and quarti ), "therefore multiply 8 by 44 makes 352 and this is the
 divisor".24

 The practice of converting values and units to the "same nature" in commercial

 contexts is presented here in full analogy to the practice of reducing to a common

 denominator in dividing fractions. Since homogenising units is the basis of economic

 calculations, and since the economic and arithmetic practices are constructed here as

 analogous, the abbacist practitioner projects the habit of tinkering with units onto the

 realm of numbers. The abbacist practitioner then becomes so habituated to the practice

 of tinkering with the natures of numbers for the purpose of homogenisation, that Piero

 recommends this practice even when it makes no practical sense, as in the above-men-

 tioned case of multiplying fractions. The habitual tinkering with the nature of numbers

 makes their distinction according to these natures much less sturdy; as a result, the

 notion of "nature" is degraded from an immutable essential feature to something more

 like a denomination (Bomobelli's rearticulations of the natures of quantities mentioned

 above react against such degradation, but come after this degradation had already had
 its impact on abbacist algebra).

 2.4 Economic practice and signs that carry values other than their face value

 So far we saw how an economic practice promotes the homogenisation of units, denom-

 inators and the "nature"s of quantities. But this tame form of homogenisation spins
 away into a far more radical form of homogenisation, which pulls the carpet from
 under the 'natural' distinctions between quantities. The convertibility of units reaches
 an intensity where it is no longer always clear to which nature or denomination a

 23 "partire per 1 libra nnon e' staria bene, convente recare ad once che la libra è 12" (della Francesca 1970,
 43).

 24 "Tu sai che 44 bracci vaglano 48 Libre | e voi sapere quello che vale 24 bracci ¿ . Adunqua bisogna che

 dove sono meççi tu raduca a meççi, cioè 24 e 24 fa 48 et meçço ci ài fa 49; hora reca 48 Libre ' Га] quarti
 fa 195. Montiplica 49 via 195 fa 9555 li quali ài a partire per 44 bracci; ma prima reduci a la natura del
 montiplicato, che sono octavi, però montiplica 8 via 44 fa 352 e questo è partitore" (della Francesca 1970,

 46). If this is not convincing enough, then Paolo dell'Abbaco draws an explicit analogy between dividing
 into fractions and converting money (Paolo 1964, 27).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 497

 given enumerator belongs. This, in turn, enables practices that view all quantities as
 potentially homogeneous.

 This process is manifest in the following ellipsis. Piero divides 9 times 20| by 25.

 "multiply 25 by 4 makes 100, multiply 9 by 20^ makes divide by 100 becomes

 25 Obviously, ™ divided by 100 is not 7-^. But this is not an error. Piero prac-

 tices here the sign 100 as 100 quarters, but the articulation of units is implicit - the

 enumerator is allowed to stand apart from the denominator, which is supposed to define

 its nature.26 Such implicit articulation of the denominator (or, to use Piero's term, natu-

 ra] ), far more open to interpretation than the changing values of coins and merchandise

 in the marketplace, makes it difficult to maintain a rigid distinction between the 100

 as partaking of the nature of integer and as counter of implicit fractions.

 One of the most interesting instances of such practice occurs in the tradition of

 counterfactual questions. Such questions as "If 4 were the half of 12, what would be

 the ^ of 15?"27 may appear perplexing, but are present across the abbacus culture.
 Their location in Piero's text can help clarify their context. Regardless of their origin,

 when they are placed, as they are, between questions concerning pricing, conversion
 and barter,28 these questions are enabled by the tacit question, 4 of what are worth
 half of 12? The number is not simply standing for itself, and may take values other
 than its face value.

 Indeed, as we will see below, in any calculation an implicit statement of units

 might be lurking. Not only is the distinction of quantities according to units/natures
 thus undermined, but even the very value of a number sign may turn our to be other

 than what it appears to be. The impact of this subversion of the nature and value

 of number signs is that even Piero, after insisting on reducing fractions to the same

 nature for multiplication and division, performs these operations by direct and cross

 multiplication with no further comment (della Francesca 1970, 41-42).29 Where the
 determination of units and natures is implicit and deferred, numbers end up being

 operated on without the preliminary step of homogenisation. As we will see below,

 this implicit change of units/nature plays a role in turning numbers into parameters
 and variables as well.

 25 "Montiplica 25 per 4 fa 100, montiplica 9 via 20^ fa parti per 100 ne vene 7 (della Francesca
 1970, 265). Similar ellipses occur, for example, in della Francesca (1970, 1 1 1) and in Paolo (1964, 26).

 26 The resulting calculation lies midway between dividing fractions by reducing to a common denominator

 (quarters) and the shorthand practice of dividing fractions by cross multiplication. Indeed, by omitting the

 explicit statement of quarters when dividing by 100, Piero practically operates a cross multiplication of the

 25 by the 4 in dividing ^ by 25.

 27 "Se 4 fusse la metà de 12, che ser la ^ de 15?" (della Francesca 1970, 48).

 2^ Counterfactual questions are similarly contextualised in Benedetto (1974, 64) as well.

 2^ As Jens H0yrup pointed out to me, and as observed in Giusti (1991), Piero's treatise appears to be an
 uncritical compilation. So it would be more precise to say that the subversion of the nature and value of
 number signs allowed him (and the culture around him) to bind together practices that approached the
 multiplication and division of fractions in such very different ways.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 498 R. Wagner

 2.5 Impracticality and the nature of quantities

 The link between evolved commercial activity and algebraic or proto-algebraic prac-
 tices is not unique to the Italian scene. The Arab and Indian scenes also provide such

 examples. To the extent that this link went further in the Italian scene than elsewhere, it

 may be due to the Italians' more advanced banking techniques, and, more importantly,
 to the fact that Italian writers of abbacus texts were not court intellectuals, but teachers

 of merchant youth, concerned more with credit and exchange than with high theory.

 But the impact of economic practices on the distinctions between natures of quan-

 tities did not serve only to homogenise them. In many cases it was precisely economic

 practice that required setting positive quantities apart from negative one (interpreted
 as meaningless or as debt), that rendered fractions sometimes irrelevant (when one

 could not break actual commodities into parts, or when the fractions were too small to

 matter), and that made irrational roots look suspect outside geometric contexts (what

 is the square root of money?).30

 But abbacus arithmetic and algebra were practiced in schools, not in the market

 place. The weight of recreational problems, which were of no use to merchants, was
 substantial in many abbacus treatises. Thus, for example, Paolo dell'Abbaco could

 pose a question about the treasure of a rich person composed indifferently of bisanti
 or fiorini (Paolo 1964, 140), Benedetto switched between gudei and morì to name

 those who should be tricked into abandoning ship and leave the Christians safely on
 board (Benedetto 1974, 143), and Jacopo could not care less if his paving question
 concerned a large room, a piazza or a house, and used all in the framework of a single
 problem (H0yrup 2007, 276). In fact he cared so little, that when he calculated how

 many houses of given side lengths could fit into a given plot of land, he did not mind

 that the borders of the plot would be covered with fractional houses (H0yrup 2007,
 295-296). Here the distance from actual implementation of arithmetic problems works

 to homogenise practice with different kinds of quantities.31

 The resulting practice is best described by the words of the Trattato di Fioretti

 concerning an irrational solution: "although this case does not result in a discrete

 quantity, I did not change it, because it comes out comfortably enough".32 Inside the

 abbacus classroom a root is indeed just as practicable as an integer. The bottom line is
 that economic practices contributed, as we saw in the previous subsection, to a con-

 ception of quantities as convertible, but that this universal convertibility was further

 30 For a comment on the rarity of this last construct in the abbacus culture, and on its more frequent Arabic
 and Indian counterparts, see H0yrup (2007, 156-157).

 31 This impractical approach was common to most abbacists I studied. A notable exception is Paolo
 dell'abbaco. This author typically takes care to solve questions in ways that make practical sense. Indeed,

 even for the problem about the serpent that crawls up a wall during the day and slides down during the night,
 Paolo complements the standard solution with a solution sensitive to the fact that once the serpent reached
 the top, there is no longer any need to count the subsequent sliding and crawling (Paolo 1964, 152-154)
 (such an approach is qualified by Jens H0yrup as amongst those "so rare that they are the ones that should

 be taken note of" (H0yrup 2007, 92). Nevertheless, even Paolo lets the occasional slip, such as calculating
 interest for a fraction of a day (Paolo 1964, 63).

 32 "benché il chaso non vengha in quantità discreta, non l'ò mutato perchè viene assaj chomodamente"
 (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 28).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 499

 enhanced by the impracticality of abbacus recreational problems, which, as we saw

 in this subsection, helped homogenise even some quantities that practical economics

 would have insisted on keeping apart.

 3 From signs that carry values other than their face values to algebra

 This section will show how the processes documented above, namely the erosion of the

 distinction between the natures of quantities and the practice of number signs as car-

 rying values other than their face values, help account for the integration of algebraic

 practices into abbacist culture.

 But I must hasten to clarify: neither algebraisation nor the déstabilisation of the

 natures and values of number signs is a linear process, and neither 'came first'. These

 two processes are co-constitutive, and I am not interested here in a 'chicken and egg'

 question. To acknowledge the non-linearity of the evolution of algebra in the Italian
 context we should recall that, whilst an early fourteenth century abbacist like Dardi
 explicitly operated on equations (squaring both sides, dividing both sides by power
 terms) and only slightly later did de'Mazzinghi explicitly operate on cosa and censo
 binomials and on their fractions (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 21, 22, 31, 33), many fifteenth

 century authors were much less proficient in these techniques, or at least less willing to

 reproduce them. In fact, the algebra imported into the Italian vernacular was imported

 as an isolated method set apart from an evolved arithmetic apparatus, which, for what

 we would today call linear problems, was no less adequate.33

 The challenge is therefore to understand the expansion and integration of cossist

 algebra into the abbacist context, leading to the eventual marginalisation of pre-cos-
 sist techniques. The initial sources of algebraisation and of the déstabilisation of the

 natures of quantities may be independent, but their taking root is co-constitutive. This

 taking root is a process of a mostly (but not entirely) reinforcing interaction between

 the algebraic déstabilisation of the natures of quantities and the enabling of algebra

 through homogenised quantities. And this nonlinear evolution is the reason for the
 persistence of both kinds of processes in such a late source as Bombelli's L'algebra.

 Even for the last proponent of the Italian abbacist tradition these processes still survive
 on the surface.

 One more methodological note is in order before we can proceed. I will use below

 the anachronistic terms 'unknown', 'parameter' and 'variable'. The unknown is fixed

 but its value is deducible only indirectly; the parameter is fixed within a given problem,

 but may vary between variations of the problem (when solving quadratics, the coeffi-

 33 This evolved apparatus contained not only the abbacists' skilled use of single and double false posi-
 tioning, but also, for example, Paolo dell'Abbaco's (1964, 96-97) capacity to retrace his way from the
 rule for summing an arithmetic progression backwards to recovering the length of the progression from
 its sum, without recourse to cossist or otherwise algebraic formalisations (indeed, the consecutive division

 and multiplication by 2 in Paolo's text indicate that the solution was formed by retracing one's steps along
 the rule for summing progressions). A somewhat less reliable indication of advanced pre-cossist practice is
 Benedetto's solution of a system of two linear equations by forming a linear combination of the equations
 without recourse to explicit cossist technology (Benedetto 1974, 73). But given the relatively late date of
 the manuscript, this might be a recasting of a cossist technique in pre-cossist terms.

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 500 R. Wagner

 cients are parameters); the variable is practiced as taking different values within the

 context of a single statement (e.g. x and y in y = x 2, if one thinks of this equation as

 representing a curve). Here we are considering the interactive emergence of all three. I

 use the unknown-parameter-variable distinction as a narrative instrument, but I hope

 this section makes clear that this distinction cannot explain generative processes, only

 organise them post-hoc. I am interested here in the emergence of practices of reading

 and writing signs as standing for an underdetermined set of possible values. I am not

 interested in the emergence of the concepts of unknown, parameter and variable (con-

 cepts tend to come too late, and capture too little). We are describing here processes of

 becoming taking place between the poles of parameter, unknown and variable - poles

 that only later would be differentiated into distinct entities.

 3.1 How signs that carry values other than their face values become unknowns

 and parameters

 Practicing number signs as carrying values other than their face values is obviously
 related to the technique known as 'false positioning' - guessing a wrong answer, and

 then rescaling it to adapt to the requirements of the problem. Of course, false posi-

 tioning has a genealogy separate from that of cossist methods, but it is interesting to
 point out the moments where one flows into the other in abbacist texts.

 Piero della Francesca provides us with an example. He asks for two numbers, the

 square of one is 5 times the square of the other, such that the sum of their squares

 together with their product is 400. The solution starts like a false positioning: "Taking
 that the first is 1, the other should be root of 5; multiply 1 by itself makes 1, and
 multiply root of 5 by itself makes 5, which makes the one 5 times the other. And added

 together they are 6. Now 1 times root of 5 makes root of 5, put on top of 6 makes 6 and

 root of 5, and you want 400".34 As this is a homogeneous problem, Piero could have

 gone on with (a quadratic analogue of) false positioning: divide 400 by 6 plus root of

 5, take the root, and multiply the result by the original false positions 1 and root of 5.
 That is, for example, what Paolo dell'abbaco does in a similar situation (Paolo 1964,
 120).

 But even though so far the rhetoric comes from the tradition of false positioning,

 □

 here is how Piero continues: "And so take that 1 be 1 and the other root of 5" (the bar

 is shorthand for cosa and the square for censo)?5 The problem is then turned into a

 quadratic equation and solved algebraically. The unknown takes here the place of the
 false position.

 I emphasise: this is not how the unknown entered the Italian scene. The Italians did

 not invent the unknown by building on their false positioning techniques. The Ital-
 ians got the cossist unknown from the Arabs through Latin and vernacular mediators.

 ^ "Poniamo che il primo numero fusse 1, l'altro convene che sia radici de 5; montiplica 1 in sè fa 1 et
 montiplica radici de 5 in sè fa 5, che fa 5 tanto l'uno de l'altro. Et gionti insiemi sono 6. Hora 1 via radici
 de 5 fa radici de 5, poni sopra 6 fa 6 e radici de 5 e tu voi 400" (della Francesca 1970, 263).

 oc _ I i

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 *D "Et però poni che 1 sia 1 e l'altro radici de 5" (della Francesca 1970, 263).

 The natures of numbers 501

 But this false-positioning-becoming-сам is an event that enables the integration of
 abbacist algebra, and the eventual marginalisation of false positioning.

 This process is a long, slow process, that goes back to earlier authors. de'Mazzinghi,

 for example, asks to find two numbers, whose squares sum to 1 00, and their product is

 5 less than the square of their difference (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 30). The solution starts

 with an intermediary problem, where the sum of the numbers (10) is given instead
 of the sum of their squares. The sought numbers are modelled as 5 + chosa and 5 -

 chosa. Only after this is dealt with, does de'Mazzinghi return to the original question,
 and solves it by modelling the numbers as chosa plus and minus the root of some
 quantità. The number 5 was a placeholder for what is to become an unknown, when

 the complexity of the problem increases.

 We saw above Piero's superscript bar and square signs for cosa and censi. To appre-

 ciate their place as hinges between false positioning and cossist algebra one should
 consider that practically any variation of their presence or absence can be found in
 the text. When a cosa is meant, sometimes there is only a bar, sometimes only the
 word cosa , sometimes both, and indeed, sometimes neither. The bar is sometimes even

 carried with the number where the cosa is no longer involved (della Francesca 1970,
 92, 93, 95, 97).

 We need not reconstruct these inconsistencies as errors. They are too widespread

 to be just that. It is more accurate to say that Piero did not practice cosa signs as
 rigidly as Bombelli later would. Piero's practice of cosa signs generates ambiguous

 positions between numbers as coefficients of unknowns, as counting some not neces-

 sarily explicit units or objects, and as false positions (note in this context the use of

 с

 1 for a horse, where the с is short for cavallo , and the value of the horse is a sought

 after unknown (della Francesca 1970, 101). In Piero's practice the number and cosa

 signs are still becoming unknowns. They not simply 4 are'

 This becoming-unknown enables the process that led to Renaissance algebra. But

 it can also lead to blunders. For example, the equation 9 and 4 equals 44 is reduced

 □ я

 □

 into 1 and 4/9 di censo equals 4| я (della Francesca 1970, 1 14). In the normalisation
 process the sign censo was carried over with the 9 into the middle term, where, from

 a contemporary point of view, it does not belong. This practice might reflect a treat-

 ment carried over from the practice of monetary denominations into cossist algebra; in
 Piero's text, cosa terms, like monetary denominations, were sometimes carried with
 their enumerators and sometimes dropped (some explanation for this practice will be

 suggested when we consider the carrying over of minus terms below). This did not
 hinder a correct solution, but is likely to have made things more difficult to follow.
 But even with Bombelli's much more rigorous use of cosa signs, the technique

 of turning a false positioning into an unknown survives. Bombelli often solves prob-
 lems in Book III by deriving values that partly solve a problem (that is, satisfy some

 requirements but not others), and then multiplying the result by an unknown in order to

 complete the solution of the problem (e.g. problems 90, 93, 98 and many subsequent
 problems in Book III). This is done partly to avoid the inconvenience of a second
 unknown, but since Bombelli did have and use notation for two unknowns, it cannot

 be just that. The fact is that for Bombelli, as a proponent of the abbacist tradition, a

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 502 R. Wagner

 number carries with it the history of not simply standing just for itself. That a number

 is the coefficient of an implicit unknown need not be explicitly stated from the outset;

 this possibility is always lurking, and may emerge in due course. The numbers are not

 what they seem.

 To strengthen this last claim, note that Bombelli sometimes practices numbers as

 carrying values other than their face values independently of algebraic terminology.
 Consider Problem 1 13 of the third book of L'algebra , which asks for three rational

 numbers, the product of any two plus 24 makes a square number. Bombelli begins by

 guessing arbitrarily, but when the third number is to be derived in accordance with the

 previous arbitrary choices, the result fails to be rational. He then looks at the result-

 ing numbers, and retraces their relations to his initial arbitrary choices. This allows

 Bombelli to reconstruct conditions on the initial choices, which would guarantee the

 rationality of the final result. This practice turns the arbitrarily chosen numbers (36

 and 64) into parameters to be revised, tentatively taking the place of the 'correct' num-

 bers that will replace them - arid all that without resorting to any algebraic symbolism

 or even a properly algebraic rhetoric. Such parametric practice with numbers runs

 throughout Book III, and only occasionally leads to explicit algebraic reconstructions.
 Recall: numbers are not what they seem.

 This has to do with Bombelli's diophantine sources, but is just as dependent on the

 tradition of counterfactual problems, mentioned above, where numbers are practiced
 as if their values were other than their face values ("if 4 were half of 12"...). Whilst

 it is true that in Bombelli's text counterfactual questions are not brought up as such,

 one can find him making such statement as "and if the 7| were equal or greater than
 12", (some operation) "would be impossible".36

 Another manner in which numbers came to represent a general magnitude, rather

 than their concrete face values, is expressed in the following odd practice, adopted
 by as bright an algebraic mind as de'Mazzinghi's. This is the practice of refraining
 from simplification. de'Mazzinghi explicitly instructs not to reduce a quotient where

 a cosa and the root of a censo could cancel out, and explicitly insists on carrying the
 cubic root of 64 through a solution without replacing it by 4, making the solution

 appear terribly complicated, and deferring to the very end its eventual simplification
 to 2 (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 46-47, 52).

 At first sight these practices look like a reactionary version of sticking to the natures

 of quantities (a root should remain a root, premature simplification would be 'unnat-

 ural'). Jens H0yrup, when he encountered these practices in the texts of Jacopo and

 Dardi, suspected that they were a sign of poor understanding and uncritical borrowing
 (H0yrup 2007, 175, 179). But even if some abbacists did borrow badly, I would like to

 offer a more charitable explanation for this practice. It is possible that maintaining the

 unsimplified form of quantities was a conscious or an unconscious tool for developing
 algebraic understanding. By refusing to simplify the cubic root of 64 one maintains the

 complicated algebraic form of the solution, which would characterise 'typical' data,
 rather than the simple integer result that follows from tailor made data. Since it is not

 reduced, the term 'cubic root of 64' can be followed through the proof without being

 36 "et se il 7 1 fusse stato pari о maggiore di 12 tale divisione era impossibile" (Book IV, §81).

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 503

 a 3 2 b li + 2
 32 1 I + 2

 6 . 4 Ü + 4A + 4
 9-6 1 1 + + 4

 9 *12' 4 1 1 ~ 1 4-2 Z
 0 3-2 1 1 ~ 1 4-2 Z

 18 * 24 * 8

 27 • 36 • 12

 27 • 54 • 36 • 8

 3 -2

 54 • 108 • 72 • 16

 81 • 162 • 108 • 24

 81 • 216 • 216 • 96 • 16

 3 • 2

 162 • 432 • 432 • 192 • 32

 243 • 648 • 648 • 288 • 48

 243 • 810 • 1080 • 720 • 240 • 32

 Fig. 2 Reproduction of Bombelli (155?, 42r, 1966, 61 ): number and unknown as parameters

 absorbed into other numerical terms, and assumes the role of a parameter. I suspect
 that de'Mazzinghi was such an impressive algebraist partly because he insisted on
 retaining the forms of algebraic terms in the context of practices that did not have

 access to explicit parametric expressions such as today's - § + yj ^ - c?1

 In Bombelli's text, an impressive instance of a number becoming parameter occurs

 when he attempts to explain in a general way the derivation of what we today call bino-
 mial coefficients (which he needs for his method of extracting higher roots). In the

 manuscript Bombelli derives binomial coefficients by raising 30 + 2 to the fifth power.

 In order to make the coefficients emerge, he does not use the usual multiplication pro-

 cedure, but a clever variation that groups separately products of the anachronised form
 30' 25-' for each i between 0 and 5 (see Fig. 2). It is only in the print edition that 30

 is replaced by the Tanto sign w. We clearly see that the practice of a number as any
 number, or as a formal entity, does not depend entirely on algebraic notation, and that
 Bombelli's unknown is not just an unknown, but also a parameter (in this example

 there is no question of recovering the value of the Tanto). The number and the unknown

 can serve as parameters and formal terms avant la lettre.

 37 As for Dardi, his explicit comment that he treats "discrete roots as if they were indiscrete" ("intendendo
 di queste R discrete chôme s'elle fusseno indiscrete" (Dardi 2001, 62)), and the eventual extraction of the
 root, show that his (or his source's) treatment had the pedagogical purpose of teaching the general practice

 through a special case, maintaining both the 'general' appearance of the solution and the ability to eventually

 simplify and verify it; indeed, despite H0yrup's contrary comments, Dardi occasionally does verify results
 following calculations with discrete roots (Dardi 2001, e.g. 40, 46).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 504 R. Wagner

 But there are other, different contexts, where numbers come to be practiced as for-

 mal terms. For instance, one of the equations that Bombelli solves leads to a rather

 long expression that involves the term R.c. [2 ±R.q.^] . In order to verify that his
 solution is correct, Bombelli substitutes this solution into the original equation. The
 resulting expression is a monstrous applications of all sorts of arithmetic operations

 (multiplication, squaring and additions) to R.c. [2 ± R.q.^-]. But instead of calcu-
 lating the result of these arithmetic manipulations, Bombelli 's text simply states that

 they are applied to R.c. [2 ± R.q.^j-], as if this term were an unknown (Bombelli
 1966, 256). Eventually these complicated manipulated terms cancel out, and Bombel-

 li's solution of the equation is proven correct. But for our purpose it is important to

 observe that a specific known number can be subjected to practices carried over from
 the treatment of unknowns. This further binds numbers and unknowns in a manner

 that could anachronistically be interpreted as a first step towards an abstract formal

 algebra. Given this practice, the formal treatment of mathematical signs, such as roots

 of negative numbers, as if they were unknowns that may eventually cancel out, appears
 much more plausible.

 But I believe that the most impressive example of practicing a mathematical sign as

 carrying a value other than its face value occurs where even a sign standing for a non-

 existent quantity is subjected to arithmetic manipulation. This happens, for instance,

 3 2 1

 where Bombelli considers the equation of 1 w + 165 to 9 ^ +9 w, which cannot
 be solved "because that which one seeks is either impossible or the derivation of the

 equation was badly done".38 Such equations are solved by applying a linear change of
 variable to derive a simpler auxiliary cubic equation. In this case too, Bombelli derives

 the auxiliary equation. Knowing full well that this auxiliary equation does not have a

 positive solution, he writes: "the value of the Tanto " (of the auxiliary equation) "being
 found (if it could be), if we would add 3" . . . "the sum would be the value of the Tanto"

 of the original equation, namely an equation already qualified as "impossible".39 We

 see here that even non-existing quantities could be other than they actually are(not).

 With this practice in one's arsenal, the hypothetic practice of roots of negative numbers
 may seem not all that startling.

 3.2 Becoming variable

 Things can get tricky where the same sign is used for different unknowns in a single
 line of text. For example, in solving a cubic equation Bombelli reaches the point where

 the cube of w -2 equals 12 w + 120. He then conducts what we would today call a

 1 3

 change of variable. He explains that the cube of w -2 "could be said to be 1 w, such

 that the number that composes it is 2 less than it was before. And this cube is equal

 12 w + 120. But because the 12 ^ are worth 2 less each than they were worth before,

 it is necessary that whatever one takes from the Tanti, one gives it to the number, so

 38 "perchè quello che si cerca о è cosa impossibile overo fu fatta male la positione" (Bombelli 1966, 261).

 39 "che trovata la valuta del Tanto (potendo), se li aggiongerà 3, che valeva più avanti la trasmutatione e la
 somma sarà la valuta del Tanto avanti detta trasmutatione" (Bombelli 1966, 262).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 that adding 24 to 120 one would have ¿ equals 12 ^ + 144".40 In a somewhat more

 modern manner we would say that if ^ -2 is replaced by ^ on the left hand side,

 then w on the right hand side must be replaced by ^ +2, turning 12 ^ 4-120 into

 The natures of numbers 505

 12- +144.

 What is interesting here is that the Tanto means different things in a single sentence.

 This plurality is partly controlled by the temporalisation of the Tanto (referring to it
 as the Tanto before and after the change). But in the quoted sentence the Tanto goes
 from the new value to the old one and back again (if we wish the expressions to make

 sense), whilst the syntax of the sentence does not quite respect this temporalisation.

 If we are to respect the mathematical and linguistic practice, we should acknowledge

 that the Tanto in the middle term 12 ^ means more than one thing (the old Tanto in

 referring back to 12 w +120, the new Tanto in being worth 2 less than before). The
 unknown does not just stand for itself. Rather than a single unknown value, or two
 different unknowns under the same sign, what we have here is a motion of becom-

 ing. In the middle of the sentence a single unknown sign is changing its meaning as
 we read. When we get there it still has one value, but when we move on, it already
 has another. The unknown is becoming a variable. This is indeed confusing for the
 uninitiated, but this confusion survives in modern day change of variables that uses x

 both in the substituted and the substituting variable ('substitute * + 2 for x '), as any

 calculus teacher can testify.

 Another expression of the process of turning unknowns into variables occurs in

 indeterminate problems that require integer solutions (Diophantine problems). This
 occasionally gives rise not to an equation, but to quadratic inequalities (e.g. problems
 1 10, 200, 220-222 of book III). In this context unknowns range, rather than stand

 fixed. But even though in the treatment of quadratic inequalities there are explicit

 ranges, and the arbitrariness of choice is obvious, Bombelli includes no explicit talk
 of the motion of the value of the unknown. If we want proper variables, we have to

 pass through Cardano.

 When Cardano explains why some cubic equations must have solutions, he uses

 language such as "decreasing the estimated value of the thing" or "increasing the cube

 and thus increasing the value of the thing" (Cardano 1968, 22).41 The analysis is vague,
 and the conclusions sometimes inaccurate, but there are explicit calculations of the

 range of values that a power term expression can take, and a motion of decreasing or
 increasing coefficients (Cardano 1968, 70, 134, 225, 248). Such language is hard to
 track in Bombelli's text, but his unexplained observations concerning the existence of
 solutions of some cubic and quartic equations together with his excellent command
 of Cardano's work do testify to a tacit practice of unknowns as variables.

 40 "si potrà dire essere 1 ~ che il numero che lo compone è 2 meno che non era prima. E questo cubo è

 eguale a 12 i +120. Ma perchè li 12 ¿ vagliono 2 men l'uno, che non valevano prima, bisogna quello che

 si toglie loro nelli Tanti darglielo nel numero, che aggiorno a 120 24 si haverà 1 ¿ eguale a 12 ^ +144"
 (Bombelli 1966, 235).

 ^ The quoted translation uses the anachronistic x. The original has the Latin res for the Italian cosa. To
 avoid anachronism I replace x by 'thing'.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 506 R. Wagner

 We can, with some risk, track in Bombelli's L'algebra at least one example of treat-

 ing the unknown as a variable. When considering equations of the form 'fourth power,
 cube, square and number equal Tantï , Bombelli provides a sufficient condition for
 the non-existence of a positive solution. If the equation's number is greater or equal
 than the coefficient of the Tanto , and if the sum of the coefficients of the fourth, third

 and second powers is greater than the coefficient of the Tanto , then the equation has

 no positive solution. This rule comes with no explanation, but the following recon-

 struction appears plausible (for the benefit of the reader, I bring it in anachronistic
 notation). Let the equation be ax4 + b: t3 + cx2 + d = ex. Bombelli's condition is
 d > e and a+b + c > e. If jt > 1 , then the left hand side is greater than (a+b + c)x,
 which, according to the condition, is greater than ex.li x < 1, then the left hand side

 is greater than d , which, according to the condition, is greater than e , which is greater

 than ex. Either way an equality cannot hold. If this was indeed Bombelli's implicit
 argument, we can see here an analytic practice of equations as functions of a dynamic
 variable.

 3.3 Closing the circle: how algebra helped undermine the distinction between

 quantities according to their natures

 As stated above, neither algebraic practice nor the destabilization of the natures and

 values of number signs 'came first'. Their emergence depends on (mostly) mutually

 reinforcing interaction. Since above I focused on how the instability of number signs

 helped promote the homogenisation of quantities that algebraic practice depends on,
 here I will show how algebraic practices helped further destabilise the distinction
 between quantities according to their natures.

 It appears that the distinction between the natures of quantities always had a context

 dependent dimension. Piero della Francesca explains: "When numbers are multiplied
 by themselves, then these numbers are called roots and these products are called

 squares or censi. And when the numbers are not in relation to roots or squares, then
 they are called simple numbers. So according to this definition every number is some-
 times root, or square, or simple number".42 Of course this is a much looser distinction

 than the one presented by Bombelli. But in Bombelli's evolved algebraic context,
 distinguishing quantities according to their natures has an even more pronounced
 context-sensitive streak.

 For example, when Bombelli asks to equate w +12 to R.q. 300, he states that
 "in that operation the R.q. are like number, not having the sign of a power".43 In
 the manuscript, where quantities involving integers and roots, but not a power of the

 cosa , are all crowned with a homogenising w, Bombelli further adds that "they're

 42 "Quando i numeri se montiplicano in sè, alora quelli numeri se dicono radici et quelli producti se dicono
 quadrati о vero censi. Et quando e* numeri non ànno respecto a le radici о vero quadrati, alora se dicono

 numeri semplici. Adunqua secondo questa defìnitione omne numero è alcuna volta radici, о vero quadrato,
 о vero numero semplici" (della Francesca 1970, 75).

 43 "in questa operatione le R.q. sono come numero non havendo segno di dignità" (Bombelli 1966, 184).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 following sentence illuminates the transition: "one will have 1 - - +16 equals 12 w,

 The natures of numbers 507

 gain homogeneity.

 3 i

 3 l

 rendered with the sign of the number".44 Relative to power terms, roots and numbers

 The algebraic context also serves to relativise the positive/negative distinction.

 When discussing the roots of one kind of cubic equation, Bombelli brings up a trans-

 formation that turns a negative root of one equation into a positive root of another. The

 which equated, the Tanto will equal 2, and this is minus, as in 1 w equals 12 - - +16
 the true value is 4 and the false is - 2".45 The contracted Italian syntax is perfect for

 expressing the intermediary position of 2 between the two equations and the relativity

 of its sign: it is the 'same' 2 which is positive with respect to the former equation and

 negative with respect to its latter transformation (but this does not contradict, in the

 context of this practice, the "false"ness of the negative solution) 46

 In fact, algebraic technique makes it difficult for Bombelli even to adhere to the

 distinction between equations according to their 'normal' forms (where all coefficients

 are positive, and each power of the unknown appears only on one side of the equation).

 When applying Cardano's trick for solving irreducible cubic equations, for example,

 one places the number term of the equation on the same side as the Tanto , which gen-

 erates equations where the number term is negative, but which Bombelli nevertheless
 practices as regular (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 267). In the context of completing quartics

 to squares the preparatory regrouping of terms led to regularising forms, where one
 side consisted of a single negative number (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 280). Further non-
 standard equations, such as power terms and number equal zero, arose as auxiliary
 forms of standard ones (Bombelli 1966, 254). In one such case Bombelli explains that

 3 i

 "the number changes and one has w and ^ equal minus number, so the Tanto equals
 minus, and serves as such".47

 A similar indeterminacy of sign occurs in the context of dividing by a negative
 term. First, Bombelli declares that he "has never encountered that division by minus

 could occur".48 Embarrassingly enough, some pages later occurs a division by -41.
 Bombelli states that although it did happen, it can always be avoided. However, in the

 context of power terms, Bombelli explicitly acknowledges the possibility of dividing

 by a minus (Bombelli 1966, 101, 162). We see here that as one loses control over the
 value of a term through the intervention of unknowns, the sign becomes a less stable

 ground for defining the natures of numbers and regimenting arithmetic operations.

 The drift continues when subtracting power terms. In the manuscript Bombelli
 states that he will call the subtracted quantity "minor" and the quantity from which it

 44 "e si vede, che si fa loro il segno del numero" (Bombelli 155?, 6 Ir).

 . i

 3 1 »»

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 45 "si haverà 1 ^ +16 eguale a 12 che agguagliato il Tanto valerà 2, e questo è meno, però di 1 ^

 eguale a 12 i +16 la vera valuta è 4 e la falsa è -2" (Bombelli 1966, 246).

 46 See Cardano (1968, 154) for a similar effect.

 47 "l'agguagliamento viene sempre a ^ e ^ eguale a numero, overo a e numero eguale a 0, che

 in quel caso si muta il numero e si ha e ^ eguale a - numero, che il Tanto vale meno, che tanto serve
 (Bombelli 1966, 292).

 48 "io (per quanto ho operato) mai ho conosciuto, che possa accadere partire per meno" (Bombelli 1966,
 63).

 508 R. Wagner

 is subtracted "major", which turns major and minor from substantial to positional terms

 (Bombelli 155?, 58v). This statement did not find its way into the print edition, but
 the terminology itself did (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 180). Similarly, Bombelli's directive
 to order summed elements in descending order breaks down with no explicit comment
 as power terms come into the picture (Bombelli 1966, 18, 163, 167). Furthermore,

 two distinct methods for summing and subtracting roots collapse into a single method

 in the context of roots of negative numbers, as one can not clearly decide which root
 is larger (Bombelli 1966, 19,21, 147).

 Things become even more obscure when extracting roots of complicated terms.

 Bombelli's techniques for finding the cubic root of a binomial involve some guess-
 work. It therefore becomes less than obvious how to determine the nature of cubic roots

 of binomials. For example, when equating the innocent looking 1 ^ +16 ^ to 48,
 Bombelli derives the monstrous solution R.q.[ of R.q.[R.c.[ 4608 + /?. <7 .4456448] +
 R.c.[ 4608 - R.q .4456448] + 16] + R.c.[R.qM + 2] - R.c.[R.q. 68 - 2]]. He then
 states that he assumes that "the binomial and the trinomial should have side" (root),
 "because the Tanto has to be worth 2. But such side as yet I could not find".49 The
 correct determination of the nature of the cubic roots of the binomial and the trinomial

 4 1

 depends on indirect evidence, and remains undecided, in the hope that (as Cardano

 had put it in a slightly different context) "these irrational quantities serving as numbers
 can be reduced to numbers" (Cardano 1968, 246). The nature of quantities becomes
 here a deferred object.

 Given all those practices, where the nature of quantities becomes dependent on con-

 text and on future determination, one can be much more open to tentative work with

 suspect quantities of obscure nature. So much so, apparently, that Bombelli was led to

 tolerate roots of negative numbers in solving cubic equations, hoping that their com-

 binations will eventually turn out to be of the nature of numbers, as they occasionally
 did.

 4 The benefits of distinguishing quantities according to their natures

 According to a standard historical narrative, setting continuous (geometric) quantities
 apart from discrete (arithmetic) quantities, and maintaining distinctions between inte-
 gers, fractions, irrationals and negatives inhibited the evolution of mathematics. This

 narrative is not entirely unfounded, but does depend on selective vision. In order to

 prevent the impression that distinguishing quantities according to their natures had a

 strictly inhibiting effect on abbacist and Renaissance algebra, and that the history of

 algebra is the history of an emancipation from this inhibition, I point out in this section
 some of the productive aspects of sticking to 'natural' distinctions in the context of
 abbacist and Renaissance algebra.

 First, this distinction motivated attempts to simplify complicated quantities, an
 effort that Cardano qualified as "the greatest thing to which the perfection of human

 intellect, or rather, human imagination, can come" (Cardano 1968, 246). Pursuing the

 49 "tengo che il Binomio et il Trinomio habbia lato, perchè il Tanto habbia da valere 2. Ma tal lato per
 ancora non ho potuto ritrovare" (Bombelli 1966, 271).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 509

 nature of quantities, researching such questions as whether a binomial can be reduced

 to a 'single' quantity, or whether the root of a binomial can be expressed as another
 binomial, made many algebraic observations possible, including, of course, Bombel-
 li's solution of cubic equations by reducing sums of cubic roots of binomials with

 roots of negatives to plain integers.

 Indeed, the attempt to reduce to a single nature the products of arithmetic com-
 binations of quantities of different natures sometimes appears to be taken too far.
 de'Mazzinghi, for example, following Paolo's directive to "always in multiplication

 make it similar against similar"50 (that is, write products of number and root as prod-

 ucts of roots), expresses the product of the root of 5 and a cosa as the root of the product
 of 5 and a censo. This obfuscates such expressions as cosa plus root of 5 censi , and
 obscures the fact that this sum is in fact a linear term (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 41). The

 problem is further exacerbated when abbacists such as Dardi, de'Mazzinghi and Piero

 often square equations whose coefficients include roots so as to turn all coefficients

 into integers, even at the cost of raising the degree of the equation (e.g. de'Mazzinghi
 1967, 40; della Francesca 1970, 120, 164). This practice seems to be linked to the

 above practice of homogenisation, which discourages the mixing of roots and num-

 bers.51 But this practice of squaring equations in order to get rid of roots in coefficients

 had a positive side effect: it helped algebraists recognise quartic equations where both
 sides are, orean be completed to, squares. Indeed, Bombelli demonstrates the capacity

 to easily gage opportunities for completing quartic and even eighth degree equations

 to squares (e.g. problem 255 of Book III). This skill must have been a prerequisite for

 eventually coming up with Ferrari's solution of the quartic by, precisely, finding out

 how to transform it into an equation between squared quadratic terms.

 But the most impressive results of taking seriously the distinction between quanti-

 ties according to their natures in the later stages of Renaissance algebra has to do with

 researching the natures of solutions of equations. Cardano explicitly researched the

 relations between problems and the possible forms (or, for him, "nature") of solutions.
 He derived non-trivial knowledge of which equations can yield which forms of solu-
 tions, and of relations between coefficients and solutions (Cardano 1968, e.g. 48-49,
 169, 176).

 Bombelli also follows up explicitly on this issue. Whilst analysing the solutions

 of cubics, he explains, amongst other similar observations, why the solution of an
 equation of the form 'cube equals Tanti and number' cannot be a binomial with the
 number greater than the root (Bombelli 1966, 245). Indeed, Bombelli asks whether
 2 + R.q.2 could solve such an equation. Raising this number to the third power yields
 20 + R.q. 392. Now one considers separately the number and the root. To balance the

 root on the right hand side one has to multiply the prospective solution 2+ R.q .2 by 14.
 But then one gets 28 + R.q. 392 on the rights hand side, and adding a number cannot

 make the right hand side equal to the 20 + R.q. 392 on the left. Bombelli then states,

 without argument, that this holds generally for this kind of equation.52 The point is

 50 "senpre nel multjprichare fae che xxia simjlj chontro a xximjlj" (Paolo 1964, 63).

 ^ A more sinister interpretation would be that abbacus masters attempted to increase the complexity of

 problems artificially in order to impress clients (H0yrup 2009a).

 52 In fact, this kind of reasoning goes back to Fibonacci's Flos (Fibonacci 1862, 227-234).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 510 R.Wagner

 that this argument depends on a separate treatment of number and root, ignoring the
 possibility that roots may equal numbers.53 Such arguments served Bombelli to rule

 out various kinds of quantities as solutions of cubic equations, which eventually led

 him to state "that (according to my judgement) I take it to be impossible to find such a

 general rule",54 that is, a general rule for solving cubics that bypasses the use of roots

 of negative numbers.

 This manoeuvre shows that exploring relations between equations and the natures

 of their solutions was a method practiced to find rules for solving equations. This
 in turn confers plausibility on the conjecture that the solution of the cubic equation
 was discovered by exploring various prospective kinds of solutions, until eventually

 stumbling on the sum of cubic roots of a binomial and its conjugate.55 As in Bom-
 belli's example above, one could start by trying to construct a cubic whose solution
 is R.c.[2 + R.q. 3] + R.c.[2 - R.q.3]. Raising this term to the third power yields
 4 + 3[R.c.[2 + R.q.3] + R.c.[2 - R.q.3]]. Now consider separately the number and
 the sum of roots. To balance the sum of roots on the left hand side, one must multiply

 the prospective solution by 3 on the right. To balance the number 4 on the left one must

 add 4 to the right hand side. The prospective solution therefore solves the equation
 'Cube equals 3 Tanti and 4'

 After having considered several such examples, one can try to derive general obser-

 vations. Keeping to the ontological distinction between the root and the number terms
 allows to note that the number on the right hand side (the above 4) must be twice

 the integer under the cubic root (the above 2). From there the way is not long to
 finding the relation between the coefficient of the Tanto and the terms under the

 cubic root, and to formulating a rule for solving such cubic equations. Note, however,
 that such a rule remains valid even when any of the roots involved is reducible to a

 quantity of a 'simpler' nature, undoing the distinction on which the above argument
 depends.

 This derivation of the solution of cubic equations is of course purely conjectural;
 Cardano's and Bombelli's explicit arguments mentioned above, however, show that

 this kind of reasoning belonged to the arsenal of sixteenth century Italian algebraists.
 So even if this suggestion for the route to the initial discovery of the solution of the

 cubic is false, the analysis of relations between solutions and equations did rely on
 the distinction of quantities according to their natures, and did contribute to algebraic
 understanding, as demonstrated by Bombelli's argument above.

 ^ I do not claim that the analysis is faulty, given Bombelli's definition of root as a quantity that is not a
 number, and of a binomial as not reducible to a 'single' quantity. I claim that this distinction helps Bombelli
 construct good arguments.

 4 "Sì che (quanto al mio giuditio) tengo impossibile ritrovarsi tal regola generale" (Bombelli 1966, 245).

 55 Tartaglia claimed that his discovery was geometric, but he was keen on keeping his methods secret, and
 his inspiration may have had nothing to do with Cardano's dissected geometric cubes. Indeed, expressions

 of the form y/a + y/b - y/a - 'fb figure in Tartaglia's translation of Euclid (Tartaglia 1543, Book X,
 problems 9,10) and in his solution of bi -quadratic equations (Tartaglia 1560, 1 Or, 13 v). Earlier encounters

 with such expressions may have inspired research into their cubic root analogues by Tartaglia or dal Ferro.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 5 1 1

 5 Negatives (and their roots)

 The discussion of negative numbers in the mediaeval and early modern context is

 tricky. It is easy to find the term meno56 outside the context of subtraction, but one

 must also bear in mind that even as late as the nineteenth century negative numbers

 were held as suspect by some authors. The line between minus as operation (subtrac-
 tion) and as modifier (changing the natura of a number, and so closer to the minus

 sign in the modern sense) is not always clear, even if one is modest enough to simply

 attempt a reconstruction of the practice, rather than the concept. Here I will document

 abbacist and Renaissance practices with meno , and attempt to understand their status

 by appealing to the distinction between quantities according to their natures.

 5.1 Away from substraction

 Operations with and on isolated meno terms can be found rather early in the abbacus
 tradition. de'Mazzinghi, for example, asks to "divide a chosa meno in 2 parts such

 that one multiplied by 3 and the other by 5 make meno 4 chose ",57 A somewhat less
 abstract and more common treatment of an isolated meno occurs in such statements

 as "multiply meno root of 2 by meno root of 2 makes 2 più".58 But note that in both
 cases the meno terms are extracted from a binomial, where they are subtracted from a

 positive term.

 However, the fact that meno terms are extracted from subtraction operations does

 not mean that they are reducible to them. When Cardano writes that "to subtract 4
 from 12 is the same as to add 4 m. to 12" (Cardano 1968, 134), 59 it is clear that 4

 m. does not unquestionably mean the subtraction of 4, as otherwise this explanation
 would have been redundant, and adding a meno (literally, adding a subtraction, or

 adding less) would have been a very odd way of putting things. This kind of rhetoric

 suggests that the meno has already gained some modifier status, which Cardano wants
 to erase and reduce back to that of a subtraction operation. This situation attests to the

 problematic status of the term meno , which we will try to elucidate in this section.

 Likewise, a formulation such as "add in m., so to speak" (Cardano 1968, 248)

 reinforces the irreducibility of adding in meno to subtraction, as otherwise explicit
 subtraction would have been used. This statement arises when Cardano starts with

 adding for the purpose of solving a problem; then, given a variation of the problem,
 Cardano needs to replace addition with subtraction. Adding in meno is the intermedi-

 ary figure that Cardano uses to enable a smooth transition and a unified presentation,
 but the semiotic price is to grant meno the role of a modifier. The same difference is

 56 In this section I will use the term meno for minus and più for plus (or their shorthand notations) when

 referring directly to abbacus and Renaissance texts, in order to keep a sense of estrangement that may help
 us avoid jumping to conclusions.

 "Ora ti resta a dividere una chosa meno in 2 parti che, 1'una multiplichata per 3 e l'altra per 5, faccino

 meno 4 chose" (de'Mazzinghi 1967, 21).

 "montiplica meno radici de 2 via meno radici de 2 fa 2 più" (della Francesca 1 970, 80).

 ^ I use here Cardano's m for minus rather than the English translation's minus sign.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 512 R.Wagner

 apparent in Bombelli's statement that "to sum p. 16 with m. 8 is as if I had 16, and
 was indebted 8, so that the debt being paid I would be left with 8 scudi".60 Again,
 some rhetorical distance is maintained between adding a meno or debt and simply
 subtracting.

 5.2 Accepting and rejecting the meno

 Before we attempt to further understand the status of this meno that is on its way from

 a subtraction operation to becoming a modifier of the nature of numbers, let us try

 to understand to what extent meno was accepted or rejected in practice. The typical

 narrative suggests that at least as far as the sixteenth century negative quantities were

 rejected essentially, but accepted opportunistically, and never served as end result. This
 description may more or less work for the abbacists, but the situation in Bombelli's
 and Cardano's work is more intricate.

 On the side of endorsement, on top of many negative interim results, we find Bom-

 belli giving R.q. 8- 4 as an example of subtraction with no explanation or qualification.

 Later, he allows " meno R.c.[R.q. 1452 - 38]" as a final result of an example (Bombelli

 1966, 24, 129). On the other hand, whilst trying to find the cubic root of a complicated
 term, running into an intermediary subtraction with a negative result, Bombelli has

 no qualms with the apodeictic statement that "it can't be subtracted".61 And whilst in

 the manuscript introduction for Book III Bombelli explains that "where I say subtract

 such from such, and that which is to be subtracted is bigger, then it does not follow
 that the rule is not good, because that which remains will be meno",62 Bombelli is

 almost exclusively interested in positive answers to the questions of Book III, and in

 underdetermined questions, when a solution fails to be positive, he typically revises the

 algebraic model or reviews his intermediary numerical choices to guarantee positive
 final results (e.g. problems 17 and 16 of Book III respectively).

 Cardano too has a complex attitude. He explains that positive solutions are more

 appropriate than negative ones (Cardano 1968, 29), and then goes on to note negative
 solutions or ignore them without any obvious consistent motivation (Cardano 1968,
 e.g. 1 15, 127, 148, 151 ; in the context of the equations of Book II Bombelli also occa-

 sionally includes and occasionally neglects negative solutions). Eventually Cardano
 presents problems where negative numbers are incorporated even into the data, but

 in the same context appears the sentence "So progresses arithmetic subtlety the end
 of which, as is said, is as refined as it is useless" (Cardano 1968, 220). Note that the

 objection here is pragmatic, not ontological.63

 ^ "a sommar p. 16 con m. 8 è come se io havessi 16, e ne havessi debito 8, che pagato il debito mi
 restarebbono scudi 8" (Bombelli 1966, 62-63). I use here p. for più and m. for meno as in the sixteenth
 century print edition, rather than the + and - of the modern edition.

 61 "non si può cavare" (Bombelli 1966, 141).

 62 "Et ove dico cavasi il tale del tale, et che sia maggiore quello che si ha da cavare: però non resta, che la
 regola non sia buona: perchè quello che resterà sarà meno" (Bombelli 1966, 316).

 63 In later texts Cardano's objections to negatives seem more ontological, cf. Tanner (1980, 166).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 5 1 3

 Roots of negative numbers suffer a similar ambiguity. When Bombelli first presents

 them in Book I, he does it so casually that he does not even give them a separate sec-

 tion heading. But in the context of quadratics a solution involving a root of a negative

 number is presented on a par with the other "sophistic method" of simply replacing

 the impossible subtraction with an addition (Bombelli 1 966, 20 1 ).64 A few pages later,

 in the context of the bi-quadratic without real solutions, solutions involving roots of

 negatives are not mentioned at all, not even under the mark sophistry. It is simply
 claimed that "one cannot solve" this case "because it concerns the impossible".65

 In the cubic case, on the other hand, a solution involving roots of negatives is

 first endorsed in the manuscript on pragmatic grounds, because a real solution can be

 derived from it. But then another solution with roots of negative numbers is included,

 even though Bombelli cannot rewrite it as a real solution (Bombelli 155?, 72v, 76v).

 In the print edition solutions of cubic equations involving roots of negatives are fur-

 ther justified by the fact that Bombelli "found their demonstration in lines", that is,

 he constructed a geometric model of the equation and its solution.66 Nevertheless, no

 argument is included which would allow Bombelli to justify the claim that his expres-

 sions involving roots of negatives are actually related to the geometrically constructed
 solution (more on that in Wagner (forthcoming)). Later, in the context of quartics,

 Bombelli refrains from solutions involving roots of negative numbers.

 But there was also a back-door entry for negative terms into Bombelli's text, in the

 context of cubic equations. There Bombelli's method (following dal Ferro, Tartaglia

 and Cardano) is a change of variable. He adds or subtracts a number from the Tanto ,

 plugs the changed variable into the cubic, solves the resulting simplified cubic, and
 then recovers the original Tanto. But given this method, a negative solution of the
 auxiliary cubic could yield a positive solution of the original cubic. Initially Bom-
 belli includes in such cases an extra step of transforming the auxiliary cubic so that

 instead of having to add a negative solution, one would subtract a positive solution.

 But later on Bombelli apparently cannot be bothered with the intermediary step, and
 simply works with the negative auxiliary solutions (Bombelli 1966, 255-257). As a

 byproduct of this economy of attrition some negative solutions of the original cubic
 occasionally enter the habitus of the mathematician as well (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 259,
 263).67

 64 This method might be explained by the work of Iberian author Marco Aurel. In his Despertador de
 ingenios, Libro Primero de Arithmetica Algebratica (1552) he offers as solution to the irreducible case

 of X2 + с = bx the negative counterpart of Bombelli's "sophistic" suggestion, namely - | - yj ^ + с
 (his notation is of course not modern). If one postulates that the product of two negatives is negative
 (a postulate to be discussed below), one indeed obtains a correct solution. (I derive this observation from
 a talk by Fátima Romero Vallhonesta delivered in the PASR conference in Ghent on August 27, 2009). This
 fact raises the possibility that the "certain Spaniard" referred to by Bombelli was Aurel, rather than Pedro
 Nuñez, as suggested by Bortolotti.

 65 "tal capitolo non si potrà agguagliare per trattarsi dell'impossibile" (Bombelli 1966, 207).

 66 "ho trovato la sua dimostratione in linee" (Bombelli 1966, 133). The demonstration is included in
 Bombelli (1966, 226, 228).

 ^ A similar situation occurs when solving quartics. There too there is an initial solution technique (com-

 pleting the quartic to an equation between squares) that might involve negative auxiliary terms, as well as

 a bypass technique that replaces the addition of negative auxiliary terms by the subtraction of positive ones

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 514 R.Wagner

 It is interesting to compare these last practices to the corresponding practices in

 the manuscript. In the first of the corresponding manuscript examples the auxiliary

 negative solution is (possibly unconsciously) glossed over by simply not carrying the
 solution through to its end result - the necessary steps are only indicated. The next

 corresponding example is worked through and includes the intermediary step of trans-

 forming the auxiliary cubic to avoid a negative solution (Bombelli 155?, 82v, 84r). But

 in the print edition, where both solutions are carried through, and both examples are

 recognised as involving negative auxiliary solutions, the intermediary step is included

 in the first example and omitted from the second. It is the repetition that brings about
 the ellipsis of the negative-bypass steps, and in turn habituates the mathematician to

 practice negative solutions. Here, as in many other cases, repetition yields difference.

 square of 1 ^ -R.q AS w -1 w di numero (the last term here is an unknown

 number: the 1 w indicates that this is one time an unknown, and the di numero indi-

 cates that this unknown stands for the number, or free coefficient, of the quadratic
 term). After Bombelli derives the conditions that would yield a felicitous choice of
 unknown for the purpose of solving the quartic, he solves these conditions and states

 that the sought unknown is "6, and this is the value of the meno 1 ^ di numero ".68

 But, in fact, Bombelli's transformed left hand side of the equation is the square of

 2 i i

 5.3 So what is meno ?

 We see, therefore, that the terms of endorsing or rejecting suspect quantities cannot be

 properly explained by a distinction between opportunistic endorsement and ontologi-

 cal rejection, but change along with the context. Bombelli is obviously highly capable

 of dealing with negative numbers, but prefers to bypass them, unless it involves too

 much effort, what can explain Bombelli's attitude? A detailed look at his practice will
 be helpful.

 Note that even in the context of Bombelli's highly rigorous use of algebraic signs,

 we can still find expressions that attest to a practice of meno that is not reducible

 to either subtraction or modifying the nature of a term. When equating 1 w with

 3

 R.q. 192 w +12, Bombelli transforms the left hand side of the equation into the
 2 1 1

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1 ^ - R.q AS w -6. So today we would rather say that 6 is the value of the 1 w
 di numero itself, not of its minus. A similar effect occurs when Bombelli writes: "6,

 from which one subtracts the cube of m. R.c.l, remains m. I".69 Again, we would say

 Footnote 67 continued

 (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 282-283). But later we find Bombelli using the initial technique even where it involves
 negative terms (Bombelli 1966, e.g. 288), and later still we can find him stating that for a certain kind of

 quartic equation one can only use the bypass technique, but immediately adding that "It is also possible

 to" use the initial technique, "but the Tanto would be meno" ("E solo si può fare la positione di - 1 i di

 mumero. Si potrebbe anco ponere -fi ¿ di numero, ma il Tanto valerebbe meno") (Bombelli 1966, 299).
 ¿Q 1
 00 "Il Tanto valerà 6, e questo è la valuta del meno 1 ^ di numero" (Bombelli 1966, 279).

 "6, del quale si cavi il cubato di m. R.c.l restarà m. 1" (Bombelli 1966, 1 14). A similar formulation

 appears on page 1 15 as well.

 The natures of numbers 5 1 5

 that the cube of the negative number is added, not subtracted, and the explicit rules

 set by Bombelli (1966, 63-64) agree with this modern reformulation.

 It is tempting to reconstruct such expressions either as indications of the anach-
 ronism of imposing our syntax on that of Bombelli, or simply as errors. But these

 supposedly aberrant formulations are in tension not only with modern ones, but also

 with other formulations routinely employed by Bombelli, and even if they were errors,

 one should try to explain their origin, as they are not too rare to matter.70

 It seems here that quantities carry their sign with them farther than they 'should'

 (this recalls Piero's carrying of cosa terms with their coefficients, even where they
 should have been left behind; see the quotation from della Francesca (1970, 1 14) in

 Sect. 3.1). Similar effects occur with units of measurement and, as the appendix shows,

 with root signs. I believe that there are two practices that maintain these phenomena.

 The first practice applies meno signs (as well as units, cosa terms and root signs)

 not strictly as operations or modifiers, but also as indexes or tags. In order to show that

 one is speaking about 'that' Tanto or 'this' R.c.l , one refers to it with the minus sign
 that originally accompanied it. It is important to acknowledge this indexical use of
 mathematical modifiers (which is easier to demonstrate in the context of root signs),

 as it is an often unacknowledged aspect of mathematical practice (it is much more
 common in oral delivery than in contemporary written math).

 The second practice that enables holding on to the sign (and, again, units, cosa

 terms and roots) is more relevant for this article. We must recall that quantities were

 distinguished according to their natures. It was therefore sometimes hard to leave
 behind the signs that marked these natures, and separate them from the quantities that

 they qualified.

 To support this last explanation, we should recall a lineage of sign rules that do
 not coincide with our own. Piero della Francesca, for example, asks to find the height

 of a ladder, such that when it leans against a wall of the same height as the ladder, it

 reaches 2 braccia below the top of the wall, and its foot is 6 braccia away from the

 wall. The height of the ladder is modelled as 1 (one cosa), and so we get a right angle

 triangle with sides 6 and 1-2 and hypotenuse T. Piero then writes: "multiply 1 meno

 □ _ _ _ □

 □

 is 1 censo) "and 6 meno by 6 meno makes 36 meno. You have 1 and 4 numero meno 4

 □

 cose equal to 1 meno 36". 1 The point to note here is how the product of differences
 matches modern standards, as opposed to the product of the isolated negative ("6
 meno") with itself, which produces a negative result. Along with this deviant practice
 we can list Marco Aurel's deviant articulation of the square of a negative as negative

 (see footnote 64 above) and Cardano's attempt to explain why the product of negatives

 70 In fact the last formulation quoted, from page 1 14, was changed from the manuscript, where it had been

 in line with modern practice, whereas the parallel form on page 1 15 had appeared in this non-modern form

 already in the manuscript. This suggests that Bombelli's choice was deliberate.

 _ _ U _ _ _ LJ

 □ □

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 2 by 1 meno 2 makes 1 censo and 4 meno 4 cose, then multiply 1 by 1 makes 1 " (that

 71 "montiplica _ 1 meno 2 via _ 1 meno 2 fa 1 censo e 4 meno 4 cose, poi montiplica 1 via 1 fa 1 et 6 meno

 via 6 meno fa 36 meno. Tu ài 1 e 4 numero meno 4 cose equale ad 1 meno 36" (della Francesca 1970,
 108).

 516 R.Wagner

 is negative in his De Regula Aliza (Cardano 1663, 398-400).72 Bombelli himself, in

 his manuscript, claims that " meno times meno is più when it is accompanied by the più ,

 but by itself alone is meno"P but the promised demonstration is lacking, a marginal

 note states that "this is not the case",74 and the statement is omitted from the print
 edition.

 Apparently, it was hard to let go of the sign marking the nature of a quantity even

 when arithmetical manipulations were supposed to leave it behind. This interpretation

 is further confirmed by Cardano's reference to a quantity's own and alien nature, and

 its inability to go outside its own nature, as motivating his aberrant rules. (Tanner
 1980, 166).

 But this latter explanation does not suppress the practice of signs as indexes. Both

 practices operate in the text, and there is no point trying to 'decide' between them. At

 the same time, the powerful stream of practices documented above made the nature of

 quantities ever less stable, and rendered it easier to leave the marks of nature behind.

 My conclusion is that the hesitant but increasingly spread practice with negative enti-

 ties is the result not of a conscious effort to review the ontology of quantities, but

 the impact of, to recapitulate the factors reviewed so far, economic practices, alge-
 braic practices and attrition, which rendered the taxonomy of quantities a less stable
 and less practicable endeavour in the context of abbacist and Renaissance algebra.
 The conflict apparent in Bombelli 's practice of negative numbers reflects his double

 commitment to keeping the natures of numbers constant and distinct (do not mix up
 negative and positive numbers, do not trust negative ("false") numbers), as well as to
 practical considerations where the stability of such distinctions is undermined.

 6 The organisation of knowledge

 Bombelli 's stated objective was to "remove finally all obstacles before the speculative

 theoreticians and practitioners of this science" (algebra), "and take away any excuse

 from the unworthy and inapt", who use the obscurity of existing presentations to justify

 their lack of understanding.75 Nevertheless, the results, as professed in the manuscript
 introduction, "for the beginners are brief, and for those who already understand are
 long".76

 Bombelli 's guiding principle is an economy of clarity and brevity negotiated in
 the context of a heterogeneous readership. This renders Bombelli a rather pragmatic

 writer. In a characteristically modest tone he acknowledges that "it could be that today
 I may teach a rule, which would please more than the others given in the past, and

 72 I refer to the 1663 edition rather than the original 1570 edition because the former is more accessible.

 73 "meno, via meno fa pui" fsicl "qua(n]do è accompagnato col più; ma per se solo fa meno" (Bombelli
 155?, 1 Ir). This is repeated slightly differently in Bombelli (155?, 51v), and it is unclear whether this has

 anything to do with the rules for multiplying roots of negative numbers.

 74 "non fa l'effetto".

 75 "per levare finalmente ogni impedimento alli speculativi e vaghi di questa scientia e togliere ogni scusa
 a' vili et inetti, mi son posto nell'animo di volere a perfetto ordine ridurla" (Bombelli 1966, 8).

 76 "Et per questo rispetto, quanto a li principianti sono stato breve; et quanto a gl'intendenti sono stato
 lungo" (Bombelli 1966,316).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 5 1 7

 then another may come, and may find a more practicable and easy rule, and so that

 new rule would now be accepted, and mine rejected".77 However, trying to economise

 his presentation was not always consistent with the organisation of knowledge around

 the distinction between quantities according to their natures.

 A simple example of a failed attempt to organise knowledge around such distinc-

 tions occurs in Book III - a collection of questions to be solved by the algebraic
 means developed in Book II. To start with, Bombelli tries to be careful concerning
 what kind of solution is required. If the solution is an integer or a fraction, Bombelli

 asks for numbers in the question. When a root is the answer he asks for it explicitly

 (e.g. problem 24). And when quadratic questions first appear he asks for "numbers or
 quantities", as quadratic equations can yield both (problem 46). But by problem 144
 cubic roots in the solution are referred to as number, and by problem 187 Bombelli

 asks for "two numbers", even though the result is irrational (this is repeated e.g. in

 problems 247 and 250). Holding on to the 'natural' distinctions between quantities
 becomes a tiresome burden to maintain, and midway through the third Book Bombelli

 no longer has enough energy to spare. Attrition eats away at the distinction between

 quantities according to their natures.

 Such processes are manifest earlier in the abbacist tradition. Dardi's treatise (2001),

 for instance, has attracted attention for its proliferation of kinds of equations resulting

 from a separate treatment of equations with integer and with root coefficients (194
 kinds, not including the four cases of special cubics and quartics, and not exhausting
 all cases that Dardi could have treated). Whilst this proliferating treatment made sense

 in mid 14th century, when the combination of roots and power terms was sufficiently
 new and odd to sustain it, it later became experienced as repetitive and tedious to the

 point where some of it appeared too tiresome to retain. Later authors borrowing from
 Dardi's work, such as Piero della Francesca, settled for sampling only a few of the
 cases that he had treated.

 Whilst Dardi did realise that some rules were "common to discrete and indiscrete

 roots",78 and that "number and root of number is of similar substance",79 he nev-

 ertheless held on to his distinction setting discrete and indiscrete roots apart, either

 ideologically "because the intellect cannot understand nor comprehend"80 the latter,

 or pragmatically because they "carry greater difficulty" . . . "as many indiscrete roots
 can't be added in one enunciation with some numbers or roots".81 Between Dardi and

 his successors operates a delicate economy of valuing differences on the one hand,

 whilst on the other giving them up due to attrition and to the similar treatment of the

 supposedly different kinds.

 77 "potria essere, che hoggi io insegnassi una regola, la quale piacerebbe più dell'altre date per il passato,
 e poi venisse un altro, e ne trovasse una più vaga, e facile, e così sarebbe all' hora quella accettata, e la mia
 confutata" (Bombelli 1966, 38).

 78 "aviallo fatto per ragione che Ila reghula sia chomuna a R di numero discreta о indiscreta" (Dardi 2001,
 46).

 7^ "niente di meno numero e R di numero è d'una simile sustantia" (Dardi 2001, 275).

 80 "perché l'ontelletto no Ila può intendere né conprendere" (Dardi 2001, 39).

 "porta maggiore difìcultà sicome tu àj veduto nell'amaestramento dinanti che molte R indiscrete non si

 può giungere in una vocie chon anchunj numerj overo R" (Dardi 2001, 284).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 518 R.Wagner

 When we reach Cardano, despite his strong interest in the natures of quantities, he

 states that an equation with irrational coefficients is to be solved "in the same manner
 as for rational numbers" (Cardano 1968, 1 89), and for Bombelli this fact does not even

 deserve mentioning. Note the self refuting process: Dardi's commitment to the root-

 number distinction gave rise to his exhaustingly repetitive catalogue - a repetitiveness

 which, in turn, rendered the number-root distinction less rigid in practice . Insistently
 repeating the articulation of a difference between roots and numbers, even where it

 made little practical difference, eventually rendered this difference too banal to merit

 ongoing attention. The excessive repetition of a difference has led to its dissolution.

 Another aspect of failed classification concerns roots embedded into other roots,

 which emerged as cubics and quartics were solved. These entities seemed to Cardano

 too obscure to deserve proper attention in terms of classifying their natures. Whilst he

 did pay attention to the different natures of possible solutions of equations with inte-

 ger coefficients, he stated that solving an equation with irrational rather than integer
 coefficients "leads to an incongruous quantity" (Cardano 1968, 259). The daunting

 interminability of the project of articulating the natures of emergent compound quan-
 tities made its ontological framework less viable.

 Bombelli made a more earnest attempt at classifying the possible natures of solu-

 tions of the different kinds of polynomial equation. In the section entitled "discussion

 of the six cases above" (Bombelli 1966, 244) the first two cases of the cubic ('cube and

 Tanti equal number* and 'cube equals Tanti and number') are the basic cases to which

 all the others are reduced or compared. For the first equation it is summarily stated that
 the solution can be an integer or a sum of cubic roots. For the reducible cases of the

 second equation (where the method of dal Ferro and Tartaglia works) there is a similar

 statement on the possible natures of the solutions, as well as a list of possibilities that
 Bombelli ruled out as solutions for the irreducible case (see the end of Sect. 4). But

 this is also a point where Bombelli puts the whole project of charting the natures of

 solutions into question. Try as he may exploring cases and transforming the problem,
 some cubics that can be solved geometrically and with roots of negatives could not be
 solved by any 'traditional' quantity that Bombelli had in store. He therefore concludes

 "that (according to my judgement) I take it to be impossible to find such a general
 rule".82

 Here the project of charting the natures of solutions hit an obstacle that for Bom-

 belli was insurmountable. But the obstacle is not just the 'objective' problem of the
 expressive power of Bombelli's language. There is another dimension to the infeasi-
 bility of this project. Indeed, for all but the first two cases of the cubic Bombelli settles

 for vague remarks and observations concerning the nature of solutions. In fact, whilst
 the manuscript version of the "discussion" section handled all thirteen cases of the

 cubic (saying precious little about the latter, more complicated cases), the print edition
 comments only on the first six cases. The reason is not only the fact that Bombelli

 was uneasy with solutions involving roots of negatives; it is also that exhausting the
 information becomes a tedious task, whose results have little value in a world of a

 destabilised distinction between the natures of quantities. Even in cases where a full

 82 "Sì che (quanto al mio giuditio) tengo impossibile ritrovarsi tal regola generale" (Bombelli 1966, 245).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 5 1 9

 taxonomy of solutions was possible, such as 'cube equals square and number', none
 was attempted, and the discussion revolves instead around the reduction of this case
 to previous cases.

 The information concerning equations becomes more and more haphazard as the

 text progresses. There is a less and less systematic treatment of the natures of solu-

 tions, solvability conditions, the number of solutions, transformation to previous cases,

 solutions with roots of negatives and negative solutions (including comments as odd
 as "This Case will rarely have more than one true solution and one false", where
 no negative solution is possible, and where this knowledge was easily accessible to
 Bombelli).83 There is a clear impression that Bombelli is getting out of breath.

 Bombelli's conclusion of the text is highly revealing. "I am of the opinion that I
 have left many unsatisfied in these last Sections" . . . "and having wanted to put all
 cases" . . . "would have made more a volume of collected Civil Code than a brief epi-

 logue" . . . "which was always farthest from my nature, being a most avid scholar of
 brevity" ... "I won't hold back now from saying this: that these Sections are a Chaos,

 and infinitely many steps and things occur there, which are impossible to teach in their

 entirety" . . . "and these Sections have so many distentions" . . . "that it's a deep chasm"

 (perhaps more figuratively: have so many protruding land-heads . . . that it is a deep
 sea).84

 7 Conclusion

 Bombelli's project ends in rumbling discontent. With Bombelli, the abbacist organi-

 sation of knowledge is obviously at a point of crisis. It is therefore fitting to consider
 Bombelli as the last proponent of abbacist algebra, even though he was obviously no
 abbacus master. The erosion of the distinction between the natures of quantities, the

 emergence of algebraic entities such as parameters and variables, and the practically

 unfeasible organisation of knowledge under unbounded lists of types of equations and

 rules for solving them - all combined together to mark the structuring principles of
 U algebra as a dead end.

 But these processes had to combine to produce Bombelli's sense of helplessness.
 Had the 'natural' distinctions not been undermined, the mere infeasibility of the pro-

 ject need not have been considered a crisis. Indeed, the taxonomies of natural history
 are unboundedly large, but taxonomie zoology and botany still survive; the modern

 83 "e questo Capitolo rare volte haverà più d'una valuta vera ed una falsa" (Bombelli 1966, 247).

 84 "Son di opinione che a molti non haverò sodisfatto in questi ultimi Capitoli dove intervengono le
 potenze di potenze (per essere stato breve) ma questi Capitoli sono tali che chi intende bene uno di essi li
 intenderà tutti, et havendo voluto mettere tutti li casi che potevano intravenire, nelle loro agguagliationi,

 si saria fatto più tosto un volume d'un corpo di Testi civili, che un breve epilogo di Capitoli di potenze,
 Tanti e numero, il che fu sempre lontanissimo dalla natura mia, per essere studiosissimo della brevità. Però
 me ne sono passato con brevità, parendomi che sia bastato a chiarire bene li sei Capitoli primi ... Non
 restarò già hora di dir questo, che questi Capitoli sono un Caos, et infiniti passi e cose vi occorrono, le
 quali non si possono insegnar tutte, delle quali ne darrò qualche saggio; e li prudenti ne potranno trovare
 dell'altre, ma gli huomini rozzi e ancora mediocri non ci si affatichino che getteranno il tempo, perchè sono
 cose difficilissime; e questi Capitoli hanno tanti capi (come ho detto di spora) ch'è un pelago profondo"
 (Bombelli 1966,311-312).

 Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 project of classifying finite simple groups was even more monstrous than the charting
 of all cases of quartics, but was nevertheless brought to an end; to be less anachronis-

 tic, Dardi's project of classifying equations according to the rationality of their coef-

 ficients had not been experienced as a crisis, even though it was just as unfeasible and

 messy, involving combinations of reductions and actual solutions not always correctly

 exhausted. If, on the other hand, the project had happened to be more containable, then

 the unstable distinctions underlying it need not have put it into question, as in the case

 of the distinction between six kinds of quadratic equations, which lasted well beyond

 the expiry date of the principles that had shaped it. But the semiotic micro-processes

 that destabilised the distinction between the natures of numbers, compounded by the
 failure of abbacist organisation of knowledge to contain what it had set out to order,
 resulted in Bombelli's experience of "Chaos" and "deep chasm".

 The next steps in the 'grand narrative' of mathematics belong to Viète and Descartes.

 Often, the transition to this next step is characterised as depending on the invention

 of better symbolism - the representations of multiple parameters and variables by let-

 ters, and of exponents by superscript numbers. But this explanation underplays the

 existence of variants of exponential notations before the end of the fifteenth century,
 the representation of parameters by terms such as numero , quantità and shorthand

 symbols, the increasing practice of numbers as parameters, and the diagrammatic
 representations of solution techniques (such as the one in Fig. 3, which shows how
 to solve a cubic equation), which were expressive enough for purposes much more
 intricate than usually acknowledged today.

 And so, if we reject the premises that Cartesian algebraic notation was a spark
 of genius that technologically determined mathematical progress, we must see it as
 a tool whose origins are older than we usually recognise, and whose widespread

 Fig. 3 Bombelli (155?, 71v):
 a computational diagram for
 solving a cubic equation

 «Гл . f 3¿¡ > <<y лЛ
 № i ¿лили . л j n.9 ЛЛ

 W $ <1-7 $£ fPö

 Cru*» «I

 (40 Ta/nto title h £ le

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The natures of numbers 52 1

 endorsement is an issue that requires explanation. I hope that the interactions between

 semiotic micro-processes that destabilised the distinction between quantities and equa-

 tions according to their natures, the practice of numbers and other symbols as proto
 parameters and variables, and the problems of the abbacist organisation of knowl-
 edge, help us understand the non-linear and not necessarily conscious evolution of
 mathematical knowledge and notation culminating in symbolic algebra.

 But the main message of this article is in its fine-grain detail: over and over again

 we find that mathematical signs stand for more than themselves, and for much more

 than the regimented roles assigned them by authors and philosophers of mathematics.

 Acknowledgements I thank Arianna Borrelli and Sabetai Unguru for some translation tips and other
 useful comments.

 Appendix: The status of roots

 Even a cursory look at the use of root signs in abbacist texts shows that they are subject

 to multiple standards. In Jacopo's text one finds the expression "Now multiply" . . . "4,

 which is cube root, against the cube root of 3375". 85 The cubic root is practiced as an

 operation applied to 3375, whereas for 4 it is practiced as a modifier marking its kind
 or nature.

 Piero, a century and a half later, writes "And wanting to divide" one square root

 by another "one divides root by root" and the answer "will be the root of that number
 which comes out".86 For a contemporary ear it sounds odd that one would apply a

 further root to the division of root by root. In fact, in the first half of this sentence the

 root actually points to the number under the root. This usage is in line with contempo-

 rary phrases such as '4 children have 12 bonbons. Divide the bonbons by the children,
 and the answer will be that each child has as many bonbons as the outcome'; first

 we divide the numbers qualified by 'bonbons' and 'children', then the result is given

 its qualifier, 'bonbons'. The root is in fact sometimes practiced like a designation or

 index pointing to the number without actually modifying it. To make this point even

 more explicit note that Maestro Dardi often uses the phrase "the number called root"

 for pointing to numbers under root signs.87

 I must be very clear here. I do not claim that abbacists necessarily conceived of
 roots differently than we do, whatever 'conceiving' may mean. I do not claim that
 their practice of roots led to results that today we would consider wrong. In Piero's

 case, for example, the rules for solving equations of the form power (or root of power)

 equals root of power are inconsistent in regards to what portion of the text is covered
 by the term 'root' (della Francesca 1970, 88-91); in concrete examples, however, his
 results are almost always correct (or at least can be read as such with a reasonable

 85 "Qra multipricha la radice chubica, cioè 4, che è radice chubicha, contra ala radice chubicha (contra ala
 radice chubicha} de 3375" (H0yrup 2007, 326).

 86 "E volendo partire Г una per l'altra, se parte radici per radici et serà radici de quello numero che ne verà"
 (della Francesca 1970, 76).

 87 "lo numero chimamto R" (Dardi 2001, e.g. 52).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 interpretation of the range of root signs). My claim is that the textual practice of the

 term 'root' combines practices deriving from indices, units and modifiers.

 In Bombelli's text too various practices of the term 'root' survive, which treat root

 522 R. Wagner

 and number as convertible units. Bombelli asks to add numbers "as if the one and the

 other were roots" instead of adding their roots88; he writes "Having multiplied 2 by
 R.q.3 (as if each were number)" for multiplying 2 by 389; he uses the phrase "dif-
 ference between R.q. 128 and 8 as number" for the difference between 128 and 6490;

 and concerning the issue of whether pairs such as R.q. 50 and R.q. 2 should be said to

 have a ratio as number to number or as square to square, Bombelli is ambiguous, and
 uses both.91

 I include these observations to show how mathematical modifiers were rhetorically

 practiced also as indexes or units. This obviously has to do with the pragmatics of teach-

 ing and rules, where an abbacus master would refer to a number by the sign standing

 next to it. But it also has to do with the conception of modifiers as expressing the nature

 of quantities, and therefore, like units, as expressions that should be carried with the

 number, even when it is the unmodified number that is operated on. Acknowledging

 these phenomena in the context of roots helps understand corresponding practices in
 the context of meno and cosa signs.

 References

 Bombello, Rafaello. 155?. L'algebra. Bologna, Biblioteca dell'Archiginnasio, В. 1569.
 Bombelli, Rafael. 1572. L'algebra. Bologna.

 Bombelli, Rafael. 1929. L'algebra, Libri IV e V. Bortolotti, E., ed. Bologna, http://a2.lib.uchicago.edu/pip.

 php?/pres/2005/pres2005- 1 88.pdf .

 Bombelli, Rafael. 1966. L'algebra, Prima edizione integrale. Bortolotti, E., ed. Milano.
 Benedetto (attributed to Pier Maria Calandri). 1974. Tractato d'abbacho , Arrighi, G., ed. Paris.
 Cardano, Girolamo. 1545. Ars Magna sive de regulis algebraicis. Nürnberg.
 Cardano, Girolamo. 1663. Hieronymo Cardani Mediolanensis Philosophi ac Medici celeberrimi Operum

 tomus quart us; quo continentur Arithmetica, Geometrica, Musica. Lyon.

 Cardano, Girolamo. 1968. The rules of algebra (Ars Magna) (trans: Whitmer, T.R.). Mineóla, NY.
 Cifoletti, Giovanna. 1995. La question de l'algèbre: mathématiques et rhétorique des hommes de droit dans

 la France du 16e sicle. Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales 50(6): 1385-1416.

 Dardi. 2001. Aliabraa argibra , Franci, R., ed. Siena.
 de Mazzinghi, Antonio. 1967. Trattato di Fioretti , Arrighi, G., ed. Paris.
 della Francesca, Piero. 1970. Trattato d'abacoy Arrighi, G., ed. Paris.
 Derrida, Jacques. 1989. Edmund Husserl' s origin of geometry: An introduction. Lincoln, Nebraska.
 Dieudonné, Jean. 1972. Review of J.E. Hofmann 'R. Bombelli - Erstentdecker des Imaginären'. Praxis

 Math 14(9): 225-230. Math Review MR0484973 (58 #4832a).

 Franci, Rafaella, and Laura Toti Rigatelli. 1985. Towards a history of algebra from Leonardo of Pisa to

 Luca Pacioli. Janus 72(1-3): 17-82.

 Giusti, Enrico. 1991. L'algebra nel Trattato d'abaco di Piero della Francesca: osservazioni e congetture.

 Bollettino di storia delle scienze matematiche 1 1 : 55-83.

 88 "come l'uno e l'altro fosse R.q." (Bombelli 1966, 87).

 89 "Moltiplicato 2 via R.q. 3 (come se ciascuno fosse numero)" (Bombelli 1966, 120).

 90 "differenza ch'è da R.q. 128 a 8 numero" (Bombelli 1966, 121).

 91 The manuscript seems to prefer the latter. The print edition seems to prefer the former, but acknowledges
 that the latter is a more common practice (Bombelli 1966, 64, 73, 124; 155?, 12v).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Giusti, Enrico. 1992. Algebra and geometry in Bombelli and Viète. Bollettino di storia delle scienze mate-

 The natures of numbers 523

 matiche 12: 303-328.

 Oxford.

 Grosholz, Emily R. 2007. Representation and productive ambiguity in mathematics and the sciences.

 Heefer, Albrecht. 2005. The rhetoric of problems in algebra texbooks from Pacioli to Euler. Preprint, http://

 logica.ugent.be/albrecht/thesis/AlgebraRhetoric.pdf.

 Heeffer, Albrecht. 2008. The emergence of symbolic algebra as a shift in predominant models. Foundations

 of Science 13(2): 149-161.

 H0yrup, Jens. 1994. In measure, number and weight. NY.
 H0yrup, Jens. 2007. Jacopo Da Firenze' s Tractatus algorismi and early Italian abbacus culture. Basel.
 H0yrup, Jens. 2009a. What did the abbacus teachers aim at when they (sometimes) ended up doing math-
 ematics? An investigation of the incentives and norms of a distinct mathematical practice. In New
 Perspectives on mathematical practices , Van Kerkhove, В., ed. Singapore.

 H0yrup, Jens. 2009b. Hesitating progress: The slow development toward algebraic symbolization in abba-
 cus and related manuscripts, c. 1300 to c. 1550. Preprint presented at the PASR conference in Ghent,
 August 29, 2009.

 Jayawardene, S.A. 1963. Unpublished Documents relating to Rafael Bombelli in the archives of Bologna.

 Jayawardene, S.A. 1965. Rafael Bombelli, engineer-architect: Some unpublished documents of the Apos-

 Jayawardene, S.A. 1973. The influence of practical arithmetics on the algebra of Rafael Bombelli. Isis

 La Nave, Federica, and Barry Mazur. 2002. 'Reading Bombelli'. The Mathematical Intellegencer 24(1):

 Isis 54(3): 391-395.

 tolic Camera. Isis 56(3): 298-306.

 64(4): 510-523.

 12-21.

 moterzo , Vol. II. Roma.

 Leonardo Pisano. 1862. Boncompagni, В., ed. Scritti di Leonardo Pisano: mathematico del secolo deci-

 Malet, Antoni. 2006. Renaissance notions of number and magnitude. Historia Mathematica 33: 63-8 1 .
 Netz, Reviel. 2004. The transformation of mathematics in the early Mediterranean world. Cambridge.
 Paolo dell'Abbaco. 1964. Trattato d'aritmetica , Arrighi, G., ed. Paris.
 Radford, Luis. 1997. Before the other unknowns were invented: Didactic inquiries on the methods and

 problems of mediaeval Italian algebra. For the Learning of Mathematics 15(3): 28-38.

 Radford, Luis. 2003. On the epistemologica! limits of language: Mathematical knowledge and social practice

 during the Renaissance. Educational Studies in Mathematics 52: 123-150.

 Rivolo, M.T., and A. Simi. 1998. The computation of square and cube roots in Italy from Fibonacci to

 Bombelli. Archives for the History of Exact Science 52(2): 161-193.

 Rose, Paul L. 1975. The Italian Renaissance of mathematics. Studies on humanists and mathematicians

 Tanner, R.C.H. 1980. The alien realm of the minus: Deviatory mathematics in Cardano's writings. Annals

 from Petrarch to Galileo. Genève.

 of Science 37(2): 159-178.

 Tartaglia, Niccolo Fontana. 1543. Euclide megarense philosopho : solo introduttore delle scientie mathe-

 matice : diligentemente reassettato, et alla integrita ridotto ...Secondo le due Tradottioni. Venice.

 Tartaglia, Niccolo Fontana. 1560. General Trattato di Numeri et Misure, Part VI. Venice.
 Van Egmond, Warren. 1980. Practical mathematics in the Italian Renaissance: A catalog of Italian abbacus

 manuscripts and printed books to 1600. Firenze.

 Wagner, Roy. 2009a. S(zp, zp): Post structural readings ofGödel's proof Milano.
 Wagner, Roy. 2009b. Mathematical variables as indigenous concepts. International Studies in the Philoso-

 phy of Science 32( I): 1-18.

 Wagner, Roy. 2010. For a thicker semiotic description of mathematical practice and structure. In Philosophy
 of mathematics: Philosophical aspects and mathematical practice , Löwe, В. and T. Müller, eds. London.
 Wagner, Roy. Forthcoming. The geometry of the unknown: Bombelli's Algebra Linearía. In Philosophical
 aspects of symbolic reasoning in early modern science and mathematics , Heeffer, A. and M. Van Dyck
 eds. London.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:35:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

