 

 

 

 

The mutual influence of aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics in theory and

experiment
Author(s): Larrie D. Ferreiro
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 2 (March 2014), pp. 241-263
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569631
Accessed: 19-05-2020 10:01 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:241-263
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0129-x

 The mutual influence of aircraft aerodynamics and ship
 hydrodynamics in theory and experiment

 Larrie D. Ferreiro

 Received: 11 July 2013 / Published online: 27 August 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract As early as 1784, sharp-eyed engineers and scientists noted striking similar

 ities between the dynamics of seagoing vessels and aerial vehicles. By the early twen

 tieth century, naval engineers and scientists were developing and designing airplanes

 and dirigibles using empirical principles derived from naval architecture. Several key

 researchers in aerodynamics began their career as naval architects (David A. Taylor,

 William F. Durand and Jerome C. Hunsaker) and carried out their experiments in ship

 testing facilities. By the 1930s, however, the transfer of knowledge was irrevocably

 reversed as empiricism gave way to more fundamental, physics-based research. The

 rapid evolution of complex aircraft systems and flight envelopes led to new theoretical

 developments in aerodynamics and maneuvering, which quickly found their way into

 naval ship design. The theoretical and experimental results for airfoils, rigid airships
 and fixed-wing aircraft developed by Ludwig Prandtl, Theodore von Karman, Max M.

 Münk and Hilda M. Lyon were employed in the hydrodynamic development of surface

 ships and submarines. This paper examines how the ideas, concepts and data from one

 discipline influenced the other and explores the processes by which that knowledge

 was transferred between disciplines.

 1 Introduction

 Naval architects were heavily involved early in the development of aircraft design. In

 the early twentieth century, when the great steam-turbine passenger liners and dread

 noughts were unquestionably the most advanced machines of the age, their designers

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 L. D. Ferreira (S)

 Stevens Institute of Technology, 6837 Brimstone Lane, Fairfax Station, VA 22039, USA
 e-mail: larrie.ferreiro@stevens.edu

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 were regarded as among the most sophisticated of all engineers, and their services

 were called upon in developing novel technologies like the airplane and dirigible.1

 The reverse was also true: aviation had a profound impact upon the evolution of ships,

 not only in the adoption of esthetically "streamlined" forms like that of the 1930s pas

 senger liner Normandie, but also in the development of lightweight aluminum alloys

 that found their way into marine construction (Peter 1996; Shatzberg 1999; Forrest
 1947).

 242 L. D. Ferreiro

 But it was in the rapid progress of theoretical developments in fluid resistance

 and dynamics that the connection between ships and aircraft was most profound.

 At the dawn of aviation, the development of aircraft aerodynamics was informed

 by empirical studies of stability, propellers and control surfaces derived from many

 years of practical and experimental studies. Within a few years, however, this flow of

 information reversed, and it was the theoretical developments in aircraft aerodynamics

 (e.g., laminar and turbulent flow, circulation theory and maneuvering equations) that

 now found their way into ship hydrodynamics, a state of affairs that has persisted to

 this day. This article discusses the flow of information between the two disciplines
 and examines the reasons for this reversal of flow.

 2 Initial flow: from ships to aircraft

 A cursory glance at any aircraft designer's drawing board or computer screen reveals

 the design heritage in the discipline of naval architecture. The body of an aircraft

 is sometimes referred to as the "hull" (especially in airships), and its left and right

 sides are designated as port and starboard. As with ships, the geometry of an aircraft is

 defined by a series of transverse body stations, by buttock lines that run vertically down

 its length and by waterlines that cut horizontally across it. The vertical reference plane

 at the nose corresponds directly to a ship's forward perpendicular, and the longitudinal

 cross-section for both is called the inboard profile. The aircraft designer used the very

 same tools as the naval architect to draw these lines, including ships' curves (similar

 to French curves) and splines or battens held in place with lead weights called ducks

 or whales. Aircraft motions are referred to by the nautical terms roll, pitch and yaw.
 The calculated surface of the aircraft is even called the wetted area, a direct reference

 to naval practice (Raymer 2006). This naval heritage of aircraft can be traced all the

 way back to the very first balloon flights of the late eighteenth century.

 2.1 "Two faces of the same problem": the ship and the aircraft, 1784-1910

 The first balloon flights of the Montgolfier brothers in 1783 ignited the interest of

 the scientific community to solve the various problems the inventors had experienced.

 The French Academy of Sciences quickly identified the primary concerns of making

 ' Naval architects did not just work on aircraft: during World War I, Winston Churchill specifically requested

 that his Director of Naval Construction, Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt, head up the creation of complex

 new armored vehicles he called landships, but which were later renamed tanks; to this day, tanks sport very

 nautical hulls and turrets (Stein 1919. p. II).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 243

 balloons practical, the most important of which was to find a way of steering them.

 Many observers noted the similarities between balloons and ships, quickly coining

 the term aeronautical to describe the naval qualities of airborne craft. In 1784, several

 inventors proposed and built rudder systems to guide dirigible (steerable) balloons,

 although the concept ultimately proved ineffective for non-propelled balloons (Carra
 1784; Gillespie 1984).

 It was not until 1852, when the French engineer Jules Henri Giffard successfully

 demonstrated a steam-powered balloon that the possibility of a dirigible air vehicle

 became a reality. By that time, numerous inventors had demonstrated man-powered

 submersibles that could be controlled both horizontally and vertically through the

 water (Roland 1978). In 1854, the mining engineer (and inventor of the modern tur

 bine) Claude Burdin submitted a memoir before the French Academy of Sciences that

 outlined in some detail the methods that could be used to propel and direct either a

 submarine boat or an airship, arguing that the mechanisms for one—i.e., propellers,

 rudders and horizontal planes—would be directly applicable to the other (Comptes
 Rendues 1854).

 This link between airships and submarines was reaffirmed by the French naval

 constructor Stanislas Charles Henri Dupuy de Lome, famous for building the first

 ironclad warships. In 1870 during the Siege of Paris, he constructed and tested a

 propeller-driven dirigible balloon as a means of escaping the surrounding Prussian

 troops, although the city fell before it could be used (Leclert 1872). In the 1880s,

 he began work on the Gymnote electric submarine, which was completed after his

 death by his colleague Gustave Zédé. Dupuy de Lome used his experience from his

 aerial experiment to guide his submarine one, frequently noting that "the question of

 aerostats and that of submarine boats are intimately linked; the day that the first is

 solved, the second will be nearly so" (Zédé 1886).

 The first heavier-than-air powered flights of Clément Ader and the Wright brothers

 showed both the great advances in the technological understanding of aircraft, and the

 vast deficit in knowledge of how to control and maintain dynamic flight. French Army

 captain Ferdinand Ferber, who had been experimenting with gliders at the same time

 as the Wright brothers, had developed his understanding of the longitudinal stability

 of aircraft from examining torpedoes and submarines, which have fins and control

 surfaces mounted at the tail. Carefully analyzing both the theoretical and practical

 aspects of the problem, he modified the Wright brothers' glider configurations (which

 all had forward canards that rendered them longitudinally unstable) by adding a fixed

 tail to provide inherent longitudinal stability. This practice was quickly followed by

 other aircraft builders (Ferber 1908).

 In 1910, the technology journalist Henri Noalhat took his inspiration from Ferber

 to examine the problems of aviation in a small book Aerial Navigation and Subma

 rine Navigation: Two Faces of the Same Problem, in which he compared stability,

 equilibrium and directional control for aerial craft (both heavier and lighter than air)

 with those of submarines and torpedoes. Noalhat pointed out several then current

 problems in manned flight that he believed could be rectified using marine technolo

 gies. Noting that single-propeller airplanes tended to pull to one side due to propeller

 torque, he suggested solutions following the practice for counter-rotating propellers

 as on torpedoes, or by using two opposite-hand propellers as on submarines. Noalhat

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 244 L. D. Ferreiro

 also suggested the use of gyroscopes to stabilize airplanes, as such devices had been

 used in torpedoes since the 1890s (Noalhat 1910). In 1913 Elmer Sperry, who had

 made his name in naval gyroscopes, adapted the technology for aircraft, used first in

 a gyro-stabilized, radio-controlled "aerial torpedo" (Hughes 1971, pp. 243-272).

 2.2 Naval architecture in aircraft design, 1911-1939

 Within a decade of the Wright brothers' first flight, enthusiasts and professionals

 around the world were designing, building and testing airplanes. Many of those early

 aeronautical engineers had begun their careers as naval architects, transferring their

 skills in stability and dynamics from one fluid to another. Naval architects dominated

 the early days of aeronautics because they were familiar with the wide range of prob

 lems inherent in aircraft design. They appreciated the role of weight and buoyancy (or

 lift) on aircraft configuration and strength. They also understood how to apply prac

 tical hydrodynamic principles of pressure distribution, potential flow and streamlines

 to aircraft aerodynamics (Roenne 1913; Hunsaker 1916; Wyn-Evans 1921 ; Hovgaard
 1927; Richmond 1929a).

 Much of this knowledge had been derived empirically from ship experimental model

 basins, which had been pioneered in the 1870s and 1880s by the British father-and-son

 engineers William and Robert Froude in Torquay and Haslar. The Froudes were the

 first to develop a coherent theoretical basis for using small-scale models to simulate

 full-scale performance of ships. In particular, they developed a method to separate ship

 resistance into two components, viscous (frictiona!) and non-viscous (primarily wave
 making) components. Similar techniques were developed to simulate the performance

 of propellers behind a ship. Using the appropriate non-dimensional scaling laws for
 each component, model test results could be used to predict the speed and power

 of ships (Wright 1983; Brown 2006). By the turn of the twentieth century, a dozen

 experimental model basins had opened across Europe and the USA. The engineers

 and scientists working on naval topics soon turned their attention to the skies.

 This was particularly evident in the USA, where the US Navy took an early leading

 role in aeronautical research under the influence of David W. Taylor. Taylor was
 a naval architect who in 1898 created the US Experimental Model Basin (EMB)

 in Washington, D.C. to develop fundamental principles of hydrodynamics and test

 warship designs. Starting in 1911, Taylor built the experimental wind tunnel at the

 site to serve the same purposes for aircraft. He and his assistant William McEntee,
 also a naval architect, established a formal Aircraft Division within the Bureau of

 Construction and Repair (the Navy's ship design organization) and quickly populated

 it with 35 naval architects to perform aircraft design and conduct experimental work.

 These men, at once naval and aeronautical engineers, were instrumental in developing

 the hull and pontoon designs for seaplanes that dominated much of early naval aviation
 (Fulton 1963; Carlisle 1998; Trimble 2002; Stein 2007; Haas et al. 2011).

 One of these "crossover" engineers was Jerome C. Hunsaker, who designed the

 NC-4 Flying Boat that made the first transatlantic crossing. In the 1920s, Hunsaker

 pointed out where aeronautical engineering had borrowed from naval architecture
 (Hunsaker 1920, 1924):

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 245

 - Methods for controlling weight and center of gravity

 - The Froude method separation of resistance analysis

 - The use of small models and scaling laws in experimental facilities to test full-sized

 craft, largely following the Froudes' practice

 - The design of propellers, also following the Froudes' practice

 - The development and use of streamlined forms

 - Buoyancy, trim and strength calculations for airships

 - The design of floats for seaplanes

 In Britain, the Admiralty's Airship Design Section was established in 1915 during

 World War I and populated with ten naval architects, including Charles I.R. Campbell

 (head of the design section), Harold Butler Wyn-Evans and Steven Payne, most of

 whom were on loan from the submarine design section. Several went back to ship

 design (notably aircraft carriers) in 1921 after the design section was transferred to

 the Air Ministry, but Campbell tragically died that year in the notorious crash of the

 R38 airship (Higham 1961, p. 176).

 In Germany, a similar pattern emerged. Albert Betz was originally trained as a naval

 architect at the Technische Hochschule Berlin-Charlottenburg and succeeded Lud

 wig Prandtl as director of the Universität Göttingen aerodynamics research institute.

 Johann Schütte, while serving as a professor of naval architecture at the Technische

 Universität Danzig (Gdansk), became co-founder of the famous Schütte-Lanz Airship
 Company (Lehmann 1999, pp. 135,458).

 It is unsurprising that these early naval-turned-aviation engineers would bring their

 body of knowledge with them and apply well-known naval architectural concepts,

 notably the metacenter and propeller theory, to the design of aircraft. The concept of

 the metacenter as a measure of ship's stability dates back to the eighteenth century.

 The basic concept states that for positive stability at small angles of roll or pitch, the

 vertical couple formed by the ship's upward buoyancy (passing through the centroid of

 volumetric buoyancy B) and downward weight (through the center of gravity) produce

 a net restoring force. For the ship to be stable (i.e., to have a positive righting moment),

 the center of gravity G cannot rise above a certain point, called the metacenter M

 (which is a function of displacement, V, and the righting moment at the waterplane,

 ly), beyond which the couple turns negative and the ship will overturn if heeled. The

 metacentric height is the distance between the center of gravity and the metacenter; the

 larger the value, the greater the inherent stability.2 The formula for a ship's metacenter
 G M is thus:

 h
 GM = BG~ —
 V

 In 1911, William McEntee proposed that a similar concept be employed for assessing

 the stability of aircraft. In his formulation, the weight of the aircraft W is supported

 by the "buoyancy," i.e., the upward lift, acting through the centroid of surface area

 P. The aircraft metacenter GM (also called the "neutral point") is a function of the

 2 Note that the righting and pitching moments in the following equations have the dimension of [weight]
 x [distance]. See Nowacki and Ferreiro (2003).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 dynamic pitching moment of pressure about its center of gravity, defined as Vm. The

 resultant equation becomes:

 246 L. D. Ferreira

 GM = PG - —
 W

 As with ships, the greater the distance between the aircraft center of gravity and

 the metacenter, the greater its inherent stability. Early aircraft designers found this

 simplified mathematical model useful in defining longitudinal stability. It was soon

 replaced by more complex dynamic stability formulae that better accounted for aircraft

 motions, though the metacenter formula is still found in aerodynamics textbooks as

 a convenient way to explain the concept of aircraft stability (McEntee 1911; Mises
 1992, pp. 517-529).

 In Germany and France, naval architects were also closely linked to develop
 ments in aviation. When the Technische Universität Berlin-Charlottenburg opened its

 new course for aircraft construction in 1925, it stipulated that candidates must "have

 acquired sufficient knowledge of the basics of ship-building" to be admitted (Eckert

 2006, p. 131). In France, when the Service Technique Aéronautique was established

 in 1916, its ranks were quickly filled by naval architects like Emile Leroux from the

 Génie Maritime, who also taught aerodynamics at its Ecole d'Application. So closely

 did the two disciplines evolve together that in 1924, the naval professional society

 Association Technique Maritime (ATM) became the Association Technique Maritime

 et Aéronautique (ATMA). ATMA devoted many pages of its annual Bulletin to aero

 nautical research, for example comparative studies by Leroux on ship and aircraft
 propellers (Leroux 1925, 1927; ATMA 2013).

 In the USA, the naval architecture community was closely involved in the estab

 lishment of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in the early

 days of World War I. Originally conceived by the aeronautical pioneer Washington

 Irving Chambers (who worked closely with Taylor's naval architects) as a scientific

 research center, it was finally created along the lines of the Navy's experimental facil

 ities as articulated by David Taylor and aimed at providing practical engineering data

 for the design and construction of aircraft. From the beginning, naval architects were

 a strong presence within NACA and guided its agenda; Taylor was Secretary in the

 1920s, while Hunsaker was Chairman in the 1940s and 1950s. Its first permanent

 headquarters was housed from 1920-1941 in the Main Navy Building in Washington
 D.C. (Roland 1985).

 Perhaps the strongest technical influence that naval architects had upon aircraft aero

 dynamics was in the domain of propeller design. One of the first proposals to NACA, to

 conduct systematic tests of airplane propellers, came from William F. Durand at Stan

 ford University. Durand had previously been a marine engineer with the US Navy,
 then head of the Department of Naval Architecture at Cornell, and was intimately

 familiar with both the theory and practice of ship propeller design. While at Cornell

 he had tested a series of propellers to gain comparative results across a range of design

 parameters (pitch, curvature, etc.). These tests, the results of which were published
 in 1905, were soon emulated in the UK, France and at David Taylor's Experimental

 Model Basin. In 1916, Durand teamed with fellow Stanford professor, and former

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 247

 naval architect, Everett P. Lesley to carry out similar parametric testing on airplane

 propellers, funded by NACA. The NACA Secretary Holden C. Richardson, himself a
 naval architect who developed one of the earliest models of hydrofoil boats, was the

 liaison for this project until Durand was appointed NACA President in 1917.

 The experiments conducted by Durand and Lesley were a classic example of

 the transfer of methods, knowledge and expertise from the field of ship hydrody

 namics to that of aircraft aerodynamics. The two men selected the design parame

 ters for testing—rotational speed, distribution of pitch ratio, diameter—based upon

 their experience testing ship propellers, then created 48 model airplane propellers

 and systematically varied them. The tests results graphically detailed the perfor

 mance data (efficiency, slip, etc.) for the entire family as functions of the parameters.

 These highly successful experiments gave aircraft designers a ready tool for matching

 desired propeller characteristics to their aircraft (Vincenti 1979, 1990, pp. 137-169;
 Durand 1953).

 Although most of maritime influence on aircraft occurred within military and

 governmental bodies, the connection between naval architecture and aircraft design

 extended into civilian aviation as well. Since the mid-nineteenth century, rules for

 designing, building and surveying merchant ships had been established, not by govern

 ments, but by independent classification societies such as Lloyd's Register (Britain),
 Bureau Veritas (France), Det Norske Veritas (Norway) and the American Bureau

 of Shipping (United States). In the early days of aircraft design, aviation compa

 nies, insurance agents and government ministries turned to these societies to develop

 rules for construction and survey of aircraft, and for the issuance of airworthiness

 certificates. These classification societies created independent aeronautical branches

 to help the fledgling aircraft industry develop and codify new procedures and prac

 tices. In 1929, the Aircraft International Register (AIR) was established, which a

 contemporary announcement stated "will be to commercial aircraft what Lloyd's

 Register is to shipping," intended to provide an internationally accepted set of classi

 fication rules ("Aircraft International Register" 1929; 1978, pp. 17-20; Anderson and

 Collett 1989, pp. 104-106; American Bureau of Shipping 2006, p. 28; Watson 2010a,
 pp. 196-199).

 The use of a ship-based classification scheme for aircraft was never a good
 fit and was ultimately short-lived. Classification societies were principally staffed

 by naval architects and marine engineers, and the criteria they developed for ship
 design and construction were based on empirical, rules of thumb lessons gar
 nered over a century of practice. For example, requirements for plate thickness
 and hull stiffness were not based on any explicit structural loading cases, but
 rather as a simple function of ship's length and hull form. Aircraft designers,
 driven in large part by the need to minimize weight, quickly began employing

 first principles of physics and mechanics to develop loading and strength crite

 ria that were used to establish minimum acceptable skin thicknesses and girder

 dimensions (Younger 1935, pp. 11-17). Within a few years of their establishment,

 most classification societies shuttered their aeronautical branches, and by 1939, the

 AIR was disestablished as governments took on the role of issuing airworthiness
 certificates.

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 248 L. D. Ferreira

 3 Flow reversal: from aircraft to ships

 By the 1930s, much of the "normal science" of ship hydrodynamics had reached its

 limits. The physical and empirical rules developed over the previous half-century were

 proving inadequate to explain what researchers were finding in their test results and

 full-scale predictions. By that time, the insights from naval architecture were also

 becoming irrelevant to aircraft designers, who themselves were developing increas

 ingly sophisticated research tools to deal with the practical problems of trying to

 reduce drag, extend lift and improve maneuverability at higher and higher speeds.
 These involved scale effects and fluid compressibility problems not found in slow

 speed ships traveling through water, an effectively incompressible fluid (Anderson
 1997, p. 319).

 One reason for the disparity in the extent of theoretical developments between

 these two fields was that governments were pouring far more money and resources

 into aircraft aerodynamics than into naval hydrodynamics. In 1930, the USA had just

 two ship model basins (EMB and at University of Michigan), while almost a dozen

 wind tunnels had already sprang up in around the nation, including six run by NACA.

 That same year, the EMB received less than $100,000 in appropriations, whereas

 NACA was being funded to the tune of $1.3 million (Davidson 1936, p. A41; Annual

 Report, 1930, p. 627; Mack 1998, p. 15).

 At the same time, naval architects were faced with a crisis in predicting the perfor

 mance of ships that were growing rapidly in size and speed. Simply relying on empirical
 scale-model test results and decades-old rules of thumb was proving increasingly inad

 equate to satisfy the increasingly onerous demands placed by navies and shipowners
 for accuracy in predicting speed, power and maneuverability. Naval architects some
 times found it "difficult to find two runs of the same model that yielded identical

 results," and maneuvering tests often returned results of "doubtful validity." What was

 clearly lacking, as explained by one naval architect, was a "solid foundation" of hydro

 dynamic theory, which was now based "on ridiculous assumptions... there should be
 less doctrine and more Physics" (Roop 1929; Carlisle 1998, pp. 114-115, 134).

 Thus, by the 1930s, it was increasingly apparent that the "Physics" necessary to

 build a solid theoretical foundation for naval architecture was to be found, not simply

 by extending current work in ship hydrodynamics, but by borrowing insights from the

 adolescent discipline of aircraft aerodynamics. This change in fundamental scientific

 assumptions is often characterized as a "paradigm shift" (Kuhn 1962), but in this
 instance, it is more accurate to call it a "flow reversal" between the two disciplines.

 Much of the theoretical work in aircraft aerodynamics originated in Germany, which

 in part due to its pioneering development of the research-oriented university and close
 ties between academia and industry, has always "punched above its weight" in terms

 of its worldwide impact on scientific developments. These developments were marked

 early on by strong mathematical and physical bases, supported by extensive empir
 ical confirmation. This very systematic and organized methodology extended into

 its aerodynamic research and later into hydrodynamic research (Clark 2006; Watson
 2010b; Timmermann 1979, pp. 83-120; Nowacki 2000). Apart from the more obvi

 ous applications to sailboats, seaplanes and air-cushion vehicles, three naval architec

 tural domains in particular were the beneficiaries of aerodynamic research; frictional

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 249

 resistance; propeller theory; and maneuvering and stability theory. A fourth domain,

 submarine design, was heavily influenced by British work on airships.

 3.1 Frictional resistance and boundary-layer theory, 1904-1957

 Since the 1870s, scientists and engineers working in ship hydrodynamics (notably the

 aforementioned William and Robert Froude, the British scientist Osborne Reynolds
 and Dutch naval architect Bruno Tideman) had used model test data to establish rea

 sonably accurate estimates of skin friction drag at full scale. The methods used for

 establishing frictional resistance in the early twentieth century had changed little over

 two generations: measuring the towed resistance of various lengths of wood planks

 coated with different varnishes to simulate surface roughness, then scaling up to full

 size using the non-dimensional Reynolds number (a function of length, speed and fluid

 viscosity) to simulate the skin of metal ships coated in paint. It was not a completely

 satisfactory approach, as it did not accurately portray full-scale surface roughness

 or hull form effects. A "crisis in ship-powering prediction" emerged, as explained

 in an internal EMB report in 1929, which noted that "model basin testing is a very

 uncertain process," yielding only an approximation to the resistance and powering of

 a ship accurate to within 10 percent. "This is a rather discouraging state of affairs," the

 report went on, arguing that the proper use of the model basin would be to bolster the

 theoretical side of the hydrodynamics of skin friction through rigorous and long-term

 experiments (Bailey 1995, pp. 62-63. Quotes: Carlisle 1998, p. 115).

 The reigning problem in hydrodynamic theory at the time was that there was no

 significant understanding of what happened at the surface of the body which could be

 used to develop a more accurate picture of what contributed to frictional drag. Obser

 vant sailors and shipbuilders had known for ages that the water directly on the skin of

 the ship moved slower than the surrounding water, forming a sort of boundary layer:
 as one shipbuilder explained in 1836 "that portion of the water accompanying a ship

 which is immediately next to her body is not passed by so quickly as that a little dis

 tance further off, etc.; consequently, the velocity of a ship through the water is actually

 less than the velocity with which she moves forward."3 British scientist William John

 Macquorn Rankine, writing in 1862, assumed that "the agitation in the water caused

 by the friction on the ship's bottom extends only to a layer of water which is very

 thin as compared with the dimension of the ship," although under certain conditions

 "this assumption is not fulfilled" (Rankine 1862). William Froude himself implic

 itly recognized this boundary layer, noting that "no particles of fluid can be strictly

 regarded as sliding past the surface, in the sense in which a solid slides past a solid"

 (Froude 1869; Brown 2006, p. 178). However, neither Rankine nor Froude exploited

 these observations in their work on skin friction, nor would naval hydrodynamicists

 systematically do so until the 1930s.

 3 Blackburn assumed that this fluid drag was a sort of added mass, a concept today used in analysis of the

 motion of aircraft and ships, stating: "A sphere in motion is said to drag with it as much of the fluid as

 is equal to six-tenths of the bulk of the sphere.... So the total resistance of a ship is more of a compound

 and diversified nature by the circumstance of an atmosphere of water accompanying her" (Blackburn 1836,
 pp. 39-43).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 250 L. D. Ferreira

 Instead, it fell to a new generation of scientists, using higher mathematical and

 physical tools, to develop a working theory of how fluids behaved right at the surface

 of a solid body. In 1904, when Ludwig Prandtl (then a professor of mechanics in

 Hannover) developed his concept of the boundary layer, his great insight was that there

 existed not one, but two separate regimes of fluid resistance which could be analyzed

 separately: ( 1 ) a thin viscous region, the boundary layer itself, where frictional effects

 were felt, with the fluid adhering to the surface and gradually increasing in velocity

 outward; and (2) the region outside the boundary layer, which was essentially inviscid

 flow. The boundary layer and nature of resistance differed depending upon whether

 the flow was laminar (generally at lower Reynolds numbers, i.e., smaller scale, slower

 speeds and lower specific resistance) or turbulent (larger scale, higher speeds and

 higher specific resistance). This concept completely changed prevailing theories of

 frictional resistance and would revolutionize fluid dynamics.

 Although many of the experiments that confirmed boundary-layer theory were done

 in a hydraulic context, the aerodynamic community was, at first, the main beneficiary of

 the results. Prandtl, now at the University of Göttingen, directed an institute for applied

 mechanics and an expanding extramural aerodynamic research facility (which would

 become the Aerodynamische Versuchsanstalt in 1919) where he continued to work on

 the problems associated with the boundary layer. Over the next two decades, many of

 Prandtl's students (again, often using hydraulic experiments) extended the theory of the

 boundary layer. Heinrich Blasius worked primarily in the laminar flow regime, while

 Theodore von Kârmân and Hermann Schlichting extended Prandtl's theories into the

 frictional effects of roughness and turbulence. Turbulent flow, it was soon realized,

 was the critical domain to explore; although small-scale models often experience
 laminar flow conditions (and therefore lower resistance), at the scale of full-sized

 ships and aircraft the flow of air and water at the surface quickly becomes turbulent.

 Understanding the formation and characteristics of boundary layers in turbulent flow

 was critical to accurate prediction of fluid skin friction.

 Von Kârmân, one of Prandtl's first students, continued his work on turbulent flow

 when he moved to the Aachen Technische Hochschule in 1912 and then at the Cal

 ifornia Institute of Technology after 1930. Schlichting, who came to Göttingen in

 1927, worked directly with Prandtl during the crucial years of his research, later

 using turbulent flow theory to help the German Navy and Air Force to develop low

 drag rivets that reduced the resistance of ships and aircraft, and became the author

 of seminal textbooks on boundary-layer theory (Eckert 2006, p. 186; Epple 2009,
 pp. 295-297).

 A fierce competition over fluid skin friction arose between Prandtl's group and von

 Kârmân. "The competition was gentlemanly, of course," von Kârmân later recalled.

 "But it was first-class rivalry nonetheless, a kind of Olympic Games, between Prandtl

 and me, and beyond that between Göttingen and Aachen...The 'ball' was the search
 for a universal law of turbulence" (Eckert 2006, pp. 107-128). In other words, both

 men were searching for a single non-dimensional equation known as the "friction line"

 or "skin friction coefficient (Cf)" that relates drag force to surface area and Reynolds

 number (/?„), in order to predict fluid friction in turbulent flow. By 1930, it appeared as

 though both men had arrived at similar conclusions concerning the logarithmic form
 of the friction line, where k and C are constants (Eckert 2010):

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 251

 = logj0 (Rn ■ Cf) + C

 The German aerodynamics community had thus made enormous progress during the

 previous twenty-five years in the understanding of the boundary layer and its appli

 cation to fluid friction, despite the upheavals of World War I and the subsequent

 deprivations under the Treaty of Versailles. Their work quickly influenced the conduct

 of aerodynamic research around the globe. The naval architecture community, how

 ever, demonstrated little interest in or knowledge of the subject, apart from work being

 done by Günther Kempf at the Hamburg Ship Model Basin and Friedrich Gebers at
 the Vienna Model Basin. Outside of these two centers, there was almost no mention

 of boundary-layer theory or references to Prandtl and von Karman in the papers of

 ATMA, the Institution of Naval Architects (INA, UK) or Society of Naval Architects

 and Marine Engineers (SNAME, USA) (cf. ATMA 1989; RINA 1960; SNAME 1946).
 That was about to change. In May 1932, Kempf and his colleague Ernst Foerster

 organized in Hamburg an international Conference on Hydromechanical Problems of

 Ship Propulsion (Konferenz über hydromechanische Probleme des Schiffsantriebs).

 It attracted enormous interest around the world, and the meeting room was filled with

 representatives from the major ship model testing basins in Germany, France, Sweden,

 Austria, the Netherlands and the USA (Bailey 1995, p. 95). This was the first time

 that the global community of naval architects received such wide exposure to the

 great theoretical leaps that had been made in the previous two decades by the German

 aerodynamic community. The primary subjects covered were frictional resistance and

 propeller hydrodynamics. This conference, more than any other event, served as the

 signal that a change in the direction of knowledge "flow" between the naval and

 aviation communities had begun, to where ship hydrodynamics began to be heavily

 influenced by aircraft aerodynamics.4

 The first part of the two-day conference was devoted to cuiTent research on frictional

 resistance, the most advanced work being done at Aachen and Göttingen. Von Kârmân,

 by then in California and unable to attend,5 submitted a paper outlining his "rational

 theory of turbulence," in which he reiterated the logarithmic law and explained the

 effects of surface roughness on specific resistance, arguing that roughness "only com

 mences to increase resistance when it projects outside the laminar boundary layer."

 This paper was commented upon by Prandtl, who did attend the conference but did

 not present any findings of his own. Kempf outlined his experiments which confirmed

 the theoretical formulations of von Kârmân and Prandtl. The final paper was a short

 4 The papers referred to in the following sections were: Theodore von Kârmàn, "Theorie des Reibungswider

 standes," pp. 50-73; Günther Kempf, "Weitre Reibungsergebinsse an ebenen und rauhen Flächen,' pp. 74

 82; Karl E. Schoenherr, "The Influence of Temperature on the Frictional Resistance Experienced by Plane

 Surfaces Moving in a Fluid," pp. 83-86 (Günther and Foerster 1932).

 5 Von Karman, who was Jewish, had been increasingly concerned about the rise of official anti-Semitism

 in Weimar Germany. After several visits to the USA, he permanently left his post at Aachen in October

 1930, just after the German Federal elections that helped vault the Nazi party into prominence, and assumed

 the directorship of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology in
 Pasadena.

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 252 L. D. Ferreiro

 discussion of the effect of temperature on friction by a relatively unknown American

 naval architect of German origin, Karl E. Schoenherr.

 Schoenherr's short paper belied the much larger work that he was completing, just

 as the Hamburg conference was taking place. Schoenherr had already led an eventful

 life, having escaped a World War I prison camp by stowing away aboard ship to the
 USA. He became a U.S. citizen, attended MIT and began working at the EMB in
 Washington D.C. He became interested in the problem of turbulent flow and pursued

 his PhD at Johns Hopkins University with a dissertation on the subject, knowing full
 well that Prandtl and von Kârmân were ahead in the race.

 Through the years 1931 and 1932, Schoenherr could be found working at the EMB

 late into the night, long after his EMB colleagues had gone home, recording hundreds

 of experimental data points from model basins in the USA, Germany and elsewhere on

 massive sheets of graph paper, because (as he explained to his professors), "whoever

 comes out first with an answer that seems internationally acceptable, has something

 that builds a reputation" (Schoenherr 1989; Carlisle 1998, pp. 116-118). By 1932, he

 had completed his groundbreaking thesis and presented the results several months after

 the Hamburg conference, at the SNAME annual meeting in New York in November of

 that year. Building upon Prandtl and von Kârmân's work, Schoenherr stated that the

 best fit to the reams of data would be represented by the equation (Schoenherr 1932):

 0.242
 —7=- = log,0(Än-Cf)
 VCf

 Naval architects who examined the data found that Schoenherr's equation agreed well
 with the data. Even von Kârmân was impressed; in late 1932, he wrote to Prandtl,

 saying that "Schoenherr has compiled the material very nicely and presented it in the

 previous meeting of the American Society [of Naval Architects]" (Kârmân to Prandtl
 1932).

 The impact of the 1932 Hamburg Conference was almost immediately felt in the

 international naval architecture community, particularly in the domain of ship resis

 tance and powering. In an after-dinner speech, consulting engineer Giovanni (John)

 de Meo, at the instigation of Dutch naval architect Lauren Troost, "pleaded strongly

 for international technical cooperation" in this domain. The following year, Troost

 hosted a meeting of model basin supervisors in The Hague to outline the framework

 for coordinating research and cooperation between model basins around the globe.

 The association, which became known as the International Towing Tank Conference

 (ITTC), continues to meet every three years to compare notes and coordinate work

 (Troost 1933, pp. 7-8). A parallel American offshoot, the ATTC, was created in 1938.
 Naval architects scrupulously examined the friction lines developed by Prandtl,

 Kârmân and Schoenherr. After careful analysis, in 1947, the ATTC adopted Schoen

 herr's equation as the standard friction line to be used for all resistance calculations in

 US and Canadian ship model basins. In 1950, the British Ship Research Association

 conducted full-scale hull friction tests on Lucy Ashton (a full-sized ship stripped of all

 underwater appendages, and fitted with above-water jet engines for propulsion) which

 showed that using Schoenherr's equation to calculate full-scale bare-hull frictional

 resistance was accurate to within 3% of actual measurements, a vast improvement

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 253

 over previous methods. In 1957, a version of Schoenherr's equation, modified primar

 ily by George Hughes at the UK National Physical Laboratory, was adopted by the
 ITTC (Lewis 1988, vol. 2, pp. 7-17; Grigson 2000; ITTC 2013).

 Naval architects took notice of the work on turbulent flow and boundary-layer

 theory by Prandtl and von Karman in other ways. Where before almost no naval

 hydrodynamic research had made reference to Aachen and Göttingen, now those

 findings on frictional resistance took on great importance in response to the "crisis"

 ship-powering predictions. One direct result was that model basins recognized the
 need to stimulate turbulent flow in small-scale models (which, operating at lower

 Reynolds numbers, often had laminar flow over significant portions of the hull) in order

 to accurately predict full scale, fully turbulent frictional resistance. Based on early

 work done by Kempf in Hamburg, model basins around the world began employing

 trip wires, pins, sandpaper and other mechanisms near the bow of the ship model to

 generate turbulent flow over the entire body, a practice that significantly improved the

 correlation of model test data with full-scale data, and which is now taught to every

 freshman-year naval architect (Hughes 1951,1952; Saunders 1957, vol. 1, pp. 89-154,
 vol. 2, pp. 86-144).

 3.2 Propeller design and circulation theory, 1915-1952

 In addition to exposing naval architects to the work of Prandtl and others on boundary

 layer theory and turbulent friction, the 1932 Hamburg Conference on Hydromechani

 cal Problems of Ship Propulsion also re-introduced naval architects to the concept of

 circulation—also a product of Prandtl's research into aerodynamics—as a fundamen

 tal principle of lift and drag, with particular reference to the action of ship propellers.

 Prior to this conference, much of the research into shipboard screw propellers had been

 informed by two theories that were born late in the previous century—momentum the

 ory and blade element theory. Neither proved satisfactory in calculating the actions

 of propellers in a way that allowed naval architects to overcome the "crisis in ship

 powering prediction" that plagued them in the 1920s and early 1930s (Carlisle 1998,
 p. 115).

 In 1865, the momentum theory of propellers was evolved by Rankine, who modeled

 the propeller as an infinitely thin disk (i.e., with an infinite number of blades) that

 instantaneously imparts momentum to the fluid flowing through it, providing thrust.

 Because he assumed an ideal fluid, the propeller did not experience energy loss due

 to frictional drag. Rankine originally assumed that the propeller did not produce any

 rotation in the fluid, a simplification later corrected by Robert Froude in 1887. The

 theory defined an ideal efficiency for a propeller, bounded only by the losses due

 to changes in momentum of the fluid (Lewis 1988, vol. 2, pp. 131-143; John 2007,
 pp. 169-172).

 The deficiency in this model was that it did not provide any means of calculating the

 thrust and torque of real propellers, nor did it differentiate between a good design and

 a bad one. William Froude, in 1878, sought to remedy this by introducing the blade

 element theory, which accounted for the geometry of the propeller blades. In this for

 mulation, propeller blades were divided into a large number of airfoil-shaped strips,

 for each of which the lift and drag could be calculated (with appropriate assumptions

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 254 L. D. Ferreira

 and approximations). Integrating the individual elements allowed for the direct calcu

 lation of thrust and torque for the propeller. It did not, however, provide any means of

 calculating the efficiency of the propeller, so that the results of momentum theory and

 blade element theory were inconsistent. (William Perring, an aeronautical engineer,

 unsuccessfully attempted to marry momentum theory with blade element theory; see

 Perring 1928.) Moreover, the calculated values derived from the two theories were

 often considerably different from the actual values of torque, thrust and efficiency of

 real-world propellers.

 In 1907, British engineer Frederick Lanchester published a book entitled Aerody

 namics in which he introduced the concept that the thrust of an airfoil is the product of

 what he termed "vortex emission" of fluid around the airfoil, and the resulting vortices

 that trailed from the edges and tips of the foil by the blades of the propeller. Lanchester

 had actually developed his ideas a decade earlier, but had initially failed to gain much

 attention in the scientific community.6 In 1915, Lanchester introduced these concepts

 to the world of naval architecture, in a paper he presented before the Institution of

 Naval Architects on corrections to Robert Froude's momentum theory (Lanchester

 1915). However, his concepts fell upon apparently deaf ears, for Lanchester's theory

 was barely referenced in any further work on ship propellers through the 1910s and
 1920s.

 The similar concept of "circulation" was developed independently and almost

 simultaneously by Wilhelm Kutta, Nikolai Joukowski, and most importantly, by Lud

 wig Prandtl (Darrigol 2005, pp. 302-322; Bloor 2011). The key insight into their
 theories is that a two-dimensional airfoil generates lift from two sources: (1) asymp

 totically rectilinear uniform flow and (2) non-vanishing circulation around the foil. The
 circulation around a three-dimensional airfoil also induces drag as the airfoil sheds

 vortices from the tips. Much of the important experimental work that verified these

 mechanisms of lift and drag was done at Prandtl's laboratory in Göttingen, from 1910—

 1918. Prandtl was ably helped by his assistant, naval-architect-turned-aerodynamicist

 Albert Betz, as well as by his doctoral student Max M. Münk. As with the boundary

 layer investigations, Prandtl's work on circulation was often conducted in friendly

 but fierce competition with Kârmân's group in Aachen. Both groups maintained close

 connections with the hydrodynamic laboratories in Hamburg and Berlin, influencing
 naval architects such as Fritz Horn, Heinrich Helmbold and Fritz Gutsche (Lewis 1988,

 vol. 2, p. 206).

 It was not until after World War I that the results in circulation theory derived in

 Göttingen and Aachen became widely known to the non-German scientific commu

 nity. NACA was instrumental in this process, as part of a concerted effort to transfer

 technical and scientific knowledge out of Germany, which was by then recognized

 to be the world leader in aeronautical research and application. NACA paid Prandtl

 handsomely for a lengthy report that detailed the state of knowledge that had been
 achieved to date at Göttingen. In 1920, on the advice of Jerome Hunsaker, NACA

 also hired Max Münk to work in its headquarters and later in one of its laboratories.

 6 One early exception to this oversight was the work of the German engineer and physicist Hermann

 Föttinger, who in 1911 applied Lanchester's theory to turbine blades (Föttinger 1911). He later extended

 this research to ship propellers.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 255

 During his six-year stint at NACA, Münk conducted both theoretical and experimen

 tal research that married Prandtl's airfoil theory to practical design, resulting in many

 of the successful "NACA profiles," a systematic series of airfoil shapes that became

 widely used for aircraft wings as well as for ship and aircraft propellers (Prandtl 1923;
 Münk 1924a; Eckert 2005).

 The wider community of naval architects was re-introduced to circulation theory

 as a result of the 1932 Hamburg Conference, this time bearing the imprint of Prandtl

 rather than Lanchester. The main problem for circulation theory addressed at this

 conference was the action of propellers in non-uniform flow behind ships. Unlike

 most aircraft propellers which are mounted at the front of the wing or nose (thus in

 a free stream), a ship's propeller is mounted behind the hull, so that the wake (flow

 into a ship's propeller) varies greatly across the disk. The Hamburg papers gave some

 early indications of how to use circulation theory to modify existing blade element

 theories in order to account for the non-uniformity of flow.7

 In 1944, the British naval architect Leonard Burrill, building on Prandtl's theories

 and the work presented in Hamburg (especially that of Fritz Gutsche), developed an

 analytical method that combined blade element and momentum theories with circula

 tion theory in order to properly account for non-uniform flow. Burrill's straightforward

 method could be performed by hand for quick-turnaround calculations of moderately

 loaded propellers. In 1952, Hermann Lerbs, formerly a colleague of Kempf at the

 Hamburg Ship Model Basin but by then working at the David Taylor Model Basin in

 the USA, developed a more rigorous lifting-line analysis for designing wake-adapted

 propellers. Complex to use, Lerb's method became more popular with the advent of

 computer-aided calculations and is now the de-facto technique found in countless pro

 peller design software applications (Burrill 1944; Lerbs 1952. See also Lewis 1988,

 pp. 204-213; John 2007, pp. 174-182; and Saunders 1957, vol. 2, pp. 609-637).

 3.3 Theory of maneuvering and course stability, 1911-1946

 Early studies of ship maneuvering at the turn of the twentieth century were concerned

 with simple, straightforward measures such as tactical diameter, a measure of the

 ability to attack or avoid an enemy. Naval architects examined the kinematics of

 the problem, for example relating the diameter to speed, rudder angle and propeller

 rotations, but did not address the physics behind it (Clarke 2003, p. 2).

 By contrast, from the earliest days, aeronautical engineers were modeling the aero

 dynamic forces on airplanes and airships, both mathematically and empirically. Even

 before the Wright brothers, aircraft designers understood the need for inherent aircraft

 stability in flight (that is, the ability of the aircraft to return to its original orienta

 tion after a perturbation) and attempted to model the forces on control surfaces. In

 1911, a British mathematics professor, George H. Bryan, worked out the six-degree

 of-freedom equations of motion for an aircraft. These equations calculated stability

 7 The papers dealing with circulation were by Alfred Betz, Fritz Weinig, Melitta Schiller (later to become

 the sister-in-law of Claus von Stauffenberg; she was involved in the 1944 plot to assassinate Adolf Hitler,

 surviving retribution only to be shot down in combat), Fritz Horn, Heinrich Helmbold, Einar Hogner and
 Fritz Gutsche. (Günther and Foerster 1932, pp. 161-217, 343-396).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 256 L. D. Ferreira

 derivatives based upon forces in straight-line motion as well as rotary motions of

 roll, pitch and yaw. The rotary forces were particularly difficult to resolve, but Bryan

 suggested a method using a whirling arm to measure them (Bryan 1911, pp. 45-46;
 Abzug and Larrabee 2002, pp. 91-12, 266-267).

 The whirling arm—essentially a long rotating arm with the model fixed at the

 end—had initially been developed over a hundred years earlier as a way of measuring

 airflow in a contained environment. Most European aeronautical faboratories—e.g.,

 at Saint-Cyr in France, Göttingen in Germany and the National Physical Laboratory

 at Teddington, UK—employed whirling arms, but they had problems with instrumen

 tation and interference from the arm itself, so whirling arms were on their way out as

 labs built fixed wind tunnels to provide more accurate results (Zahm 1914).

 The need to measure rotary forces breathed new life into the whirling arm. It became

 the principal method for developing rotary stability derivatives, which are the non

 dimensional variations in forces and moments as a function of angular velocity in roll,

 pitch and yaw. In Britain, for example, Leonard Bairstow used it to develop equations

 for rolling during a banked turn (Bairstow 1920, p. 105; Hashimoto 2007).

 In France, the whirling arm housed in the manège (roundabout) of Saint-Cyr became

 the focus of attention for aircraft stability. Maurice Roy built upon the work of Bryan

 and Bairstow to develop equations of motion that explicitly accounted for wind gusts

 (Roy 1931). Both the manège and Roy's work came to the attention of French naval

 architects, who were searching for a methodology to more rigorously calculate a ship's

 course stability, i.e., its ability to maintain course after a perturbation. In the 1920s,

 the planned expansion of the Paris model basin was to include a "manège (bassin de

 giration)" i.e., a rotating-arm basin, but it initially conflicted with the adjacent flying
 field at Issy-ies-Moulineaux, so construction could not start until 1938 (DGA/DCN

 1988, p. 23). That same year, Pierre Contensou applied Roy's equations of motion to

 a ship's course stability and turning characteristics (Contensou 1938, 1946).

 The start of World War II in 1939 halted all work on course stability. The nearly

 completed rotating-arm basin—the first of its type in the world—was bombed during

 the German occupation of Paris in 1940. It was not rebuilt until 1945, after which course

 stability and maneuvering research (employing Roy's original concepts of aircraft

 motion) went into full swing. These experiments were most famously performed under

 the naval architect Jean Dieudonné,8 who developed the eponymous spiral maneuver

 that is used to measure a ship's course stability (Bleuzen 1946; Dieudonné 1949).

 A particularly telling example of the influence of aircraft aerodynamics is found in

 the evolution of maneuvering theory by Ken Davidson at Stevens Institute of Tech

 nology in Hoboken, NJ. Davidson was a former military pilot who initially used his

 knowledge of aerodynamics in yacht design.9 In the 1930s, his work at Stevens had

 been largely funded through the Research Corporation for Science Advancement, but

 8 Dieudonné's internal reports on maneuvering and course stability were collected and translated into

 English by Harold Saunders at the David Taylor Model Basin (Saunders 1952). Note that the naval architect
 Jean Dieudonné ( 1900-1972 ) should not be confused with the mathematician Jean Dieudonné ( 1906-1992).

 9 It is worth noting that in 1946. Stevens Institute brought another aviation specialist, Boris V. Korvin

 Kroukovsky. former chief design engineer at Aeromarine and EDO Aircraft, into its hydrodynamics labo

 ratory. There he made major contributions to ship theory, e.g.. Theory of Seakeeping, (Korvin-Kroukovsky
 1951).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 257

 the advent of World War II shifted the emphasis to naval work. In 1939, he began exam

 ining the turning performance of destroyers, but was hampered by lack of facilities to

 test small models in turns. Undaunted, he arranged to conduct self-propelled model

 tests in the swimming pools of Stevens Institute and Columbia University (nights and

 weekends). The results, published in 1944 as "On the Turning and Steering of Ships,"

 examined the performance of hulls in turns, but made little headway in establishing

 quantitative control characteristics for course stability and maneuvering (Davidson
 1940a,b, 1944).

 The results of these investigations convinced Davidson that existing theory and

 experimental procedures were inadequate for the more demanding requirements of

 naval work and began a literature search for other solutions. He happened upon current

 research being performed by Leonard Schiff, a nuclear physicist who was working part

 time on anti-submarine operations and torpedo maneuvering. Schiff alerted Davidson

 to the large whirling arm at the Guggenheim Airship Institute in Akron, Ohio, which

 had been built a decade earlier to examine the rotary forces on rigid airships. Davidson

 realized that he needed a similar capability for his own work and applied to the US

 Navy for funding. By 1945, a rotating-arm facility was up and running, which Davidson

 and Schiff used to further develop the theory of ship maneuvering and control (Bruno
 1993, p. 13; ASME 1981).

 The Davidson and Schiff paper which gave the results of these investigations, "Turn

 ing and Course-Keeping Qualities," explicitly shows the influence of the aerodynamics

 community. It was far more mathematically rigorous than the Davidson paper of just

 two years earlier, as they carefully followed aerodynamic practice in defining forces

 and moments acting on a ship, using essentially the same equations first employed

 by Bryan. The hydrodynamic forces developed experimentally using the rotating arm

 provided systematic, quantitative results for control derivatives. This marked a turning

 point in the assessment of ship maneuvering and control; within a few years of the

 facilities at Paris and Stevens Institute, rotating-arm basins became standard fixtures at

 major naval architecture research establishments, and the aerodynamics-based repre

 sentation of ship motions invoked by Davidson and Schiff became the ITTC worldwide

 standard (Davidson and Schiff 1946; Lewis 1988, vol. 3, pp. 191^122; ITTC 2013).

 3.4 Airship influence on submarine design, 1924-1953

 The modern submarine, with its streamlined body-of-revolution hull design, directly

 traces its roots to airship design, in particular the British /? 101 program of the 1920s.

 The early experimental submarines and submersibles of the nineteenth century—

 lctineo,Gymnote and Holland, to name a few—were generally streamlined, following

 the concept of a fishlike form. The later U-boats, fleet boats and other submarines of

 the World War I and World War II eras were generally ship-shaped, as they operated

 for long periods at high speed at the surface, with only short stints of underwater

 operation, limited by battery power to low speeds, typically 6-8 knots.10

 10 One notable exception to ship-shaped submarines was the German V80 submarine ( 1939) with an "outer

 casing shaped like a fish," designed by Hellmuth Walter with a closed-cycle engine that could give high
 speeds underwater (Rössler 1981, pp. 168-172).

 Ô Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 258 L. D. Ferreira

 The streamlined airship was a product of the aerodynamic research conducted at

 Göttingen for companies like Luftschiffbau Zeppelin GmbH, before World War I. A

 series of experiments using the newly established wind tunnel confirmed Prandtl's

 boundary-layer theory and further established that the optimal body of revolution

 (i.e., one that produces minimum resistance) had a blunt nose and pointed tail. Prior to

 this research, many airships resembled blunt-ended sausages. Afterward, all had the

 now-commonplace airfoil shape (Eckert 2006, pp. 46-49).

 After World War I, British aeronautical engineers were under pressure to produce

 results comparable to or better than their German counterparts (Richmond 1929a,

 p. 174). The R101 project was begun in 1924 as the Air Ministry side of a government

 commercial competition to develop a troop-carrying fleet of airships (immortalized

 in Shute 1954). The design team developed a series of minimum-drag hulls based

 on elliptical forms, before settling on a slender form with no parallel middle body
 (Richmond 1929b, p. 687; Cox 1929, pp. 800-809).

 One of the team members, Hilda M. Lyon, was instrumental in the structural design

 of R101 and contributed to the aerodynamic development of the craft. Her interest

 in aerodynamics soon drew her to attend the MIT Department of Aeronautics from

 1930 to 1932. Her Master's thesis "The Effect of Turbulence on the Drag of Airship

 Models" examined these effects on a pair of R10I models with different fullness

 ratios and highlighted how initial test conditions affected experimental results (Lyon

 1930, 1932; Baker 1932, vol. 1, p. 210). Lyon subsequently studied under Prandtl at

 Göttingen and was working on boundary layer theory and stability before her untimely
 death in 1946.'1

 R101 crashed in 1930 after just a few flights. Subsequent accidents such as those

 which befell Akron and Hindenburg effectively ended the airship era by 1940. But

 the airship hull form was resurrected by the US Navy after World War II in its search

 for a submarine with high-speed submerged performance. In 1949, the Committee on

 Undersea Warfare submitted an initial report on the optimum shape for a research sub

 marine that could exceed 20 knots submerged. When several conventional submarine

 forms were compared with a streamlined hullform based on RIOL the results were

 startling; the R101 shape required less than half the power of the World War II fleet

 submarine for the same speed. The RI01 airship thus became the starting point for

 the model research that led to the USS Albacore, the US Navy's prototype for the

 streamlined, body-of-revolution submarine. This submarine owed more than just its

 hull form to the world of aerodynamics; several models of Albacore were tested in

 the large NACA wind tunnel at Langley (Largess and Mandelblatt 1999, pp. 20-22;

 Gertler 1950; Polmar and Moore 2004, p. 128). The equations of motion for the sub

 merged hull were developed directly from airship equations of motion first elucidated

 by Max Münk.12

 USS Albacore, commissioned in 1953, was the forerunner of all modern submarine

 hulls. The diesel boat Barbel and nuclear boat Skipjack were closely based upon it,

 1 ' Additional information on Hilda Lyon is from the author's correspondence and telephone interviews
 with her niece Enid Greenwood, November 2009.

 12 Note that the pitch destabilizing force of a submarine moving at an angle of attack is referred to as the
 "Münk moment." See Münk (1924b).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 259

 both of which became the model for many Western submarines, both conventional and

 nuclear. Even the Soviet Navy copied ihcAlbacore design from public and intelligence

 sources, beginning in 1957 with K — 3 Leninsky Komsomol (Polmar and Moore 2004,

 p. 74).

 Interestingly, the Committee on Undersea Warfare report, which started it all back
 in 1949, labeled the airship shape as the "Lyon Form," in honor of Hilda Lyon's
 contributions to Ä101. It is therefore the name of aeronautical engineer Hilda Lyon

 that has subsequently been used to describe the shape of the modern submarine.

 4 Conclusions

 From the earliest days of flight, practitioners have noted the many similarities between

 ships and aerial vehicles and sought to apply the principles and technologies used for

 centuries at sea to the newfangled dirigibles and heavier-than-air craft. When the

 development of airplanes and airships swung into high gear, naval architects initially

 led the way, applying their theoretical knowledge and experimental techniques to their

 design and production, along the way giving us the nautical terminology we use to

 describe aircraft—port, starboard, roll, pitch and waterlines.

 In less than a generation, the roles were reversed. Naval architects, faced with a

 "crisis in ship-powering prediction," as well as the need to design wake-adapted pro

 pellers and to accurately develop quantitative control characteristics for course stability

 and maneuvering, quickly turned to the insights derived from aircraft aerodynamics

 (frequently originating in Germany) to inform their research and engineering, leading

 to a more formal approach to ship hydrodynamics. This culminated in the develop

 ment of the modern submarine hullform, based upon airship design and corresponding

 equations of motion.

 The connection between aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics is as strong
 in the twenty-first century as it was in the early twentieth century. Modern day sub

 marine designers continue to use airship and missile experimental data to examine

 flow separation at angles of attack. The methods and techniques of computational

 fluid dynamics, originally created as a joint effort between the hydrodynamic and

 aerodynamic communities, are continuously developed, improved and shared across

 both aircraft and naval fields.13 Planing boats, hydrofoils, air-cushion vehicles and

 surface effect ships (and more recently wing-in-ground effect craft or ekranoplans)

 are all representative artifacts of this crossover engineering and scientific discipline

 (King 1966). Perhaps the most elegant example of the connection between aerody

 namics and hydrodynamics is in the world of yacht design, notably that of the hi-tech

 America's Cup. In 2010, the USA-17 trimaran handily won the competition, sporting

 not a traditional sail but instead a rigid wingsail (Wolverton 2010), and the AC72-class

 catamarans in the 2013 America's Cup all carry wingsails that would not look out of

 place on a modern airliner.

 13 For example, a fundamental and highly cited study on three-dimensional flow that formed the basis for
 computational fluid dynamics (Hess and Smith 1962) was carried out by Douglas Aircraft under the US

 Navy Bureau of Ships fundamental hydromechanics research program NS 715-102, administered by the
 David Taylor Model Basin.

 "ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Acknowledgments I am grateful to Michael Eckert, Olivier Darrigol and Horst Nowacki for their knowl

 edge, insights and suggestions.

 260 L. D. Ferreira

 References

 University Press.

 ABS.

 Cappelens Folag.

 Abzug, Malcolm J., and E. Eugene Larrabee. 2002. Airplane stability and control. New York: Cambridge

 Aircraft International Register. 1929. Flieht. 8 Aug, 1929, p. 863.

 American Bureau of Shipping. 2006. The history of the American Bureau of Shipping 1862-2005. Houston:

 Anderson. Hâkon, and John Collett. 1989. Anchor and balance: Det Norske Veritas 1864-1989. Oslo:

 Anderson, John. 1997. A history of Aerodynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Annual Report. 1930. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Navy. Washington DC: US GPO.
 ASME. 1981. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Landmarks brochure H072, "Rotating-Arm

 Model Test Facility: An International Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark".

 ATMA. 1989. Association Technique Maritime et Aéronautique Centième Anniversaire. Paris: ATMA.
 ATM A. 2013. "Histoire". http://www.atma.asso.fr/FR/histoire.htm. Accessed June 2013.

 Bailey, David. 1995. Ships in the making: A history of ship model testing at Teddington and Feltham,

 1910-1994. London: Lloyd's of London Press.

 Bairstow, Leonard. 1920. Applied Aerodynamics. London: Longmans, Green.

 Baker, George S. 1932. Ship design, resistance und screw propulsion, vol. 2. Liverpool: Charles Burchill.
 Blackburn. Isaac. 1836. The theory and science of naval architecture familiarly explained. Plymouth:

 Bartlett.

 Bleuzen, Jean. 1946. LEtude de la Giration au Bassin d'Essais des Carènes. Bulletin de l'Association

 Technique Maritime et Aéronautique 45: 477-496.

 Bloor, David. 2011. The enigma of the aerofoil: Rival theories in aerodynamics. 1909-1930. Chicago:

 Brown, David K. 2006. The way of a ship in the midst of the sea: The life and work of William Froude.

 Bruno, Michael S. 1993. The history of towing tank research at Stevens (pamphlet). Hoboken: Stevens

 University of Chicago Press.

 Penzance: Periscope.

 University Davidson Laboratory.

 Bryan, George H. 1911. Stability in aviation. London: MacMillan.
 Bureau Veritas. 1978. Bureau Veritas 1828/1978: A record of 150 years. Paris: PEMA 2B.

 Burrill, Leonard. 1944. Calculation of marine propeller performance characteristics. Transactions of North

 East Coast Institute of Engineers and Shipbuilders 60: 269-294.

 Carlisle, Rodney P. 1998. Where the fleet begins: A history of the David Taylor Research Center, 1898-1998.

 Washington, DC: Naval Historical Center.

 Carlton, John. 2007. Marine propellers and propulsion. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 Carra, Jean-Louis. 1784. Essai sur la nautique aérienne. Paris: Onfroy.

 Clark, William. 2006. Academic charisma and the origins of the research university. Chicago: University

 Clarke. David. 2003. The Foundations of Steering and Maneuvering. In 6th IFAC conference on maneuvering

 and control of marine craft. Girona: University of Girona.

 Comptes Rendues. 1854. Comptes Rendues Hebdomadaires des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences. 38:

 of Chicago Press.

 953,998-999.

 Contensou, Pierre. 1938. Mécanique du navire en route et en giration. Bulletin de l'Association Technique

 Maritime et Aéronautique 42: 597-614.

 Contensou, Pierre. 1946. Note sur la Cinématique Générale du Mobile Dirigé. Bulletin de l'Association

 Technique Maritime et Aéronautique 45: 323-368.

 Cox, Harold Roxbee. 1929. The external forces on an airship structure. Journal of the Royal Aeronautical

 Society 33(225): 725-811.

 Darrigol, Olivier. 2005. Worlds of flow. Oxford; Oxford University Press.
 Davidson, Kenneth. 1936. An experimental towing tank for small models. Journal of Applied Mechanics

 3(2): A4I-A46.

 <£j Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 261

 Davidson, Kenneth, 1940a. Experimental Towing Tank 1940 Annual Report, no. 142, Research Corporation

 for Science Advancement (Tucson, AZ) Archives Box 42 fol. 528.

 Davidson, Kenneth, 1940b. Memo of December 13,1940. Research Corporation for Science Advancement

 Davidson, Kenneth. 1944. On the turning and steering of ships. Transactions of the Society of Naval

 (Tucson, AZ) Archives Box 36 fol. 503.

 Architects and Marine Engineers 52: 287-324.

 Davidson, Kenneth, and Leonard Schiff. 1946. Turning and course-keeping qualities. Transactions of the

 Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 54: 152-200.

 DGA/DCN. 1988.1906-1988: Quatre-vingt-deux ans d'histoire du Bassin d'Essais des Carènes de Paris.

 Paris: DGA/DCN.

 Dieudonné, Jean. 1949. Note sur la Stabilité du Régime de Route des Navires. Bulletin de l'Association

 Technique Maritime et Aéronautique 48:463-490.

 Durand, William F. 1953. Adventures in the Navy. New York: McGraw Hill.

 Eckert, Michael. 2005. Strategie internationalism and the transfer of technical knowledge: The United States

 Germany and aerodynamics after World War 1. Technology and Culture 46(1): 104-131.

 Eckert, Michael. 2006. The dawn of fluid dynamics. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

 Eckert, Michael. 2010. A kind of Olympic Games: the Prandtl-Kârmân rivalry on turbulent skin friction.

 In Conference on Fluid Resistance from Newton to the Present. Paris: Université Pierre et Marie Curie.

 Epple, Moritz. 2009. Calculation, measurement and leadership: War research at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute

 for Fluid Dynamics, 1937-1945. In The Kaiser Wilhelm Society under National Socialism, ed. Susanne

 Heim et al., 283-311. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

 Ferber, Ferdinand. 1908. Eaviation: ses débuts, son développement: de crête à crête, de ville d ville, de

 continent à continent. Paris: Berger Levrault.

 Forrest, Matthew G. 1947. Application and use of aluminum alloys in ship construction. Transactions of

 the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 55: 305-331.

 Föttinger, Hermann. 1911. "Über die physikalischen Grundlagen der Turbinen- und Propellerwirkung",

 Zeitschrift für Flugtechnik und Motorluftschiffahrt. Berlin: R. Oldenbourg Verlag.

 Froude, William. 1869. On Some Difficulties in the Received View of Fluid Friction. In British Association

 for the Advancement of Science (Mechanical Science Section) Report Exeter: BAAS.

 Fulton, Garland. 1963. The General climate for Technological Developments in Naval Aeronautics on the

 Eve of World War I. Technology and Culture 4(2): 154-165.

 Gertler, Morton. 1950. Resistance experiments on a systematic series of streamlined bodies of revolution

 for application to the design of high-speed submarines, DTMB Report C-297. Washington, DC: DTMB.

 Gillespie, Richard. 1984. Ballooning in France and Britain, 1783-1786: Aerostation and adventurism. Isis

 75(2): 248-268.

 Grigson, Christopher. 2000. Accurate friction lines: An essential to understanding hull flow. Royal Institution

 of Naval Architects magazine, The Naval Architect, 27-30.

 Haas, David, et al. 2011. Birth of U.S. Naval Aeronautical Engineering and Phenomenal Rise to Excellence.
 Bethesda: Naval Surface Warfare Center Carderock Division, Report NSWCCD-50-TR-2011/068.
 Hashimoto, Takehiko. 2007. Leonard Bairstow as a Scientific Middleman: Early Aerodynamic Research

 on Airplane Stability in Britain, 1909-1920. Historia Scientarium 17(2): 102-120.

 Hess, John L., and Apollo Milton Olin Smith. 1962. Calculation of non-lifting potential flow about arbitrary

 three-dimensional bodies. Long Beach: Douglas Aircraft report ES 40622.

 Higham, Robin D.S. 1961. The British rigid airship, 1908-1931: A study in weapons policy. London: G.T.

 Foulis.

 Hovgaard, William. 1927. Deformations and stress distributions in rigid airships. Transactions of the Insti

 Hughes, George. 1951. Turbulence stimulation on ship models. Transactions of the Society of Naval Archi

 Hughes, George. 1952. Frictional resistance of smooth plane surfaces in turbulent flow. Transactions of the

 tution of Naval Architects 69: 314-339.

 tects and Marine Engineers 54: 281-314.

 Institution of Naval Architects 94: 287-322.

 Hughes, Thomas. 1971. Elmer sperry; Inventor and engineer. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

 Hunsaker, Jerome. 1916. A review of hydrodynamical theory as applied to experimental aerodynamics. In

 Transactions of the international engineering congress 1915, 12 vols, vol. 11, 160-207. San Francisco:

 Hunsaker, Jerome. 1920. Naval Architecture in Aeronautics. Aviation and Aeronautical Engineering 9(1):

 Neals Publishing.

 10-14.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 262 L. D. Ferreira

 Hunsaker, Jerome. 1924. Aeronautics in naval architecture. Transactions of the Society of Naval Architects

 and Marine Engineers 32: 1-23.

 ITTC. 2013. Website http://ittc.sname.org/ Accessed June 2013

 Kempf, Günther, and Emst Foerster (eds.). 1932. Hydromechanische Probleme des Schiffsantriebs. Ham

 burg: HSV.

 King, Horace F. 1966. Aeromarine origins: The beginnings of Marine Aircraft. Winged Hull, Air-Cushion

 and Air-Lubricated Craft. Planing Boats and Hydrofoils. London: Putnam.

 Korvin-Kroukovsky, Boris V. 1951. Theory of seakeeping. New York: SNAME.

 Kuhn, Thomas. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Lanchester, Frederick W. 1915. A contribution to the theory of propulsion and the screw propeller. Trans

 actions of the Institution of Naval Architects 57: 98-116.

 Largess, Robert, and James Mandelblatt. 1999. USS Albacore: Forerunner of the future. Portsmouth, NH:

 Leclert, Emile. 1872. M. Dupuy de Lome's Aerial Ship. Naval Science 1: 280-285.

 Lehmann, Eike. 1999. 100 Jahre Schiffbautechnische Gesellschaft: Biografien zur Geschichte des Schiff

 Portsmouth Marine Society.

 baus. Berlin: Springer.

 Lerbs, Hermann W. 1952. Moderately loaded propellers with a finite number of blades and an arbitrary

 distribution of circulation. Transactions iff the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 60:
 73-117.

 Leroux, Emile. 1925. Note sur un paramètre de similitude mécanique dans les mouvements des fluides.

 Bulletin de l'Association Tech nique Maritime et Aéronautique 29: 235-263.

 Leroux, Emile. 1927. Cours d'aéronautique. Paris: C. Béranger.
 Lewis. Edward (ed.). 1988. Principles of naval architecture, vol. 3. Jersey City: SNAME.

 Lyon, Hilda M. 1930. The strength of transverse frames of rigid airships. Journal of the Royal Aeronautical

 Society 34(236): 497-556.

 Lyon, Hilda M. 1932. The Effect iff Turbulence on the Drag of Airship Models. Cambridge, MA: MIT

 Master's thesis; also published as British Aeronautical Research Council. Report no. 1151.

 Mack, Pamela. 1998. From engineering science to big science: the NACA and NASA Collier Trophy research

 project winners. Washington, DC: NASA History Office.

 McEntee, William. 1911. Some applications of the principles of naval architecture to aeronautics. Trans

 actions of the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 19: 287-298.

 Münk, Max M. 1924a. Simplifying assumptions, reducing the strict application of classical hydrodynamics

 to practical aeronautical computations. Washington DC: NACA Technical Note No. 207.

 Münk, Max M„ 1924b. The Aerodynamic Forces on Airship Hulls. Washington DC: NACA, Report 184.
 Noalhat, Henri. 1910. Navigation aérienne et navigation sous-marine: deux faces d'un même problème.

 Nowacki, Horst. 2000. Zur Entwicklung der Schiffshydrodynamik im 20. Jahrhundert. In 100 Jahre Schiff

 bautechnische Gesellschaft: Jubiläumsverunstaltung an der TU Berlin, ed. Eike Lehmann. Berlin: STG

 Paris: L. Geisler.

 Vortrag.

 Nowacki, Horst and Larrie Ferreira, 2003. Historical roots of the theory of hydrostatic stability of ships.

 In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on the stability of ships and ocean vehicles, ed. Luis

 Pérez Rojas, 1-30. Madrid: ETSIN, Reprinted as MPIWG Preprint 237, Berlin: Max Planck Institute

 for the History of Science.

 Perring, William. 1928. The vortex theory of propellers and its application to the wake conditions existing

 behind a ship. Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects 69: 226-238.

 Polmar, Norman, and Kenneth J. Moore. 2004. Cold War Submarines. Washington DC: Brassey's.

 Prandtl, Ludwig. 1923. Applications of modern hydrodynamics to aeronautics. Washington, DC: NACA

 Report No. 116.

 Peter, Quartermaine. 1996. Building on the Sea: Form and meaning in Modern Ship Architecture. London:

 National Maritime Museum and Academy Group.

 Rankine. William John Macquora. 1862. Abstract of an investigation of the resistance of ships. Journal of

 the Franklin Institute 73: 22-29.

 Raymer, Daniel P. 2006. Aircraft design: A conceptual approach. Reston, VA: AIAA.
 Richmond, Vincent C. 1929a. Some modern developments in airship construction. Transactions of the

 Institution iff Naval Architects 70: 173-209.

 Richmond, Vincent C. 1929b. RIOL Journal iff the Royal Aeronautical Society 33(224): 686-723.

 RINA. 1960. Royal Institution of Naval Architects Index to the Transactions 1860-1959. London: RINA.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Roenne, Baron A. 1913. Notes on Airship Construction. Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects

 Aircraft aerodynamics and ship hydrodynamics 263

 Roland, Alex. 1978. Underwater Warfare in the age of sail. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

 Roland, Alex. 1985. Model Research: The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 1915-1958. Wash

 Roop, Wendell, 1929. "Frictional Resistance of Ship Models", EMB Report 227, Washington D.C.; also in

 Transactions of the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 37, pp. 45-64.

 Rössler, Eberhard. 1981. The U-boat: The evolution and technical history of German submarines. London:

 55:117-135.

 ington, DC: NASA.

 Cassell.

 et Aéronautique 35: 619-640.

 Roy, Maurice. 1931. Stabilité des Régimes de Vol des Avions. Bulletin de l'Association Technique Maritime

 Saunders, Harold. 1952. Collected French Papers on the Stability of Route of Ships at Sea, 1949-1950,

 DTMB translation 246. Washington, DC: DTMB.

 Saunders, Harold. 1957. Hydrodynamics in Ship Design, vol. 3. New York: SNAME.
 Schoenherr, Karl. 1932. Resistance of flat surfaces moving through fluid. Transactions of the Society of

 Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 40: 279-313.

 Schoenherr, Karl. 1989. Coming to the United States—The Hard Way. New York: Vantage Press.

 Shatzberg, Eric. 1999. Wings of wood, wings of metal. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Shute, Nevil. 1954. Slide Rule: Autobiography of an Engineer. London: Heinemann.
 SNAME, 1946. Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers Index to Transactions, years 1893 to

 1943. New York: SNAME.

 Stein, Albert G. 1919. Tanks: 1914-1918. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
 Stein, Steven K. 2007. From torpedoes to aviation; Washington Irving Chambers and technological inno

 vation in the new Navy, 1876-1913. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.

 Timmermann, Gerhard. 1979. Die Suche nach der günstigsten Schifform. Hamburg: Gerhard Stalling.

 Trimble, William F. 2002. Jerome C. Hunsaker and the rise of American aeronautics. Washington, DC:

 Smithsonian Institution Press.

 Troost, Lauren (ed.). 1933. International conference of Tank Superintendants Collected papers. Wagenig

 nen: Nederlands Scheepsbouwkundig Proefstation.

 Vincenti, Walter. 1979. The air-propeller tests of W.F. Durand and E.P. Lesley. Technology and Culture

 20(4): 712-751.

 Press.

 Vincenti, Walter. 1990. What engineers know and how they know it. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

 von Kärmän, Theodore, to Ludwig Prandtl. 1932 (9 December). Archive of the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft,

 Berlin, III. Abstract Reports 61 (Prandtl papers), Number 793.
 von Mises, Richard. 1992. Theory of flight, 2nd ed. New York: Dover.

 Watson, Nigel. 2010a. Lloyd's Register, 250 years of service. London: Lloyd's Register.
 Watson, Peter. 2010b. The German Genius. New York: Harper.

 Wolverton, Mark. 2010. Winging it. Invention and Technology 25(1): 18-27.

 Wright, Thomas, 1983. Ship Hydrodynamics 1710-1880. Ph.D. thesis, University of Manchester.
 Wyn-Evans, Harold B. 1921. The standardization of data for airship calculations. Transactions of the

 Institution of Naval Architects 63: 131-162.

 Younger, John, et al. 1935. Structural design of metal airplanes. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Zahm, Albert. 1914. Report on European Aeronautical Laboratories. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Insti

 tute.

 Zédé, Gustave. 1886. Sur les navires sous-marins. Comptes Rendues Hebdomadaires des Séances de

 l'Académie des Sciences 102: 808.

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:01:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

