 

 

 

 

The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem on primes in an arithmetic progression
Author(s): Jeremy Avigad and  Rebecca Morris
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 3 (May 2014), pp. 265-326
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569604
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:59 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569604?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:265-326
 DOI i 0.1007/s00407-013-0126-0

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem
 on primes in an arithmetic progression

 Jeremy Avigad ■ Rebecca Morris

 Received: 22 May 2013 / Published online: 23 July 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract In 1837, Dirichlet proved that there are infinitely many primes in any arith

 metic progression in which the terms do not all share a common factor. We survey

 implicit and explicit uses of Dirichlet characters in presentations of Dirichlet's proof

 in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with an eye toward understanding some

 of the pragmatic pressures that shaped the evolution of modern mathematical method.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 266

 2 Functions in the nineteenth century 267
 2.1 The generalization of the function concept 267
 2.2 The evolution of the function concept 274
 3 Dirichlet's theorem 275

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 J. Avigad (E>3)

 Pittsburgh, PA, USA
 e-mail: avigad@cmu.edu

 R. Morris

 •£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 This essay draws extensively on the second author's Carnegie Mellon MS thesis (Morris 2011). We are

 grateful to Michael Detlefsen and the participants in his Ideals of Proof workshop, which provided

 feedback on portions of this material in July 2011. and to Jeremy Gray for helpful comments. Avigad's

 work has been partially supported by National Science Foundation grant DMS-1068829 and Air Force

 Office of Scientific Research grant FA9550-I2-I-0370.

 Department of Philosophy and Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,

 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

 e-mai I : rebecca. lea. morris @ googlemai I .com

 266 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 3.1 Euler's proof that there are infinitely many primes 276
 3.2 Group characters 278
 3.3 Dirichlet characters and L-series 280

 3.4 Contemporary proofs of Dirichlet's theorem 281
 4 Modern aspects of contemporary proofs 283
 5 Dirichlet's original proof 285
 6 Later presentations 291
 6.1 Dirichlet 291

 6.2 Dedekind 293

 6.3 Weber 297

 6.4 De la Vallée-Poussin 299

 6.5 Hadamard 302

 6.6 Kronecker 304

 6.7 Landau 309

 7 Changes in mathematical method 313
 8 Conclusions 321

 1 Introduction

 Historians commonly take the "modern" age of mathematics to have begun in the nine

 teenth century. But although there is consensus that the events of that century had a

 transformational effect on mathematical thought, it is not easy to sum up exactly what

 changed and why. Aspects of the transformation include an increasingly abstract view

 of mathematical objects; the rise of algebraic methods; the unification of disparate
 branches of the subject; evolving standards of rigor in argumentation; a newfound

 boldness in dealing with the infinite; emphasis on "conceptual" understanding and a

 concomitant de-emphasis of calculation; the use of (informal) set-theoretic language

 and methods; and concerns to identify a foundational basis to support the new devel

 opments.1 It is still an important historical and philosophical task to better understand

 these components, and the complex interactions between them.

 A good deal of attention has been given to early appearances of set-theoretic and

 structural language, including the use of equivalence relations and ideals in algebra;

 the expansion of the function concept in analysis and its generalization to other math

 ematical domains; foundational constructions of number systems from the natural

 numbers to the reals and beyond; and the overall conception of mathematics as the

 study of structures and spaces, often characterized in set-theoretic terms (Ferreirôs

 1999). These provide clear and focused manifestations of the changes that took place.

 In this essay, we will consider certain functions, known as "Dirichlet characters,"

 and their role in proving a seminal 1837 theorem due to Dirichlet, which states that

 there are infinitely many prime numbers in any arithmetic progression in which the

 terms do not all share a common factor. As far as abstract objects go, characters are

 fairly benign: For a given positive integer m, there are only finitely many characters

 modulo m, and each one can be described exactly by giving its value on the finitely

 The essays in Ferreiras and Gray (2006) provide an overview.

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 267

 many residue classes modulo m. Moreover, it is not terribly hard to provide a concrete

 and exhaustive description of the set of all such characters.

 Nonetheless, we will argue that the evolution of the treatment of characters over

 the course of the nineteenth century illustrates important themes in the overall trans

 formation of mathematical thought. Indeed, we will try to call attention to changes

 in mathematical method that have by now become so ingrained that it is hard for us

 today to appreciate their significance. An important feature of contemporary proofs of

 Dirichlet's theorem is that they are higher order, which is to say, one treats characters on

 a par with mathematical objects like the natural numbers: One sums over characters,

 quantifies over characters, applies functions to characters, forms sets of characters,

 considers groups whose elements are characters, and so on. This runs counter to an
 "intensional" view of characters as expressions that play a role in ordinary mathe

 matical language that is fundamentally different from that of the natural numbers or

 the real numbers. Our narrative traces a gradual transition from this latter view to the

 contemporary one.

 In tracing this evolution, we will set aside other important aspects of the history
 of Dirichlet's theorem, such as the evolution of number-theoretic and analytic ideas,

 and the use of analysis in number theory. We will also for the most part set aside other

 nineteenth-century developments that invoked the use of set-theoretic language. Our

 hope is that focusing on the notion of character, and its evolving role in a single math

 ematical proof, will help clarify some of the mathematical pressures that contributed

 to the adoption of a modern standpoint.

 The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sect. 2, we situate our study amid a

 host of topics related to the development of the function concept, noting that for most

 of the nineteenth century the word "function" was used exclusively in connection

 with functions on the real or complex numbers. In Sect. 3, we discuss contemporary

 presentations of Dirichlet's proof, and in Sect. 4, we highlight various senses in which

 these presentations treat characters as objects. In contrast, Sect. 5 describes Dirichlet's

 own presentation of his proof, in which the notion of a character does not figure at all.

 Section 6 then traces a gradual transition, as characters are transformed from shade

 like entities in the original proof to the fully embodied objects we take them to be

 today. Section 7 analyzes the forces that shaped the transition, and Sect. 8 draws some

 conclusions. In a companion paper to this one Avigad and Morris (n.d.), we explore

 further philosophical aspects of the treatment of characters as objects in the history of
 Dirichlet's theorem.

 2 Functions in the nineteenth century

 2.1 The generalization of the function concept

 Nineteenth-century mathematicians dealt with a number of objects that we, today,

 view as instances of the function concept. Analysis dealt with functions defined on

 the continuum, that is, functions from the real numbers, R, to R. Cauchy and others

 extended the subject to include functions from the complex numbers, C, to C. Analysts

 also commonly dealt with sequences and series, which can be viewed as functions from

 <0 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 268 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 the natural numbers, N, to a target domain, such as the integers or the reals. Number

 theory dealt with functions like the Euler totient function, (p, which maps N to N.

 Geometry dealt with transformations of the Euclidean or projective plane, which can

 be viewed as invertible maps from the space to itself. Galois' theory of equations

 focused on substitutions, or permutations, of a finite set A, which is to say bijective

 functions from A to A. Below we will see how developments in number theory led to

 the study of characters, that is, functions from the integers, Z, to C, or from the group

 (Z/wtZ)* of units modulo m to C. By the end of the century, Dedekind and Cantor

 considered arbitrary mappings, or correspondences, between domains.

 Despite this diversity, most of the literature on the evolution of the function concept

 (including Chorlayn.d.; Kleiner 1989;Luzin 1998;Monna 1972; Youschkevitch 1976)

 has focused on functions on the real or complex numbers. Surveys typically trace the

 evolution of the concept from the introduction of the term "function" ("functio") by

 Euler (1748) in 1748, to the mention of "arbitrary functions" ("fonction arbitraire")

 in the title of Dirichlet's seminal paper of 1829 (Dirichlet 1829), to the dramatically

 opposed treatment of the function concept by Riemann and Weierstrass.2 There is

 a very good reason for this: In the early nineteenth century, the word "function"

 was used almost exclusively in this narrow sense. Indeed, there is little in the early

 nineteenth-century literature that suggests any family resemblances between the kinds

 of mathematical objects enumerated in the last paragraph, let alone subsumption under

 a single overarching concept.

 For example, sequences of real numbers were referred to as sequences or series or

 often just introduced by displaying the initial elements ao,a\,a2, ■ ■ ■ with an ellipsis

 at the end. The word "series" ("série" in French, "Reihe" in German) was also used to

 describe a finite or infinite sum. For example, Dirichlet wrote the following in 1835:

 Now let

 F(a) = bo + b\ cos a + bi cos 2a -I = bj cos ia

 be an arbitrary finite or infinite series, whose coefficients are independent of a?

 (Dirichlet 1835, p. 249)

 do today.

 The dependence of the coefficient bj on i was indicated by the subscript, just as we

 Terminology governing number-theoretic functions was more varied. In the eigh

 teenth century, Euler tended to refer to number-theoretic functions as "symbols" or

 "characters." When introducing what we now call the totient function in 1781, he
 wrote:

 2 See Bottazzini and Gray (2013) for a history of complex function theory, which includes a detailed
 treatment of the work of Riemann and Weierstrass, in particular.

 F (a) = bo + b\ cos a + f>2 cos 2a + • • • = ^ t, cos ia

 eine beliebige endliche oder unendliche Reihe, deren Coefficienten von a unabhängig sind."

 3 "Es sei jetzt:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 269

 .. .let the character jt D denote that multitude of numbers which are less than D

 and which have no common divisor with it.4 (Euler 1784, p. 2)

 In 1801, in § 38 of the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (Gauss 1801), Gauss introduced
 the totient function as a notation:

 For brevity we will designate the number of positive numbers which are relatively

 prime to the given number and smaller than it by the prefix <p. We seek therefore

 <pA.s

 In the following section, he referred to the "character" (p. Later, in § 52, he defined

 another number-theoretic function, \//, and in § 53 compared it to the <p "symbol"

 ("signo"). In the Disquisitiones, the word "function" is never used to describe such
 entities.

 Early in the nineteenth century, in the field of projective geometry, Möbius
 studied general "relations" between figures in the plane, such as "affinities" and

 "collineations."6 In his Erlangen Program of 1872, Klein considered invertible "trans

 formations" ("Transformationen") of a space, and the group they form under the oper

 ation of "composition" ("Zusammensetzung") (Klein 1893). Once again, in neither

 case is there any hint that such transformations bear a connection to a more general

 function concept.

 In algebra, Galois' groups consisted of "substitutions" of the roots. Cayley's famous

 1854 paper, which provided the first axiomatization of the group concept, begins as
 follows:

 Let 0 be a symbol or operation, which may, if we please, have for its operand,

 not a single quantity x, but a system (x, y,...), so that

 0(x, y, ...) = (*', /,...),

 where x', y',... are any functions whatever of x, y,..., it is not even necessary

 that x', y',... should be the same in number with x, y In particular, x', y',

 &c. may represent a permutation of jc, y, & c., 8 is in this case what is termed
 a substitution; and if, instead of a set x,y,..., the operand is a single quantity
 x, so that 8x = x' = fx, 9 is an ordinary function symbol.7 (Cayley 1854,
 p. 123)

 Notice that although we can assume that each quantity x', y',... is a function of
 x, y,..., for Cayley, 8 is, in general, an operation and not a function. As examples of

 cases where 6 is a function, he singled out multiplication by quaternions and examples

 arising from the study of elliptic functions. But he makes it clear that it is the operations,

 more generally, that are assumed to satisfy the associative law, under composition:

 4 "Quod quo facilius praestari possit, denotel character ipD multitudinem istam numerorum ipso D mino

 rum, et qui cum eo nullum habeant divisorem communem." (Euler 1784, p. 19)

 5 "Designemus brevitatis gratia multitudinem numerorum positivorum ad numerum datum primorum

 ipsoque minorum per praefixum characterem <p. Quaeritur itaque ipA."

 6 See the discussion in Wussing (1984. pp. 35-40).

 7 This excerpt is quoted and discussed in Pengelley (2005).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 270 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 A symbol 6<p denotes the compound operation, the performance of which is

 equivalent to the performance, first of the operation <p, and then of the operation

 6; 0<p is of course in general different from <p9. But the symbols 9, <p,... are in

 general such that 9.<px = 9<p.x, &c., so that 9(px,9(pxco, &c. have a definite

 signification independent of the particular mode of compounding the symbols...

 Dedekind's later treatment of Galois theory (Dedekind 1894) focused on the group

 of automorphisms of a field rather than permutations of roots, but even in this context,

 he used the term "substitution" for an invertible map from a field to itself, and "permu

 tation" for a substitution that is moreover a homomorphism with respect to the field

 structure. Once again, there seems to be nothing to link these substitutions and per

 mutations with the function concept from analysis. Even as late as 1895, when Cantor

 presented his mature theory of the infinite (Cantor 1895), he described a one-to-one

 correspondence as a "law of association" ("Zuordnungsgesetz") between sets, with

 nothing to suggest that these correspondences had anything to do with the objects of

 function theory with which he had begun his mathematical career.

 The shift from using the term "function" exclusively for functions defined on the

 continuum to those defined on more general domains was gradual. We have found

 a very early instance of the phrase "number-theoretic function" ("zahlentheoretische

 Funktion") in an 1850 paper by Eisenstein, which begins with a notably self-conscious

 justification for the use of the term:

 Since, with the concept of a function, one moved away from the necessity of

 having an analytic construction, and began to take its essence to be a tabular
 collection of values associated to the values of one or several variables, it became

 possible to take the concept to include functions which, due to conditions of an

 arithmetic nature, have a determinate sense only when the variables occurring
 in them have integral values, or only for certain value-combinations arising
 from the natural number series. For intermediate values, such functions remain

 indeterminate and arbitrary, or without any meaning.8 (Eistenstein 1850, p. 706)

 We might have expected Eisenstein to observe, more simply, that once one starts to

 think of a function as a correspondence between input and output values, it is reasonable

 to transfer the notion to correspondences between domains other than the real or

 complex numbers, described by means other than an analytic expression. Instead,

 he adopted the surprising strategy of viewing number-theoretic functions as partial

 functions on the real numbers. This is a nice illustration of the fact that concepts are

 often stretched and transformed in surprising ways, a theme that is the central study of

 Mark Wilson's book, Wandering Significance (Wilson 2006). In any case, the passage

 8 "Seit man bei dem Begriffe der Funktion von der Nothwendigkeit der analytischen Zusammenset
 zung abgehend, das Wesen derselben in die tabellarische Zusammenstellung einer Reihe von zugehörigen

 Werthen mit den Werthen des order der (mehrerer) Variabein zu setzen anfing, war es möglich, auch solche

 Funktionen unter diesen Begriff mit aufzunehmen, welche aus Bedingungen arithmetischer Natur entsprin

 gend nur für ganze Werthe oder nur für gewisse aus der natürlichen Zahlenreihe hervorgehende Werthe und
 Werth-Combinationen der in ihnen vorkommenden Variabein einen bestimmten Sinn erhalten, während sie

 für die Zwischenwerthe entweder unbestimmt und willkürlich oder ohne alle Bedeutung bleiben," We are

 grateful to Wilfried Sieg for help with the translation.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 271

 makes it clear that the modern notion of a function defined on arbitrary domains was

 far from the mid-nineteenth-century mindset.

 We have already noted that in 1854, Cay ley considered multiplication by a quater
 nion as a function. This seems to fit with the view of the natural progression from

 real numbers to complex numbers to quaternions, as generalizations of the concept

 of magnitude. One finds another hint of expansion in the title of Dedekind's 1854
 Habilitation lecture, "On the introduction of new functions in mathematics" ("Über

 die Einführung neuer Funktionen in der Mathematik") (Dedekind 1854). In this lec
 ture, Dedekind discussed the way that the domain of natural numbers was gradually

 expanded to include the integers, real numbers, and complex numbers, while extend

 ing and preserving the properties of familiar operations like addition and division. But
 the evocative use of the word "function" in the title is tempered by the contents of

 the lecture itself, where the word "operation" is used exclusively when it comes for

 functions defined on the natural numbers and integers.

 To our knowledge, it is not until 1879 that one finds the word "function" used

 to describe correspondences between arbitrary domains, and then, in that year, this
 occurred in two remarkable sources. The first is due to Dedekind. In 1879, in a supple

 ment dealing with quadratic forms in the third edition of his presentation of Dirichlet's

 lectures on number theory (Dirichlet 1863), he defined the general notion of a char

 acter on a class group (i.e., a function that maps equivalence classes of ideals in an

 algebraic number field to the complex numbers):

 ...the function /(a) also possesses the property that it takes the same value on

 all ideals a belonging to the same class A; this value is therefore appropriately

 denoted by x(^) and is clearly always an /ith root of unity. Such functions /,
 which in an extended sense can be termed characters, always exist; and indeed

 it follows easily from the theorems mentioned at the conclusion of § 149 that the

 class number h is also the number of all distinct characters xi » X2> • • •. Xh and

 that every class A is completely characterized, i.e. is distinguished from all other
 classes, by the h values xi(^). X2(A) Xh(A).9

 In other words, Dedekind referred to a mapping from a certain algebraic structure to

 the complex numbers as a "function." There is no reason to think that he meant to

 limit the terminology to this particular structure, and, indeed, by 1882, Weber (1882)

 described characters on arbitrary groups as "functions."10 In his foundational essay
 Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen (Dedekind 1888) of 1888, Dedekind considered

 9 "...die Function x(a) ausser der Eigenschaft ...noch die andere besitzt, für alle derselben Classe A

 angehörenden Ideale o denselben Werth anzunehmen, welcher mithin zweckmässig durch x ( A ) bezeichnet
 wird und offenbar immer eine hle Wurzel der Einheit ist. Solche Functionen x • die man im erweiterten Sinn

 Charaktere nennen kann, existiren immer, und zwar geht aus den am Schlüsse des § 149 erwähnten Sätzen

 leicht hervor, dass die Classenanzahl h zugleich die Anzahl aller verschiedenen Charaktere xi • XI Xh

 ist, und dass jede Classe A durch die ihr entsprechenden h Werthe xi(4). X2<^> XA ( 4) vollständig
 charakterisirt. d.h. von allen anderen Classen unterschieden wird." The quotation appears in § 178 in the

 1879 edition of the Vorlesungen (Dirichlet 1863), and in S 184 of the 1894 edition, which is reproduced in
 Dedekind's Werke (Dedekind 1932). The translation above is by Hawkins (1971, p. 149).

 10 We discuss Weber's 1882 paper and provide more background on the history of characters, in Sects. 6.2
 and 6.3 below.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 272 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 arbitrary mappings ("Abbildung") between domains, but, curiously, seems to distin
 guish mappings from functions."

 The other landmark source of 1879 is the philosopher Gottlob Frege's Begriff

 sshrift (Frege 1879). Here Frege defined the notion of a function as follows:

 If, in an expression (whose content need not be a judgeable content), a simple or

 complex symbol occurs in one or more places, and we think of it as replaceable

 at all or some of its occurrences by another symbol (but everywhere by the same

 symbol), then we call the part of the expression that on this occasion appears

 invariant the function, and the replaceable part its argument.12 (Frege 1879, § 9)

 Although this definition is couched in terms of expressions, in 1891 Frege emphasized

 the distinction between an expression and its reference and made it clear that functions

 are what are denoted by the corresponding syntactic expressions (Frege 1891 ). He went

 on to note that his conception of function extends the previous ones in two ways: by

 enlarging the collections of signs that could be used to construct a functional expression

 and by enlarging the domain of possible arguments for functions.13 Regarding the

 first extension, Frege allowed signs such as the equality symbol to occur in functional

 expressions, thus allowing "x3 + x2 + x + 1 = 0" to be classified as such. Regarding

 the second extension, Frege wrote:

 Not merely numbers, but objects in general, are now admissible; and here persons

 must assuredly be counted as objects.14 (Frege 1891, p. 17)

 The syntax of Frege's logical language allows, moreover, for higher-order functionals,

 which is to say functions that take elements of a domain of functions as arguments.

 This feature prompted the following observation in the Begriffsschrift:

 One sees here particularly clearly that the concept of function in Analysis, which

 in general I have followed, is far more restricted than that developed here.15
 (Frege 1879, § 10)

 Although Frege was influenced by Riemann and developments in the theory of complex

 functions (Tappenden 2006), there are features of his treatment of the function concept

 that distinguish it from the contemporary mathematical notion. Nonetheless, in the

 context of the history we have sketched here, Frege's dramatic expansion was novel
 and bold.

 11 See § 135 in Dedekind ( 1888). The relationship between the two notions will be discussed in forthcoming

 work by Wilfried Sieg and the second author.

 12 "Wenn in einem Ausdrucke, dessen Inhalt nicht beurtheilbar zu sein braucht, ein einfaches oder zusam

 mengesetztes Zeichen an einer oder an mehren Stellen vorkommt, und wir denken es an allen oder einigen
 dieser Stellen durch Anderes, überall aber durch Dasselbe ersetzbar, so nennen wir den hierbei unveränder

 lich erscheinenden Theil des Ausdruckes Function, den ersetzbaren ihr Argument."

 13 See Beaney (1997, pp. 137 and 140).

 14 "Es sind nicht mehr bloß Zahlen zuzulassen, sondern Gegenstände überhaupt, wobei ich allerdings auch
 Personen zu den Gegenständen rechnen muß."

 15 "Man sich hieran besonders klar, dass der Functionsbegriff der Analysis, dem ich mich im Allgemeinen

 angeschlossen habe, weit beschränkter ist als der hier entwickelte."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 273

 Today, we are apt to look back at the history and wonder what mathematicians before

 Dedekind and Frege were missing, that is, why they did not realize the extent to which

 they could simplify terminology and notation and eliminate conceptual clutter. After

 all, all they had to do was write f : A -*■ B to denote a function / between two

 arbitrary domains, A and B, and recognize sequences, number-theoretic functions,

 permutations, and transformations as instances of such. But this seems to us to be

 the wrong question to ask. A better one is this: Why would anyone want to view

 these patently different entities as instances of a single concept? In practice, they are

 described in very different ways: Analytic functions were typically given by piecewise

 analytic expressions; number-theoretic functions were given by implicit algorithms,

 such as counting the numbers less than and relatively prime to some number; Galois'

 substitutions were given by explicit lists; early geometric transformations were given

 by geometric constructions. Moreover, the different kinds of objects support very

 different operations: Functions in analysis can sometimes be composed, but sequences

 and series cannot; substitutions (and Cayley's "operations") can always be inverted,

 whereas number-theoretic functions generally cannot; one can sum an expression over

 all the permutations of a finite set, while one certainly cannot sum an expression over

 all the functions from R to R; notions of continuity and differentiability make no sense

 outside the realm of analysis, and so on. In a discussion of the function concept in

 analysis, Renaud Chorlay nicely sums up the state of affairs as follows:

 As du Bois-Reymond strikingly put it, the "most general" function, the "arbitrary

 function," the "function on which no hypotheses is made" is something about

 which nothing can be said. It is by no means an object to be studied, it is but an

 (intensionally) empty place in the whole epistemic configuration: not something

 to investigate, but a kind of background against which ever more specific function
 classes can be delineated; meaningless (on the intensional level) because all

 encompassing (on the extensional level). (Chorlay n.d.)

 This characterization is even more applicable to the notion of a function between two

 arbitrary domains.

 There are invariably start-up costs involved in fashioning coherent means of dealing

 with new abstract objects and significant concerns. Thus, one should not expect to see

 an investment in the unification of the function concept until there was either a pressing

 need or clear benefits to be had. Our study below will suggest that some of these benefits

 stem from the uniform treatment of algebraic structures composed of functions. For

 example, the set of automorphisms of a structure form a group under composition,

 but there is little reason to recognize permutations, geometric transformations, or

 automorphisms of a field as such until one has particularly useful things to say about

 groups of automorphisms in general. Similarly, one can view a number of common

 mathematical constructions as quotienting by the kernel of a suitable function, but

 there is no point to making the effort to recognize them as such until one realizes that

 substantial things can be said about the commonality. Alternatively, it is also possible

 that the unification of the function concept is best viewed as a by-product of the drive

 toward subsuming mathematical objects under a single unifying foundation, a move

 which, in turn, might have been encouraged by other mathematical needs.

 <2) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 274 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 It is beyond the scope of our study to speculate more than this as to the factors that

 encouraged the development of a general concept of function and led to its gradual

 acceptance. But noting the absence of an overarching function concept in the early

 nineteenth century serves to clarify the nature of the project here. When we consider

 the history of number-theoretic characters in proofs of Dirichlet's theorem, we are

 studying the evolving mathematical treatment of what we now take to be certain kinds

 of functions, in the hopes that understanding the forces that guided that evolution

 will help illuminate the forces that shaped the evolution of modern mathematics more

 generally. In doing so, we will focus on the way characters were used and the properties

 that were ascribed to them, while, for the most part, steering clear of the question as

 to how and why they came to be viewed as instances of the general function concept.

 2.2 The evolution of the function concept

 We have seen that it was not until the latter half of the nineteenth century that there was

 any hint of a general notion of a function between any two domains and that it was a

 while before what we currently take to be instances of the function concept were sub

 sumed under such a general notion. Let us label this trend the generalization (or, per

 haps, unification) of the function concept. The point of this section is to note that this is

 not the only sense in which the function concept evolved over the course of the century.

 To start with, there was also the extensionalization of the function concept. Roughly

 speaking, by an "extensional" view we mean the implicit understanding that a function

 is completely determined by its extension, that is, the values it takes at all the inputs

 in its domain. In contrast, by an "intensional" view of the function concept, we mean

 any way of thinking that presupposes that there is more to a function than its bare

 extension. For example, let / be the function from real numbers to real numbers given

 by f(x) = x2 + 2x + \ . Saying that "/ has three terms" or that "the second term

 of / is 2x" amounts to treating / intensionally, because these statements cannot be

 couched solely in terms of the values that / takes. Of course, most mathematicians
 today would acknowledge that such phrases refer to "the expression of /" or "the

 definition of f" or "the representation of /," rather than the function / itself. But

 one of the themes that will emerge below is that this distinction was not clear in the

 nineteenth century, and fundamental considerations pulled in opposite directions. For

 concreteness, it is natural to think of functions as expressions, or, at least, entities

 somehow associated with a concrete representation. But, as we will see, there are also

 advantages to thinking of operations on functions that depend only on the abstract

 input-output relation. Our case study will highlight an uneasy tension between these

 two ways of thinking.

 Recall that in Euler's time, a function from the real numbers to the real numbers

 was expected to have a representation in terms of a certain kind of analytic expression.

 Arguments involving functions could then make use of such a representation. Pre

 cisely this feature of Cauchy's treatment of Fourier series was the target of Dirichlet's

 criticism in the opening paragraphs of his 1829 paper (Dirichlet 1829) on that same

 subject. Cauchy, like Dirichlet, was concerned with the question as to when the Fourier

 series of a real-valued function converges to the value of the original function at a given

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 275

 point. But Cauchy's analysis presupposed that the function in question is represented

 by a power series, which could then be applied to complex arguments. The use of the

 phrase "arbitrary function" in Dirichlet's title signaled his intention to lift this restric

 tion. Even though the paper dealt primarily with continuous functions, the hypothesis

 of continuity was expressed purely extensionally, which is to say in terms of the values

 that a function takes at its arguments. In other words, Dirichlet took great pains not

 to treat analytic operations like differentiation as symbolic operations, but, rather, as

 operations on the functions themselves, viewed extensionally. As Dirichlet famously

 emphasized in that paper, this renders the concept of function open ended, in that all

 that is needed is some determinate relationship between input and output values. In

 particular, this made it possible for him to consider, as a difficult example, functions
 that take one value on the rationals and another value on the irrational numbers.

 This brings us to another aspect of the evolution of the notion of a function, which

 we will call the liberalization of the function concept. Setting aside issues of unification

 and generality, there is also the issue of the language and methods one helps oneself

 to in defining functions in a particular domain. As Frege later noted,16 the very act of

 accepting a definition by cases depending on whether an argument is rational or not was

 a striking move on Dirichlet's part. This paves the way to the use of more dramatically

 nonconstructive methods in describing functions from the reals to the reals, say, in

 terms of limits and other infinitary operations. Riemann's contributions to function

 theory were especially novel in this regard. Some, like Dedekind, hailed the fact that

 Riemann's methods made it possible to consider functions without having a particular

 representation to work with, or method of computation. Others, like Weierstrass, held

 the Riemannian approach to be defective for just this reason.17

 Finally, there is the issue of the reification of the function concept, which is to say

 the decision to treat functions as objects, on a par with mathematical objects like the

 natural numbers. In Sect. 4, we will expand on what this amounts to.

 We have already indicated that we will have little more to say about the general

 ization of the function concept. And, since characters are fairly simple combinatorial

 objects, we can avoid issues having to do with liberal uses of the infinite. We will

 be quite concerned, however, with issues regarding the reification of characters, and

 their treatment as extensional objects. Thus, our case study considers some important

 aspects of the evolution of the function concept, but ignores others, as well as the

 broader question as to how all the various components are related to one another.

 3 Dirichlet's theorem

 Two integers, m and k, are said to be relatively prime, or coprime, if they have no

 common factor. In 1837, Dirichlet proved the following:

 Theorem 3.1 If m and k are relatively prime, the arithmetic progression m, m +

 k, m + 2k,... contains infinitely many primes.

 16 See the discussion in Sect. 7.

 17 See Bottazzini and Gray (2013). For an interesting exploration of the ways that nineteenth-century

 analysis expanded to incorporate a more liberal understanding of the function concept, see Chorlay (n.d.).

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 276 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 In other words, if m and k are relatively prime, there are infinitely many primes

 congruent to m modulo k. Dirichlet pointed out that Legendre assumed this fact,

 without proof, in 1788 (Legendre 1788), when proving the law of quadratic reciprocity.

 In his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Gauss noted this gap in Legendre's work after

 presenting his own proof of the law of quadratic reciprocity, one which does not

 rely on Theorem 3.1.18 But Gauss himself was never able to prove that theorem.

 Dirichlet's own proof is striking, not only due to the fact that it finally established

 Legendre's conjecture, but also due to its sophisticated use of the methods of analysis

 in establishing a purely number-theoretic assertion. Dirichlet noted (Dirichlet 1837a,

 pp. 309-310) that his method was inspired by a proof that there are infinitely many

 primes due to (Euler 1748, Chapter XV), though Dirichlet's ideas go considerably
 beyond Euler's. In this section, we will describe Euler's proof and then define the

 modern notion of a group-theoretic character, which supports the generalization to

 arbitrary characters. We will then describe contemporary proofs of Dirichlet's theorem,

 using modern terminology and notation, as presented in textbooks such as Everest and
 Ward (2005, pp. 207-224). In Sect. 4, we will use this presentation to frame our
 discussion of the historical development, which occurs in Sects. 5 and 6.

 There is a sense, however, in which our modern presentation is old-fashioned.

 The use of m and k for the initial value and common difference in the statement of

 Theorem 3.1 is due to Dirichlet and was picked up by a number of successive authors,

 including Dedekind and Hadamard. Modern presentations are more apt to use a and d,

 but although the use of m and k may feel alien to readers familiar with contemporary

 textbook proofs, it will facilitate the historical comparisons later on. (Our reason for

 using the variable q to range over the prime numbers will similarly become clear when

 we discuss Dirichlet's original proof.)

 3.1 Euler's proof that there are infinitely many primes

 In the Elements, Euclid proved that there are infinitely many primes, but his proof does

 not provide much information about how they are distributed. Euler, in his Introductio

 in Analysin Infinitorum (Euler 1748), proved the following:

 Theorem 3.2 The series Y ]■ diverges, where the sum is over all primes q.

 * </

 This implies that there are infinitely many primes, but also says something more
 about their density. For example, since we know that the series is convergent,

 it tells us that, in a sense, there are "more" primes than there are squares.

 Euler's proof of Theorem 3.2 centers around his famous zeta function,

 n=1

 defined for a real variable s. (The zeta function was later extended by Riemann to

 the entire complex plane via analytic continuation.) It is not hard to show that the

 18 See Gauss' remarks in Friedrich Gauss (1801, § 150).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Diriehlet's theorem 277

 series £(s) converges uniformly on the interval [a, oo), where a is any number strictly

 greater than 1. For s > 1, the infinite sum can also be expressed as an infinite product:

 where the product is over all primes q. This is known as the Euler product formula.

 Roughly, this holds because we can write each term of the product as the sum of a

 i'~-n ('-?)"'•

 a—I </ x

 geometric series,

 (■"?)

 and then expand the product into a sum. The unique factorization theorem tells us

 that every integer n > 1 can be written as a product q\{ ■ q'f ■ ■ ■ q'kk, and so the term

 n ' —

 ~v = s • qf'2"... q7'k" will occur exactly once in the expansion. Since we are

 dealing with infinite sums and products, the Euler product formula implicitly makes a

 statement about limits, and some care is necessary to make the argument precise, but
 this is not hard to do.

 If we take the logarithm of each side of the product formula and appeal to properties

 of the logarithm function, we obtain

 Using the Taylor series expansion

 iogf>-v = ]T-|og(i

 »i=i 'I

 *2 v3
 log(I -x) = -x- — - —

 and changing the order of summations yields

 iog5>"' = Z- + °(i>- (l)

 00 J

 ;i=l q ^

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 00 I 00 I I

 logZn_ïrrZ^+Z-Z^7

 h=I q ' 11=2 q '

 At this stage, keep in mind that we want to show that \ diverges, and notice that

 the first term on the right-hand side of the above equation is 4-. Thus, we should

 consider what happens as 5 tends to 1 from above. It is not hard to snow that the second

 term on the right-hand side is bounded by a constant that is independent of s, a fact

 that can be expressed using "big O" notation as follows:

 As s approaches 1 from above, the left-hand side clearly tends to infinity. Thus, the

 right-hand side, ^ J?, must also tend to infinity, which implies that | diverges.

 278 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 3.2 Group characters

 Just as Euler's proof shows that there are infinitely many primes by establishing that the

 series -7 is divergent, proofs of Dirichlet's theorem establish that there are infinitely

 many primes q congruent to m modulo k by showing that the series Xç=/«(mcxl*) {
 is divergent. Remember that we are assuming that m and k are relatively prime. In

 general, the residues modulo k that are relatively prime to k form a multiplicative

 group. To adapt the argument above, we need series that are more refined than the

 zeta function, and a device that enables us to focus attention on the integers that are

 congruent to m modulo k. This is where the notion of a group-theoretic character
 comes in.

 Notice that the expression X^=m(modk) \ can f*e written H(/ where f(n) is
 equal to 1 if m is congruent to m modulo k and 0 otherwise. With this observation,

 it is natural to try to emulate Euler's argument with X«=l f(n)n~s >n place of the Ç

 function, Xn=i n~s- We will see below that an analogue of the Euler product formula
 holds if / is completely multiplicative, which is to say it satisfies f(uv) = f(u)f(v)

 for every u and v. The problem is that the particular / just described does not have

 this property. But Corollary 3.5 below shows that we can decompose / into a sum

 of functions that do have this property and apply the Euler product formula to each

 component.

 Let G be a finite abelian group, written multiplicatively, with an identity denoted

 by 1. A character x on G is a homomorphism from G to the nonzero complex num

 bers, C*. In other words, a character x is a nonzero function satisfying x(g\82) =
 X(g\)x(g2) for every g\ and g2 in G. Since xO) = xO • 0 = xO)x(l) andx(l)
 is nonzero, we have x ( 1 ) = 1 • Since G is a finite group, for every g there is a least

 n > 1 satisfying g" = 1; this n is called the order of g and denoted o(g). The fact
 that x(g)0{g) = X(g"(8)) = X(l) = 1 means that x (g) is a "root of unity" for every

 g in G. The character that is equal to 1 for every g in G is called the trivial character

 and denoted by xo

 Define the product x • ^ of two characters pointwise, by

 (x ■ VO(g) = x(g)it(g),

 for every g in G. This multiplication is commutative, and we have x • Xo = X f°r

 every character x, which is to say xo is a multiplicative identity. Recall that if co is

 any complex root of unity, its complex conjugate, cö, is also a root of unity, satisfying

 (oca = 1. We can also lift the operation of conjugation to characters, defining x by the

 equation J(g) — x(g) for each g. Then clearly we have x • X" = Xo- In other words,

 the set of characters on G forms an abelian group, with x ~1 = Y- We will denote this

 group G.

 The following theorem is fundamental:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 279

 Theorem 3.3 If G is any finite abelian group, G is isomorphic to G. In particular,
 G = \G,

 To see this, first consider the case where G = {g} = {I, g, g2,..., g"-1} is a cyclic

 group generated by an element g of order n. Then any character x on G has to map

 g to an /ith root of unity, w. This determines the behavior of x completely, since then

 we have x(g') = co1 for every i. Thus, we can let Xo> denote the unique character that

 maps g to co. But now if we let co = e2j"i", then w is what is known as a "primitive root

 of unity," which is to say that all the roots of unity are given by 1 ,co,a>2 co""1.

 Notice that these roots form a multiplicative group that is isomorphic to G. It is easy

 to verify that the map that sends the element g' of G to the character x„y of G is an

 isomorphism.

 In the more general case, we appeal to the structure theorem for finite abelian

 groups, which says that any such group G can be written as a product G \ x • • • x G*

 of cyclic groups. This means that every element g of G can be written uniquely as
 a product g = gig2 • • • g*, where each g; is in G,. Given characters xi, X2 Xk
 on GI, Gi, ■ ■■, Gk, respectively, one gets a character x on G defined by x(g) =

 XI (g l )X2 (g2 ) • • • Xkigk), whereg = gig2 ...gk is the decomposition described above.

 Moreover, it is not hard to show that every character on G arises in this way. This shows

 that G is isomorphic to G i x G2 x ■ • ■ x Gk- By the analysis of the cyclic case, the

 latter is, in turn, isomorphic to G| x Ci x ••• x Gk, and hence to G.

 The following theorem expresses two important properties, known as the "orthog

 onality relations" for group characters.

 Theorem 3.4 Let G be finite abelian group. Then for any character x in G, we have

 and for any element g of G, we have

 Xx(g) =
 xeO

 |C| ifx = Xo
 0 ifx £ XO,

 ^X(g) =
 xeG

 |C| ifg=\G
 0 if g £ le

 The first equation clearly holds when x is the trivial character, xo, since, in this

 case, each term of the sum is equal to 1. Otherwise, pick h such that xCO i=- ' and
 note

 XW X = ^X(hg) = ^ X(g).

 KeG k€G h€G

 since hg ranges over the elements of C as g does. Since xCO / we must have

 XxeG X(g) = 0. The second equation can be established in a similar way.

 The orthogonality relations make it possible to do "finite Fourier analysis," in the

 following sense: If / is any function from G to the complex numbers and we define the
 "Fourier transform" / of / by /(x) = /(g)x(gX then / can be recovered from

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 280 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 its Fourier transform: / = ^ x f(x)X- This shows, in particular, that any function
 from G to the complex numbers can be written as a linear combination of characters.

 The second orthogonality relation also provides the following useful corollary:

 Corollary 3.5 For any g, h e G, we have the following:

 X X(g)x(h) =
 xsG

 ICI ifg = h
 0 ifgïh

 This follows from the fact that we have

 X X(g)x(h)= ^ X(g)x(h) ' = X Xfc* =
 X eG /eC xeG

 |C| if g = h
 0 ifgf^h

 This corollary will enable us to focus on the residue class of m modulo k in the proof
 of Dirichlet's theorem.

 3.3 Dirichlet characters and L-series

 Let k be an integer greater than or equal to 1. It is a fundamental theorem of number

 theory that an integer n is relatively prime to k if and only if n has a multiplicative

 inverse modulo k, in other words if and only if there is some n' such that nn' = 1 mod k.

 This implies that the residue classes of integers modulo k that are relatively prime to

 k form a group, denoted (Z/kZ)*, with multiplication modulo k. The cardinality of

 (Z/kZ)*, that is, the number of residues relatively prime to k, is denoted by <p(k), and

 the function <p is called the Euler phi function.

 Any character x on (Z/kZ)* can be "lifted" to a function X from Z to C defined

 by

 *(«) =

 X (n mod k) if n is relatively prime to k
 0 otherwise.

 Such a function is called a Dirichlet character modulo k. Dirichlet characters are

 completely multiplicative, which is to say X(mn) = X(m)X(n) for every m and n

 in Z. Mathematicians typically use the symbol x to range over Dirichlet characters,

 blurring the distinction between such functions and their group-character counterparts.

 This is harmless, since there is a one-to-one correspondence between the two, and so

 we will adopt this practice as well.

 We can now generalize the method of Euler's proof. Roughly speaking, we need

 a variant of the zeta function that will allow us to focus on primes in a particular

 residue class modulo k. To that end, given a Dirichlet character x modulo k, define

 the Dirichlet L-function or L-series,

 it ^ V*(n)
 L(s,x) = y —7"'
 ns
 n=1

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlef s theorem 281

 where s is any complex number. This formal series will converge whenever fH(s) > I,
 that is, the real part of s is greater than one. And just as can be written

 as a product via the Euler product formula, each L(s,x) = X^=i has a useful
 product expansion.

 Theorem 3.6 Let x be a Dirichlet character modulo k. Then the L -function associated

 with x has an Euler product expansion for SHfs) > 1,

 "=i Ll q\k

 The last identity follows from the fact that, in the product, we can ignore those

 primes q that divide k, since x (</) = 0 for such q. With the product formula in place,

 we can sketch a proof of Dirichlet's theorem.

 3.4 Contemporary proofs of Dirichlet's theorem

 Recall that we want to prove that there are infinitely many primes q such that q =

 m(mod k), where m and k are relatively prime. As in the proof that ^ ^ diverges, we
 begin by taking logarithms of both sides of the Euler product expansion for L(s, x),

 where x is a Dirichlet character modulo q:

 log L(s, x) = -£log(l ~ •

 if v q }

 As before, we make use of the Taylor series expansion for the logarithm on the right
 hand side of the above equation to obtain:

 One can show that the second term in the expression is bounded by a constant that is

 independent of s and x, which can be expressed as follows:

 i„sl(s,x> = z£1*<Ç

 i a"J

 ./=! J V

 y XO?) -y 1 X(<7 ; )
 H qS J qSj
 q\k ipk. j=2

 \ogL(s,x) = y ^ + 0(1).

 x(q)

 H q
 q\k

 Now comes the crucial use of Corollary 3.5 to pick out the primes in the relevant residue

 class. We multiply each side of the above equation by x("t) and then take the sum

 of these over all the Dirichlet characters modulo k. (Recall that we can identify each

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 282 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Dirichlet character with the corresponding group character, that is, the corresponding

 element of (Z/kZ)*.) Thus, we have:

 X X(«0 log Z.(s, x) = X + 0(1).

 xe(Z/kX)' xe(Z7*Z)* #

 To simplify this expression, we exchange the summations on the right-hand side and

 appeal to Corollary 3.5. Since the cardinality of the group (Z/kZ)* is <p(k), we obtain

 X X(w)logL(Ä,x) = <0(A:) ^ -^ + 0(1). (2)

 X€(Z/kZ)* q=m(modk) q

 This is analogous to Eq. (1) in Euler's proof. Our goal is once again to show that

 the left-hand side tends to infinity as s approaches 1 from above; this implies that

 the right-hand side tends to infinity, which, in turn, implies that there are infinitely

 many primes q that are congruent to m modulo k. However, now the left-hand side is
 considerably more complicated than the expression log n" 'n Euler's proof.

 To show that Y X(m) log L(s, /) tends to infinity as s approaches 1, we

 divide the characters into three classes, as follows:

 1. The first class contains only the principal character xo> which takes the value of 1

 for all arguments that are relatively prime to k, and 0 otherwise.

 2. The second class consists of all those characters that take only real values (i.e., 0

 or ± 1 ), other than the principal character.

 3. The third class consists of those characters that take at least one complex value.

 It is not difficult to show that L(s, xo) has a simple pole at 5 = 1, which implies

 that the term xö(m) log L(s, xo) approaches infinity as s approaches 1. The real work

 involves showing that for all the other characters x, L(s, x) has a finite nonzero limit.

 This implies that the other terms in the sum approach a finite limit, and so the entire

 sum approaches infinity.

 For characters in the third class, that is, the characters that take on at least one

 complex value, the result is not difficult. For characters in the second class, the result

 is much harder, and Dirichlet used deep techniques from the theory of quadratic forms

 to obtain it. In the years that followed, other mathematicians found alternative, and

 simpler, ways of handling this case. But even in modern presentations, this case remains

 the most substantial and technically involved part of the proof.

 Our presentation has been thoroughly "modern." In the next section, we will con

 sider some of the methodological features of the proof that make it so. This will enable

 us to draw interesting contrasts with Dirichlet's proof and then explore the way that

 presentations of Dirichlet's theorem gradually took on such a modern character.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 283

 4 Modern aspects of contemporary proofs

 Although our presentation uses contemporary terminology and notation, there is a
 sense in which it is a faithful description of Dirichlet's 1837 proof. Dirichlet did not,

 and could not, rely on a general notion of group character, as the general notion of

 a group was not articulated before Cayley did so in 1854 (Cayley 1854), and was
 not brought into general currency until Kronecker's 1870 paper (Kronecker 1870),

 which first presented the structure theorem for finite abelian groups.19 Another impor

 tant difference is that even though Dirichlet's argument used complex numbers in a

 central way, there was less established background in complex analysis than is avail

 able today, and Dirichlet tended to reduce the calculations to real analysis whenever

 possible. Thus, his variable 5 ranged over real numbers, and his calculations involve
 real-valued sines and cosines where today we are comfortable sticking with the com

 plex exponential. In addition, we have already noted that many of the technical details

 were streamlined over the years. Despite all this, the outline above characterizes the

 central ideas of his proof, and most mathematicians would not find it unreasonable to

 say that is, essentially, how he obtained the result.

 But, as we will see in Sect. 5, there is one very striking difference: In Dirichlet's

 original presentations, there is no mention of characters at all. That is, Dirichlet's

 papers contain certain expressions that we now recognize as values of the various
 characters, and summations that are tantamount to summing over all the characters.

 But, the characters themselves are only objects that we project back into the argument

 from our current understanding. They hover over the page as shade-like premonitions,

 ghosts of mathematics yet to come.

 In Sect. 6, we will consider presentations of Dirichlet's theorem given by Dedekind,
 de la Vallée-Poussin, Hadamard, Kronecker, and Landau and see how the characters

 were gradually brought to life. We will see that many of the benefits of giving characters

 a substantive embodiment are notational and pragmatic, but that is not to say that

 they are merely notational and pragmatic: Treating characters as bona fide objects
 comes with serious mathematical constraints and obligations and provides conceptual

 reorientations that have great bearing on the kind of mathematics we do and the way

 we do it. We will argue that the reification of the notion of a character is a prototypical

 instance of the conceptual changes that are hallmarks of the transition to "modern"

 mathematical thought, and that understanding how and why the changes came about

 shed light on the way we do mathematics today.

 But the observations above present us with a terminological conundrum: Should

 we describe the various historical texts as "versions" or "presentations" of Dirichlet's

 proof, or different proofs entirely? Having raised this issue, we will, for the most part,

 set it aside and be fairly cavalier with our terminology. Since our specific concern is to

 study the way that language, conceptualization, and inferential practice evolved over

 the years, and the effects that had on the mathematics, we need not explicitly address

 the question as to when it is proper to consider two proofs essentially the same or

 essentially different.

 See Wussing ( 1984) for the history of group theory.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 284 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Talking about historical texts in modern terms is difficult, and it is always misleading

 to portray the history of mathematics as a muddled and inefficient attempt to arrive at

 the contemporary enlightened view. We hope we have not fallen into this trap. If there

 is anything that deserves to be treated as a rational pursuit, mathematics should count

 as such, and so one would expect there to be good reasons that we do mathematics

 the way we do. At the same time, there are often good reasons to question the way

 we do mathematics today and recognize there are trade-offs involved in the historical

 decisions that were made. Comparing mathematical texts from different historical eras

 and trying to understand what has changed provides a fruitful way of understanding

 the values that drive mathematical change. But it is often easier to draw contrasts

 by starting with the mathematics with which we are most familiar, and so having
 discussed contemporary approaches to Dirichlet's theorem, let us foreshadow some
 of the contrasts we wish to consider.

 In Sect. 2, we noted that characters (whether we refer to group characters or Dirichlet

 characters) are instances of the contemporary function concept, a concept that evolved

 significantly over the course of the nineteenth century. These are some of the salient

 features of the treatment of characters in our modern presentation:

 1. Group characters are given an abstract, axiomatic definition as functions that sat

 isfy the homomorphism property, and the Dirichlet characters are introduced as a
 natural extension of the notion.

 2. In particular, one defines the set of characters modulo k extensionally. Only later

 does one show that this set is finite and provide explicit ways of describing and

 3. Characters are studied in their own right, and their general properties are enunciated

 enumerating them.

 in propositions and theorems.

 4. One sums over sets of characters, without needing representations for any partic

 ular one. More generally, one characterizes operations on characters (such as the

 product of two characters) extensionally, and not in terms of their representations.

 5. Characters appear as arguments to other functions, namely the L-functions. In

 particular, it is clear from the definition that L(s, x) depends only on the extension
 of X

 6. One defines various sets of characters extensionally, for example, distinguishing

 the trivial, real, and complex characters in terms of the values they assume. More

 generally, one typically carries out arguments without making reference to any

 particular representation.

 7. The characters modulo k are viewed as elements of an algebraic structure, namely

 a group, with multiplication defined pointwise and the trivial character serving as

 identity.

 In Sect. 5, we will discuss Dirichlet's original proof, and in Sect. 6, we will consider the

 way the proof was gradually transformed to reflect our contemporary understanding.

 We will see that proofs along the way possess various subsets of the properties just

 enumerated and that in some cases, the authors are noticeably squeamish, or at least

 self-conscious, of these features. Importantly, Dirichlet's original proof has none of

 the properties just enumerated, providing a clear contrast to the style of presentation

 that is common today.

 £> Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 285

 One way of characterizing the difference between Dirichlet's original proof and

 our modern presentation is to say that, in the latter, characters are treated as full

 fledged mathematical objects, whereas there are no such objects in Dirichlet's version.

 Elsewhere (Avigad and Morris n.d.), we reflect in greater detail on what it means to

 say that a piece of mathematics sanctions certain entities as "objects." Here, let us

 merely summarize some of the senses in which this can be said to be the case in the

 modern proofs of Dirichlet's theorem:

 1. Characters fall under a recognized grammatical category, which allows us to state

 things about them and define operations and predicates on them.

 2. There is a clear understanding of what it means for two expressions to represent the

 same character, namely that they take the same values at all arguments. Linguistic

 conventions ensure that expressions occurring in a proof respect this "sameness."

 For example, the expression L(s, x) does not depend on the data used to represent

 3. One can quantify and sum over characters; in logical terms, they can fall under the

 X

 range of a bound variable.

 4. One can define functions that take characters as arguments and sets of characters;

 indeed, characters can be elements of arbitrary algebraic structures.

 What these features have in common is that they are fundamental to the way we do

 mathematics, bearing upon the proper use of mathematical language and inference at

 a very low level.

 5 Dirichlet's original proof

 We have already asserted that characters appear only "implicitly" in Dirichlet's original

 proof (Dirichlet 1837b). There is nothing mysterious about this: What we mean is that,

 in Dirichlet's proof, there are certain symbolic expressions that we now recognize as

 denoting the values of characters and that, moreover, some of Dirichlet's calculations

 and inferences invoke what we now recognize as general properties of characters.

 Let us spell out the details. Like Dirichlet, we will first consider the case where
 the common difference in the arithmetic progression is a prime number, denoted by

 p instead of k. It was well known in the nineteenth century that one can always find

 a primitive element modulo p, which is to say an element c, such that the p - 1
 residues c°, c1, c2 c1'"2 modulo p yield all the nonzero resides, 1,2p — 1
 (not necessarily in the same order). In modern terms, we would say that the group

 (Z/pZ)* of units modulo p is cyclic, generated by the residue class of c. In more

 elementary terms, this amounts to saying that for every integer n, there is a number

 yn with the property that cy" = n mod p. We saw in Sect. 3.2 that if x is a Dirichlet

 character modulo p (i.e., x corresponds to character on (Z/ pZ)*), then x(c) is a pth

 root of unity, say, to; moreover, x is entirely determined by to, in the sense that for

 every n relatively prime to p, x(n) = a)y". Thus, Dirichlet simply wrote a>y" where
 we would write x(")- The notation presupposes that one has fixed a choice of the

 primitive element, c, though any primitive element will work equally well.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 286 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 So far, so good. In the more general case where the modulus is a composite number

 k, however, things get more complicated. First, write k as a product of primes,

 where each p, is an odd prime and jt, is greater than or equal to 1. Then the group of

 units modulo k is isomorphic to the product of the groups of units modulo each term in

 the factor. Gauss had already shown if p is an odd prime and n is an integer greater than

 or equal to 1, then one can more generally find a primitive element c modulo pn. This

 means that the residue class of c generates the cyclic group (Z/p* Z)*, or, equivalently,

 for every n relatively prime to p, there is a yn such that cy" s n mod pn. Thus, we can

 choose primitive elements c\,...,Cj corresponding to p"1, p%2, ■■ ■, PjJ ■ If A. > 3,

 however, there is no primitive element modulo 2X. Rather, (Z/2À)* is a product of two

 cyclic groups, and for every n relatively prime to 2X, there are an an and ß„ such that

 (— l)a"5^" = n mod 2X. Thus, for any n relatively prime to k, we can write

 n s (-l)an5ß"c\>mc?m . ..cy/m mod it

 where each y,-,„ is the index n relative to pf'. As above, if we choose appropriate roots

 of unity 9, (p, a)\, an, ..., coj, we obtain a character

 X (n) = 6a"<pß»(o\l nw?''... a//-". (3)

 And, once again, every character is obtained in this way. We should note that Dirich

 let used the notation p, p',... rather than p\,..., pj to denote the sequence of odd
 primes. Moreover, he used the notation a, ß, y, y',... to denote the indices, suppress

 ing the dependence on n. Thus, Dirichlet wrote 0a<pPwyco'Y ... for the expression we

 have denoted x («) above, leaving it up to us to keep in mind that a, ß,... depend on n.

 To summarize, in the simple case of a prime modulus p, Dirichlet fixed a primitive

 element modulo c and represented each character x in terms of a pth root of unity, co.

 In that case, the value x («) is given by cjy". In the more general case of a composite

 modulus k, Dirichlet fixed primitive elements modulo the terms of the prime factor

 ization of k and represented each character x in terms of a sequence 9, <p, n, it' of

 roots of unity. In that case, the value x(n) was written 9a(pP(oyoJy'..., suppressing

 the information that the exponents a, ß, y, y',... depend on n.

 Recall that our contemporary presentation had little to say about particular char

 acters, other than the trivial character, xo- Rather, characters appear as arguments

 to the L-functions, L(s, x), and the proof considers summations over the set of all
 characters. Let us now consider how Dirichlet handled these as well.

 Again, with Dirichlet, we begin with the easier case where the common difference

 in the arithmetic progression is a prime, p. Recall that, in that case, each character x

 corresponds to a pth root of unity, co. Dirichlet stated the Euler product formula as
 follows:

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concepl of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 287

 We therefore have the equation

 11 1 -a>r± ^ ns

 where the multiplication sign ranges over the whole series of primes with the

 sole exception of p, while the summation involves all the integers from 1 to oo

 that are not divisible by p. The letter y denotes yp on the left, and y„ on the
 right.20 (Dirichlet 1837b, p. 3)

 Compare this to the statement of Theorem 3.6 above. Since there are p — 1 distinct

 p - 1st roots of unity, Dirichlet continued:

 The equation just found represents p - 1 different equations, which are obtained

 by replacing w with its p - 1 values. It is known that these p — 1 different values

 can be represented as powers of one such Q, chosen appropriately, so that the
 values are then:

 In accordance with this representation, we will write the different values L of

 the series or product as:

 a0, n1, œ2 a''-2.

 Lo, L\, Lj L/>-2,

 ...21 (Dirichlet 1837b, p. 3)

 20 "Man hat daher die Gleichung:

 FI i—r = y^-=L. (4)
 11 \-ayY^ ^ n> W

 wo sich die Multiplicationszeichen auf die ganze Reihe der Primzahlen, mit alleiniger Ausnahme von />,
 erstreckt, während die Summation sich auf alle ganzen Zahlen von I bis oo bezieht, welche nicht durch

 p teilbar sind. Der Buchstabe y bedeutet auf der ersten Seite yq, auf der zweiten dagegen y„." (Dirichlet
 1837b, pp. 317-318) We have replaced Dirichlet's equation number with our own, and throughout this
 section we have modified the translation cited in Dirichlet ( 1837b).

 21 "Die eben gefundene Gleichung repräsentirt p — I verschiedene Gleichungen, welche man erhält, wenn

 man für co seine p - 1 Werthe setzt. Bekanntlich lassen sich diese p - I verschiedenen Werthe durch die

 Potenzen von einem derselben G darstellen, wenn dieser gehörig gewählt wird, und sind dann:

 G0. G1. G2 G''-2.

 Wir werden, dieser Darstellung entsprechend, die verschiedenen Werthe L der Reihe oder des Productes
 mit:

 bezeichnen...." (Dirichlet 1837b, p. 318)

 Lq- L|. L? Lp-2

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 288 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Notice that Dirichlet says that the Euler product formula "represents p — 1 different

 equations," rather than thinking of it as a single equation parametrized by w.

 In the more general case where the common difference is some composite k, Dirich

 let's procedure is completely analogous. First, he demonstrated that the Euler product
 formula holds:

 n IT-—7—r = Yeavpo>yo>'Y'... - = l,
 111 - 6a<pPcoyco'y --js nS

 (5)

 where the multiplication sign ranges over all primes, with the exclusion of

 2, p, p',..., and the summation ranges over all the positive integers that are not

 divisible by any of the primes 2, p, p',.... The system of indices a, ß, y, y',...

 on the left side corresponds to the number q, and on the right side to the num

 ber n. The general Eq. (5), in which the different roots 6, <p, w, w',... can be

 combined with one another arbitrarily, clearly contains K-many particular equa

 tions.22 (Dirichlet 1837b, p. 17)

 Note, again, Dirichlet's characterization of the general equation as "containing" the

 particular instances. Here, K is what we have called <p(k), the cardinality of the

 group (Z/kZ)*. Dirichlet went on to note that we can choose primitive roots of unity

 ©, <I>, Œ, £2',... so that all choices of 9, tp, co, w',... can be expressed as powers of
 these,

 0 = 0°, <p = <pb, co = fic, tw = ...,

 just as in the simpler case. He wrote that we can thus refer to the L-series in a "con

 venient" ("bequem") way, as I0,b,c,c/,...» where a, b, c, c',... are the exponents of the

 chosen primitive roots. Notice that the representations just described depend on fixed,

 but arbitrary, choices of the primitive roots of unity, as well as fixed but arbitrary gen

 erators of the cyclic groups. Modulo those choices, we have parameters o, b, c, c',...

 that vary to give us all the characters, and for each choice of a, b, c, c',..., we have

 an explicit expression that tells us the value of the character at n. For Dirichlet, sum

 ming over characters therefore amounted to summing over all possible choices of this

 representing data.

 22 ..

 n —^—7—r = Ye%V'...-!- = i, (5)
 * M - 0atpPa>yco'y ... JT n

 wo sich das Multiplicationszeichen auf die ganze Reihe der Primzahlen, mit Ausschluss von 2, p, p',....
 und das Summenzeichen auf alle positiven ganzen Zahlen, welche durch keine der Primzahlen 2, p, p/,
 ...theilbar sind, erstreckt. Das System der Indices a, ß, y, y' entspricht auf der ersten Seite der Zahl

 q, auf der zweiten Seite der Zahl n. Die allgemeine Gleichung (5), in welcher die verschiedenen Wurzeln

 0, <p, a), üi\ ... auf irgend eine Weise mit einander combinirt werden können, enthält offenbar eine Anzahl

 K besonderer Gleichungen." (Dirichlet 1837b, pp. 336-337) We have replaced Dirichlet's equation number
 with our own.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 11 ] !
 2 2- + 3 2L ^3+3^ + • "

 has been absorbed into the term 0( 1 ) in Eq. (2); indeed, Dirichlet's next move was to

 note that this sum is bounded by a constant. Finally, if x/(m) is equal to S2'Yl", then the
 complex conjugate /,•(»1) is equal to so the expression Q~iy"' log Li would be
 expressed in our notation as x, (m)Z.(^, Xi)

 When Dirichlet considered the more general case, he arrived at the analogous result:

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 289

 In the special case where the common difference is a prime, p, Dirichlet ran through

 calculations similar to those described in Sect. 3.4 to obtain the following identity:

 ZI 1 1 1 ^ t 1

 qï+P + 2 ^ ~q^ + 3 ^ qï+ïï + " '

 (log Lq + Q~Ynt log L i + £2~2>/m log Li 3 h log Lp-2).

 P " 1

 He has essentially arrived at Eq. (2) in Sect. 3.4, which reads as follows:

 X X(m)\ogL(s, x) = <p(k) ^ -^- + 0(1) (2)

 X€(Z/Iz)' </=«i(modt)q

 In the case at hand, k is p, in which case tp(k), the cardinality of (Z/kZ)*, is equal to

 p - 1. To facilitate the comparison, switch the right-hand side of (2) with the left-hand

 side (convention dictates that the term 0(1) stays on the right side), divide through by

 (p{k), and note all of the following. First, Dirichlet used 1 + p in place of .v to denote

 the quantity that approaches 1 from above. Second, the sum

 ^ 1 1 V 1 1 V 1

 q\+p 2 ^ q-+-P 3 ^ q$+3p

 ~ T X! ®~a"'a Q>~ti'"bQ~r"'cS2~Yi'"c' • • • log La b.c.c'

 K

 Here the summation on the right-hand side of the equation is over the possible values

 of a, b, c, c',.... Once again, this translates to our Eq. (2).

 Finally, consider the key use of the first orthogonality relation given by Corol

 lary 3.5. In the special case where the common difference is a prime, Dirichlet
 expressed this by saying that we have

 I + Qhy~y„, + tf(hy-ym) + + Q(p~2)(hy-ym) _ q

 except when h y — y„, = 0 mod p — 1, in which case the sum is equal to p — 1. In the

 general case, he considered the sum £ W-^^,

 I V" u/ _L

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 290 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 ...where the symbol £ ranges over all primes q and W denotes the product of

 the sums taken over a, b, c, c',... or respectively over

 y Q(ha-ctm)a^ ^ (p(hß-ßm)b^ ^ Q(hy-ym)c Q'foy'-yilf i

 Now one sees .. .that the first of these sums is 2 or 0, corresponding to whether

 the congruence ha -am = 0(mod 2) or, equivalently, whether the congruence

 qh = m (mod 4) holds or not; that the second is 2X~2 or 0 corresponding to

 whether the congruence hß - ßm = 0(mod 2X~2) or, equivalently, whether the

 congruence qh = ±m(mod 2X) holds or not; that the third is (p — 1 )pn~i orO,

 corresponding to whether the congruence hy -ym = 0(mod (p - l)/?*-1) or,

 equivalently, whether the congruence qh = /«(mod pn) holds or not, and so on;

 that therefore W always vanishes except when the congruence qh = m (mod k)

 holds, in which case W = K.23, (Dirichlet 1837b, p. 340)

 Let us now summarize the differences between Dirichlet's presentation and con

 temporary ones. One salient difference is at the level of algebraic abstraction. The

 contemporary presentation developed the general notion of a character of an arbi

 trary finite abelian group, G, and showed that the characters themselves form a group,

 G, isomorphic to G itself. Dirichlet, in contrast, focused on a very particular group,

 (Z/kZ)*, the multiplicative group of units modulo k. His presentation showed an

 intimate familiarity with the structure of that group, and the explicit mapping from

 that group to the group of characters. These details are inessential in the modern

 presentation.

 But there is another abstraction that distinguishes modern presentations from
 Dirichlet's, namely the willingness to treat characters as mathematical objects in their

 own right. This is, in part, facilitated by the algebraic abstraction: It is easier and

 more advantageous to treat characters as objects that transcend their representations

 when there are language and methods available that obviate the need to return to
 particular representations whenever there is real work to be done. But, the depen

 dence goes both ways: The abstract algebraic methods cannot even be invoked until

 one is willing to consider characters as objects that can bear properties and algebraic
 structure.

 It is the absence of these two forms of abstraction that puts Dirichlet's presentation
 in stark contrast with the modern one. Dirichlet did not define the notion of character at

 23 "...wo sich das Zeichen £ auf die Primzahlen q erstreckt und W das Product der nach o, b, c, c',...
 resp. zwischen den angegebenen Grenzen zu nehmenden Summen:

 £0(A«-am)a ^^(hy'-y^c'

 bedeutet. Nun erseiht man ... dass die erste dieser Summen 2 oder 0 ist, je nachdem die Congruenz ha—am =

 0(mod 2), oder was dasselbe ist, die Conquenz qh = m(mod 4) stattfindet oder nicht stattfindet, das die
 zweite 2*-2 oder 0 ist, je nachdem die Congruenz hß - ßm = 0(mod 2^~2), oder was dasselbe ist, die
 Conquenz qh = ±m(mod 2A) oder was dasselbe ist, die Conquenz qh = m(mod 4) stattfindet oder nicht
 stattfindet, das die dritte (p-Up"-1 oder 0 ist, je nachdem die Congruenz hy-ym = 0(mod (p-\)pn~x)

 oder was dasselbe ist, die Conquenz qh = m(mod p" ) stattfindet oder nicht stattfindet, u. s. w. das also W

 immer verschwindet, ausser wenn die Congruenz qh = m (mod k) ist, in welchem Falle W = K wird."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 291

 all, let alone general operations on characters; nor did he identify any of their general

 properties. Rather, characters only come into play as symbolic expressions in the

 construction of the L-functions, and their properties are derived in an ad hoc way as the

 proof proceeds. The characters are thus "intensional" entities: They are represented

 explicitly in terms of primitive roots of unity and generators of the corresponding

 residue group, and the only way of reasoning about them is in terms of this representing
 data.

 In Dirichlet's presentation, there is no quantifying over characters. Instead, one

 quantifies over their representations in terms of primitive roots of unity. Similarly,

 there is no direct notion of summing over characters: Dirichlet was happy to sum over

 finite sets of natural numbers and tuples of natural numbers, but where we would sum

 over a finite set of characters, Dirichlet instead summed over representations in terms

 of such tuples. It is notable that he presented the Euler product formula in (4) and (5)

 in terms of arbitrary primitive roots of unity and then explained that these "represent"

 or "contain" more particular equations that can then be summed over to obtain the
 desired result.

 Finally, it is worth drawing attention to one further consequence of the different

 treatment of characters in the two presentations, namely the extent to which they make

 important dependences explicit. Because Dirichlet's expressions depend on so much

 representational data, Dirichlet often suppressed details, to keep the expressions from

 getting unwieldy. Thus, he wrote coy, suppressing the dependence of y on n, where
 we would write x(") for the character x corresponding to co. This places a greater

 burden on the text of the proof, and the reader's memory, to keep track of the relevant

 dependences, and, for example, the ranges of a summation. Moreover, the modern

 notation L(s, x) makes it easy to track the dependence on the character x, something

 that is lost in Dirichlet's presentation. Thus, in the modern expression x (m)L(s, x )> the
 role of x is clear in both terms in the product; in Dirichlet's expression log L;,
 the connection is buried in the definition of L,.

 6 Later presentations

 In this section, we will examine proofs and discussions of Dirichlet's theorem by
 Dedekind (Dirichlet 1863), de la Vallée Poussin ( 1897), Hadamard ( 1896), Kronecker

 (1901), and Landau (1909, 1927), as well as proofs of related results by Dirichlet

 ( 1840, 1841 ) and Weber ( 1882). The proofs of the original theorem all share the same

 structure, so we will focus on describing the similarities and differences between the

 presentations of characters and L-functions, rather than describing each in full.

 6.1 Dirichlet

 Over the next few years, Dirichlet extended the methods used to prove Theorem 3.1 in

 two different directions, first to consider primes represented by quadratic forms and

 second to consider arithmetic progressions in the complex numbers. We will consider

 each of these extensions briefly.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 292 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Regarding the first extension, some background on quadratic forms will be helpful.

 Number theory has long been concerned with questions as to which numbers can be

 represented by a given algebraic expression in which the variables are taken to range

 over the integers. It is easy to characterize the numbers that can be represented by a

 linear form ax + b in one variable, and quadratic reciprocity addresses the problem of

 which numbers can be represented by a quadratic form ax2 + bx + c. When it comes

 to quadratic forms in two variables, things become more difficult. Fermat's famous

 theorem that the odd prime numbers that can be represented by the form x2 + y2 are

 exactly the ones that are congruent to one modulo four is considered a gem of number

 theory. Euler proved this and other of Fermat's claims in the eighteenth century, and

 Lagrange later extended the theory of binary quadratic forms considerably. A central

 contribution of Gauss' Disquisitiones Arithmeticae is a complete classification of

 binary quadratic forms, whose study constitutes the bulk of that work.

 Gauss showed that it suffices to characterize "primitive" quadratic forms ax2 +

 2bxy + cy2, where the second coefficient is even, and a, b, and c have no factor in

 common. (Quadratic forms are also classified as "indefinite," "positive definite," and

 "negative definite," and in the discussion that follows it should be assumed that we are

 fixing our attention on one of these fixed kinds.) He called the value D = b2 — ac the

 discriminant of the form and showed how to assign to each primitive quadratic form

 of discriminant D a finite list of values of the form ± 1 which, roughly speaking, char
 acterizes its behavior. He called these values the characters of the form and took the

 "genus" of a form to be the collection of all the primitive forms with the same discrimi

 nant and character. As we will see in Sect. 6.2, the use of name "character" for nonzero

 group homomorphisms to the complex numbers traces back to this terminology.

 Dirichlet's Theorem 3.1 asserts that there are infinitely many primes represented

 by any linear form kx + m where k and m have no common factor. In 1840, Dirich

 let considered the analogous question as to whether infinitely many primes can be

 represented by a primitive quadratic form ax2 + 2bxy + cy2 and showed that this

 indeed holds in the special case where the discriminant D — -p is a negative prime

 number, and p is congruent to 3 mod 4. As he noted, the proof relies on methods that

 are "essentially the same" ("im Wesentlichen ...übereinstimmend") (Dirichlet 1840,

 p. 98) as those used in his proof of the theorem on arithmetic progressions, although

 with a few new modifications. The result was proved in full generality by Weber ( 1882)

 in 1882, and de la Vallée Poussin (1897) also presented a proof in 1897.

 In 1841, Dirichlet turned his attention to arithmetic progressions in the Gaussian

 integers and established that

 .. .the expression kt+l, in which t denotes an indeterminate complex integer and

 k, I denote given numbers of this kind with no common factor, always contains

 infinitely many prime numbers."24 (Dirichlet 1841, p. 509)

 The proof begins with a discussion of modular arithmetic for the Gaussian integers

 and defines the notion of primitive roots and indices for complex moduli (Dirichlet

 1841, pp. 512-524). Dirichlet then considered the product

 24 "...der Ausdruck kt 4-1, in welchem t eine unbestimmte complexe ganze Zahl und k, l gegebene solche

 Zahlen ohne gemeinschaftlichen Factor bezeichnen, immer unendlich viele Primzahlen enthält."

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 293

 Ç2n = (pa"(p'a» .. .1jfß" ^V" ijf'ßn -^Y" _ _

 where <p, <p', V- Vr'- X. x'<1 are all roots of unity and an,ct'n, ß„, ß'ir x„, x,',, • • •.

 <5„, £« are indices with respect to n. This product is thus analogous to the characters

 that appear in his 1837 proof.

 However, in contrast to the presentation in 1837, in 1841 Dirichlet explicitly noted

 that the products enjoy a number of "important properties" ("wichtige Eigen
 schaften") (Dirichlet 1841, p. 524). The properties he highlights are the following,

 where ij/(k) is a quantity calculated from the prime decomposition of k, involving the

 norms of the prime factors and their exponents (Dirichlet 1841, 524-525):

 I- Qua1 =
 2. ÇI,,' — £2„ whenever n' = n(mod k).

 3. X = 0 or X «/ = |)K^) depending on whether there is at least one root

 among the roots in £2/ that is different to 1, or whether they are all equal.

 4. S£2„ = |t/r(Jt)orS£2„ = 0 depending on whether« s l(mod k)orn ^ l(modI:),
 where the sign "S" indicates a sum over all combinations of the roots that can occur
 in Q.

 Note that the last two are the key orthogonality relations, Theorem 3.4. Thus, in this

 presentation Dirichlet labeled the expressions that we now recognize as characters

 and isolated their properties. Moreover, he introduced a notation for summing over

 characters that is, interestingly, distinct from the notation for summation over natural

 numbers. The net effect is that the proof is considerably more modular than the proof
 of 1837.

 6.2 Dedekind

 In 1863, Dedekind published a book, Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie, based on his

 notes taken from a course on number theory given by Dirichlet at Göttingen. After the

 lectures, he added nine "supplements," or appendices, with material of his own. Sup

 plement VI, in particular, contained a presentation of Dirichlet's theorem. Dedekind
 extended the supplements in the second edition, published in 1871, to include his

 theory of algebraic ideals. That theory was, in turn, revised and expanded in the third

 and fourth editions, which appeared in 1879 and 1894, respectively. The earlier sup

 plements, however, were not changed after the first edition.

 Dedekind began his presentation with an overview of main steps of the proof. In

 particular, he proved the Euler product formula and obtained the series expansions for

 the L-functions and their logarithms. But the overview deals with a more general class
 of L-functions than we have considered so far:

 The general proof of... [Dirichlet's theorem] is based on the consideration of a
 class of infinite series of the form

 l = ^ y(").

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 294 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 where n runs through all positive integers and the real or complex function i/f(n)
 satisfies the condition

 f(n)\ii{n) = \jf{nn'),

 ...[and] we always assume that ^(1) = l.25 (Dirichlet 1863, § 132)

 He then went on to focus his attention on Dirichlet characters. He used the same

 expressions as Dirichlet to represent the characters, but whereas Dirichlet expressed

 each root of unity co involved in the construction as the power £2' of a single primitive

 root of unity, Dedekind did not bother with this step. He did not explicitly refer to the

 relevant expressions as "characters," but he introduced the notation x(n) to denote

 their values, and pointed out that x is completely multiplicative:

 The numerator [of n)] x («) = 0a rjPu)r œ'r'... has the characteristic property
 X(n)x(n') = x(nn')...26 (Dirichlet 1863, §133, footnote)

 Otherwise, however, Dedekind did not make use of the x notation in his proof. And,

 like Dirichlet, Dedekind showed a reluctance to quantify over characters directly. He
 introduced the L-functions as

 specifying that the product is to be taken over all primes not dividing the common

 difference, and the sum is to be taken over all natural numbers relatively prime to the
 common difference. Dedekind went on to note

 ...that the series can exhibit quite different behavior, depending on the roots of

 unity 0, r/, w, appearing in the expression for i/f(n). Since these roots can

 have a, b, c, c',... values, respectively, the form L contains altogether

 abcc'... = cp(k)

 different particular series...27 (Dirichlet 1863, §133)

 25 "Der allgemeine Beweis dieses Satzes ...stützt sich auf die Betrachtung einer Classe von unendlichen
 Reihen von der Form

 wo der Buchstabe n alle ganzen positiven Zahlen durchlaufen muss, und die reelle oder complexe Function

 L = ^V'(tî),

 i/r (« ) der Bedingung

 i//(n)ir(n') = \lr(nn')

 genügt ...so nehmen wir immer an, dass f(l) = 1 ist."

 26 "Der Zähler x(n) = 0a... besitzt die charakteristischen Eigenschaften x(n)x(n') = X(nn')

 27 "Wir bemerken zunächst, dass diese Reihen je nach der Wahl der in dem Ausdrucke \jr(n) vorkom
 menden Einheits-Wurzeln . ein ganz verschiedenes Verhalten zeigen; da diese Wurzeln resp.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 295

 Note that the use of the word "contains" echoes Dirichlet's language.

 Dedekind then proceeded to divide the L-functions into classes. Given that the

 characters are defined in terms of a sequence of roots of unity, there are three distinct

 possibilities that can obtain for a given series L:

 1. The roots of unity in the construction of the character occurring in L are all 1.

 There is only one such L-function, which is denoted L\.

 2. The roots of unity in the construction of the character occurring in L are all real,

 i.e., are all ±1. L-functions that fall into this category are written as L2.

 3. At least one of the roots of unity in the construction of the character occurring in

 L is imaginary. L-functions that fall into this category are written as Ly.

 Moreover, each L-function that falls into the third category has a conjugate: if L-$ =

 ^ (hen there is a corresponding L-series in the same class, denoted by

 L'v such that L'-, = -—- r'".

 Let us now see how Dedekind's notation plays out when it comes to summing

 over the characters. When proving that the L-functions corresponding to a complex

 character have a finite nonzero value as s tends to infinity, he obtained the following

 equation:

 (p(k)

 = log L i + ^log(L2) +^logfL.iL^), (6)

 where, on the left hand side, the successive sums are over all the primes q

 not dividing k which satisfy the successive conditions q = lfmod/:), q~ =
 1 (mod k), etc. On the right hand side the first sum is over all series L2 of the

 second class, and the second sum is over all conjugate pairs L3L3 of series of
 the third class.28 (Dirichlet 1863, §136)

 In a sense, Dedekind took the summations to range not over the characters or their

 representations, but over the L-functions themselves. Later, when dealing with these

 Footnote 27 Continued

 a. b. c. ( '.... verschiedene Werthe haben können, so sind in der Form L im Ganzen

 abcc'... = ip(k)

 verschiedene besondere Reihen enthalten ..."

 28 ..

 <p(k)  (z + \ Z + • • ■ + ^ Z + ••■) = + Zlog(t2) +

 wo auf der linken Seite das erste, zweite Summenzeichen u.s.f. sich auf alle die in k nicht aufgehenden

 Primzahlen q bezieht, welche resp. den Bedingungen <y = I, q2 = Krnod k) u.s.f. Genüge leisten; auf der
 rechten Seite bezieht sich das erste Summenzeichen auf alle Reihen Li der zweiten Classe, das zweite auf

 alle verschiedenen Paare L->,L\ conjugirter Reihen dritter Classe." We have added the equation numbers in
 this quotation and the next, for later reference.

 4£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 296 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 sums, he came closer to Dirichlet's presentation, in that the indices of the summation

 range over the sequences of roots that determine the characters. However, at times

 he introduced convenient abbreviations. For example, given a particular collection
 of roots of unity 9, q, to, to',..., Dedekind denoted 9~a[ q~^lo)~nto'~yt... by x >

 where a\,ß\,y\, Y\ stand for the indices of the first term of the progression, m.
 Note that while Dedekind used the notation x («) in a footnote, he explicitly called

 X, as defined here, a value. (In fact, it plays the role of x(m) in the presentation of

 Sect. 3.3.) Moreover, when he used the symbol in a summation, Dedekind was explicit

 that the summation ranges not over x. but rather the roots of unity involved in the
 definition:

 The summation of all products x log L therefore gives the result

 where the successive sums on the left hand side are over all primes q satisfying
 the successive conditions q = m,q2 = m,q^ = m(mod k) etc., while the sum
 on the right hand side is over all <p(k) different root systems 0, q, to, to',...29
 (Dirichlet 1863, §137)

 In many ways, Dedekind did not stray far from Dirichlet's presentation. For the most

 part, his treatment of the characters was intensional, in the sense that the arguments

 rely on the particular representations of the characters. In other words, operations

 on the characters are described in terms of their representations, rather than their val

 ues, and, like Dirichlet, he viewed summations as ranging over these representations in

 Eqs. (6) and (7). Similarly, he classified the characters depending on the roots involved

 in their representation, rather than their values. Nor did he take the expression L, for

 the L-functions, to depend on the characters themselves. Rather, he characterized

 them as expressions that behave differently "depending on the roots of unity" appear

 ing in their construction. The L notation in particular does nothing to signal this
 dependence.

 Nonetheless, he did take some key steps toward viewing the characters abstractly.

 To start with, Dedekind went out of his way to isolate the characters as independent of

 the L-series in which they appear and, in particular, flagged them as entities satisfying

 certain key properties. And, at least at times, he characterized summations as ranging

 over the L-functions themselves, hinting at a new level of abstraction.

 The use of the term "character" in the modern sense can be traced to the long

 Supplement XI in the 1879 edition of the Dirichlet-Dedekind Vorlesungen, which

 29 "Die Summation aller Producte x log L giebt daher das Resultat

 tp(k)

 wo auf der linken Seite das erste, zweite, dritte Summenzeichen u.s.f. sich auf alle Primzahlen q bezieht,
 welche resp. den Bedingungen q = m,q2 = m.q3 = m(mod k) u.s.f. genügen, während das Summenze
 ichen auf der rechten Seite sich auf die sämmtlichen <p(k) verschiedenen Wurzel-Systeme 6, ij, w, co',..."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 297

 contains a presentation of Dedekind's theory of ideals in algebraic number fields.

 As noted in Sect. 6.1, Gauss assigned "characters" to quadratic forms in order to

 classify their behavior. Already in the first edition of the Vorlesungen, Dedekind used

 Gauss' terminology in Supplement IV, "Genera of quadratic forms." In 1879, however,

 Dedekind went further by showing that Gauss' classification could be understood in

 terms of his theory of ideals. Specifically, he showed that there is a correspondence

 between genera of quadratic forms and equivalence classes of ideals in an associated

 quadratic extension of the rationals. Moreover, there is a group structure on the ideals,

 and Gauss' characters correspond to characters on that group, in the modern sense. This

 explains the quotation in Sect. 2: Dedekind had simply adopted Gauss' terminology

 to characterize the homomorphisms from groups of ideals to the (nonzero) complex

 numbers more generally.

 As we noted in Sect. 2.1, in 1882, Weber (1882), building on Dedekind's work,

 extended the notion of a "character" to arbitrary finite abelian groups. But, although

 Dedekind revised his theory of ideals substantially in the third and fourth editions

 of the Vorlesungen, he did not revise any of the supplements that appeared in the

 first edition. In particular, he did not take advantage of the opportunity to go back to

 introduce the modern notion of a character in his presentation of Dirichlet's proof,

 although he clearly could have done so in the later editions.

 6.3 Weber

 The paper (Weber 1882) is devoted to a proof of the fact that any primitive quadratic

 form represents infinitely many primes, the result that Dirichlet had proved in 1840

 in a special case. That paper, however, was the first to present the modern notation

 of a character on a finite abelian group in full generality. Weber defined such a group

 as consisting of h elements "of any type" ("irgend welcher Art") satisfying the usual
 group laws. He then stated the now-familiar structure theorem:

 In a finite abelian group of order h one can always choose elements
 ©I, ©2 ©i> of order n \, «2 nv so that each element © of G can be

 expressed uniquely by the form

 where S|, s->,..., are chosen from complete residue systems with respect to

 the moduli n |, n2, ■ ■., nv?° (Weber 1882, pp. 306-307)

 30 "In einer Abel'schen Grupper G von Grade h kann man stets die Elemente (-)|. (->2 von den
 Graden n \. 112 nv so auswählen, dass in der Form

 ©î1©;2...©:,",

 C-),1 Wj2... (-)*"

 jedes Element (-) von G und jedes nur einmal enthalten ist, wenn s\, ,?2 sv je einem vollständigen
 Restsystem nach den Moduln « 1 • "2 "v entnommen werden."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 298 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Weber called the sequence of values ©i, @2,..., ©„ a basis of the group and used

 them to define the characters as follows:

 If we assign to the v elements @1, ©2,..., 0„ of such a basis v roots of unity

 wi,ct)2,... ,cov, oï order n\,ni, ■ ■. ,nv respectively, then each element © =

 0'J1 ©22... 0'u' of the group also corresponds to a particular h'h root of unity

 Si ^2 Si,

 CO = (0] (02 . . .covv.

 We denote this root of unity by x (©) and call it the character of the element.3'

 (Weber 1882, p. 307)

 Weber went on to point out that this gives rise to h distinct characters and that each

 such character x satisfies the equation

 X(©)x(©') = X (©©')•

 Moreover, this last condition provides an exact characterization:

 If, conversely, x (©) is a uniquely determined function of © which satisfies [the

 equation above], then it is necessarily contained among these h characters.32
 [ibid.]

 Thus, Weber's paper provides us not only with the modern notion of a character defined

 on an arbitrary finite abelian group, but also with the modern understanding that such

 characters constitute an instance of the function concept.

 There are some small differences between Weber's presentation and ours. In his
 presentation of the second orthogonality relation, Weber used ellipses rather than
 summation notation to sum over the characters:

 For each element 0:

 Xi(©) + X2(©) H + Xh(&) = 0,

 except for the identity element ©o, for which we have

 Xi (©0) + X2(0o) + • • • + X/i(©o) = h.

 31 "Ordnet man den t> Elementen (~)|, ©2 (-)„ einer solchen Basis v Einheitswurzeln w\, ori u>v

 von den Graden n \, 112 nv, so entspricht auch jedem Element (-) = 0j'0^2 ... ®svv der Gruppe eine
 bestimmte h'e Einheitswurzel w nach der Vorschrift

 S| s 2

 ru = ru, a)-, .

 Wir bezeichnen diese Einheitswurzel mit /(0), und nennen dieselbe den Charakter des Elementes 0."

 32 Ist umgekehrt x (0) eine durch das Element 0 eindeutig bestimmte Function, welche der Bedingung

 .. .genügt, so ist dieselbe nothwending unter diesen h Charakteren enthalten.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 299

 (Weber 1882, p. 308)33

 This implicitly assumes that the h characters are enumerated xi»• • •. XA. though the

 enumeration is arbitrary. Moreover, Weber provided the explicit construction of the

 set of characters before the extensional characterization, whereas modern presenta

 tions usually provide the extensional characterization first. But these points are minor,

 and, otherwise, his presentation is little different from the one in Sect. 3.2.34 Even

 his fairly modern presentation harks back to an intensional view, however. After

 introducing analogues of the Euler product formula and the result of taking loga

 rithms of both sides, he emphasized, echoing the language used by Dirichlet and
 Dedekind:

 Each of the formulas ...represents h different formulas, corresponding to the h

 different characters Xi. X2> •• • « XA-35 (Weber 1882, p. 315)

 He then characterized the analogue of Eq. (2) in Sect. 3.4 as the result of "the addition

 of all the formulas" ("die Addition der sämmtlichen Formeln"), rather than the addition

 of the corresponding values.

 6.4 De la Vallée-Poussin

 More than two decades later, Charles Jean de la Vallée-Poussin gave another pre

 sentation of Dirichlet's theorem in a 1895/6 paper entitled "Démonstration simplifiée

 du Théorème de Dirichlet sur la progression arithmétique," and again in sections

 from his 1897 book Recherches analytiques sur la théorie des nombres premiers. He
 introduced the characters in much the same way that Dirichlet and Dedekind did,

 namely, via an explicit construction in terms of primitive roots and roots of unity. Like

 Dedekind and Weber, he used the symbol x for the characters. Like Weber, he distin

 guished between the tp(M) characters modulo M using subscripts, writing xi, X2> - • •.

 Xip(M)

 De la Vallée-Poussin went on to subject the characters to a thorough study.
 Whereas Dirichlet and Dedekind divided the /.-functions (or, perhaps more pre
 cisely, the corresponding expressions) into three categories based on their represen
 tations, de la Vallée-Poussin based the categorization on the characters themselves.

 •13 "Für jedes Element (-) ist:

 XI «-» + X2«-» + • • ' + X/, «">) = 0.

 ausgenommen für das Hauptelement Ho, für welches

 XI (<->o) + X2<w0) + • • + xa(<->o) = h.

 44 Mackey's historical survey (Mackey 1980) of the history of harmonic analysis includes a very helpful

 and informative overview of the history of character-theoretic ideas in number theory.

 35 "Jede der Formeln . . .repräsentirt Ii verschiedene Formeln, entsprechend den Ii verschiedenen Charak
 teren/|./2 xi,"

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 300 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 The following description applies to the simplest case, where the modulus M is a

 prime:

 One calls the character that corresponds to the root +1 the principal character,

 it is equal to unity for all numbers n. Apart from the principal character, there is

 only one which is real for all numbers n: it corresponds to the root (—1) and is

 equal to ±1 depending on the number n.

 We call all the other characters imaginary characters, though they may have a

 real value for some particular numbers. Their modulus is always equal to unity.36

 (de la Vallée Poussin 1897, p. 19)

 Thus, de la Vallée-Poussin divided the characters into three classes:

 1. the class consisting solely of the principal character;

 2. the class consisting of all real characters (in this case, there is only one character

 that is real for all numbers, corresponding to the root -1); and

 3. The class consisting of all other characters, called the imaginary characters.

 Notice that his categorization includes both intensional and extensional characteriza
 tions; that is, he characterized the characters in each class in terms of both the values

 they take and the roots involved in their construction.

 In his study of the characters in his 1896 paper, de la Vallée Poussin listed a

 number of "very important relations" ("relations très importantes"). The first is that

 X (n)X («') = X (nn') for every character x, and n and The second is that for a given

 character x modulo M, and any n and n', if n = n'(mod M), then x(«) = x("')- The

 third and fourth are the first and second orthogonality relations, respectively. In order

 to present the second orthogonality relation, de la Vallée-Poussin introduced a new

 symbol, 5, to denote summation over the characters, just as Dirichlet did in 1841:37

 36 "On appelle caractère principal celui qui correspond à la racine +1; il est égal à l'unité pour tous les
 nombres n. En dehors du caractère principal, il n' y en a qu' un seul qui soit réel pour tous les nombres n : il

 correspond à la racine (-1) et est égal à± 1 suivant le nombre n.
 Nous donnerons à tous les autres caractères le nom de caractère imaginaires, quoiqu'ils puissent avoir une

 valeur réelle pour certains nombres particuliers. Leur module est toujours égal à l'unité."

 37 "Considérons .. .la somme étendue à tous les caractères, c'est-à-dire à tous les systèmes de racines

 ... Pour tout nombre n, la somme étendue à la totalité des caractères

 Sxx(n) = Sutw^œ^2...

 à la seule exception près du cas où

 car alors tous les indicateurs sont nuls et l'on a

 Sxx(n) = 0,

 n = l(mod M),

 Sxx(n) = <p(M)."

 fi Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 301

 Consider ...the sum extending over all the characters, that is to say over all the

 systems of roots

 Sxx(n) = S,„W|1 wf...

 .. .For every number n, the sum extending over the totality of characters satisfies

 the only exception being the case where

 because then all the indices are zero and one has

 Sxx(n) = 0,

 n - 1 (mod M),

 SXX(") = <p(M).

 [de la Vallée Poussin, pp. 14-15]

 Although his notation is different from that of Dirichlet's original notation and

 Dedekind's, his proof of Theorem 3.1, like theirs, relies on an explicit calculation

 based on the construction of the characters, in contrast to the modern proof sketched
 in Sect. 3.2.

 When introducing the L-functions in his 1896 paper, de la Vallée-Poussin simply

 described them in terms of their equivalent expressions as a sum and product. In 1897,

 however, he adopted a functional notation:

 We define the function Z(.v, / mod A/), for TZ(s) > 1, by the absolutely conver
 gent expressions:

 -i

 where n designates successively all the integers prime to M and q all the prime

 numbers not dividing A/.38 (de la Vallée Poussin 1897, p. 56)

 Aside from the choice of the letter Z instead of the letter L. we have finally arrived

 at the modern notation. But, like Dirichlet and Dedekind, he was reticent to quantify

 38 "Nous définirons ia fonction Z(s. /mod M), pour 7l(s) > 1, par les expressions absolument conver
 gentes

 «=1

 «= I

 où il désigne successivement tous les nombres entiers premiers à M et q tous les nombres premiers qui ne
 divisent pas M."

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 302 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 over the characters, using language that is eerily reminiscent of theirs. For example,
 in his 1897 work, he wrote:

 ...one finds the fundamental equation

 (£)...- lim(i - y)Z (.S' X) = lim(î - 1)X

 i=l Z(s, x) s=l ^ qs

 and this equation (E) represents in reality <p(M) distinct ones, which result from

 exchanging the characters amongst themselves.39 (de la Vallée Poussin 1897,
 p. 65).

 Nonetheless, there are a number of important respects in which de la Vallée

 Poussin's presentation is close to the modern one. To start with, characters are treated

 as objects of study in their own right, bearing their own properties and relations. More

 over, they are classified extensionally, although this classification is, at the same time,

 related to properties of their representations. They are also represented notationally as

 arguments to the L-functions. Finally, de la Vallée-Poussin used a summation notation

 with an index ranging over the characters, not their representing data. The fact that

 he went out of his way to use one symbol, S, for summation of characters and the

 usual r symbol for summation over sets of natural numbers hints that he does not

 conceive of these as precisely the same mathematical operation, although they have

 similar properties.

 6.5 Hadamard

 For each real number jc, let jt(jc) denote the number of primes less than x. Around

 the turn of the century, both Legendre and Gauss conjectured that 7t(jc) is asymptotic

 to jc/ ln(jc), in the sense that their ratio, jt(jc) In jc/jc, approaches 1 as x approaches

 infinity. This fact, now known as the "prime number theorem," was finally proved by

 both de la Vallée-Poussin and Jacques Hadamard, working independently, in 1896. De

 la Vallée-Poussin's proof was first published in the Annales de la Société Scientifique

 de Bruxelles, but also appeared in the 1897 book we discussed in the last section.
 Both Hadamard and de la Vallée-Poussin also obtained a generalization of the prime

 number theorem to arithmetic progressions, which says that if m is relatively prime to

 k, the number of primes less than jc that are congruent to m modulo k is asymptotic to

 (1 /<p(k)) ■ (jc/ In jc). This is, of course, a generalization of Dirichlet's theorem, since

 it implies that there are infinitely many primes congruent to m modulo k.

 Hadamard's 1896 paper was titled "Sur la distribution des zéros de la fonction

 Ç(s) et ses conséquences arithmétiques" and provided a number of results concerning

 39 "...on trouve \'équation fondamentale

 (£)...- lim(.r - X) = lim(r -

 i=l Z(s, x) v=l ^ qs

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 et cette équation (E) en représente en réalitéip{M) distinctes par l'échange des caractères entre eux."

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 303

 L-functions and characters. He introduced characters in the same way as Dirichlet,

 Dedekind, and de la Vallée-Poussin, namely, by a construction in terms of roots of

 unity and primitive elements. Like Weber and de la Vallée-Poussin, he distinguished

 between the characters modulo k notationally by making use of subscripts, writing

 t/r„(n) where v runs from I to (p(k). He defined the L-functions as follows:

 , / , X-1 i'v(n)
 L"(J) = 2-—•

 //= 1

 The notation L„(x), in contrast to de la Vallée-Poussin's Z(s, x), does not indicate an

 explicit dependence on the character, though the subscript provides a link. As did his

 predecessors, Hadamard classified the L-functions into three different classes, but his

 classification was intensional, like Dirichlet's and Dedekind's, referring to the roots

 of unity used in the construction of the characters.

 When it came to summing over the characters, Hadamard, unlike Dirichlet,

 Dedekind, or de la Vallée-Poussin, let the index of the summation range over the
 subscripts described above.

 The fundamental equation that Dirichlet used in the demonstration of his theorem
 is

 log Lv(s)

 i>v(m)

 <p(k)  zv J_ IV" J ^

 <7V + 2 2- q2s + 3 2- ^37 + J '

 where m is some integer prime to k, and where, among the signs ]T, ...,
 the first ranges over the prime numbers q such that q = m (mod k), the second

 ranges over the primes numbers q such that q2 = m (mod k), etc.40 (Hadamard
 1896, p. 209)

 Once again, this is comparable to the modern formulation in Eq. (2).

 Hadamard's presentation falls somewhere between those of Dirichlet and Dedekind,
 on the one hand, and that of de la Vallée-Poussin, on the other. His treatment of charac

 ters was, for the most part, intensional. But, in contrast to Dirichlet and Dedekind, he

 left representational data out of the key summations, thereby eliminating unnecessary

 clutter. However, unlike de la Vallée-Poussin, he did not go so far as to characterize
 these as summations over the characters themselves. Rather, he introduced natural

 number indices, v, labeling the characters, and then took the variable of summation

 to range over those.

 40 "L'équation fondamental utilisée par Dirichlet pour la démonstration de son théorème, est

 log Lv(s)
 , , , ■ = ¥><*>

 <M'">

 »(Ep + ïEjr + jS ;*♦•••)

 où/« est un entier quelconque premier avec k et où les signes Y"- ■ ■ • s'étendent, le premier aux
 nombres premiers q tels que q = m (mod k), le second aux nombres premiers q tels que q- = «; (mod k),
 etc."

 'S Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 304 J. Avigad. R. Morris

 6.6 Kronecker

 Between 1863 and 1891, Leopold Kronecker lectured at the University of Berlin

 on a range of subjects, including number theory, algebra, and the theory of deter
 minants. After Kronecker's death, his student, Kurt Hensel, edited the five volumes

 of his collected works, which were published between 1895 and 1930. Hensel also

 took it upon himself to work Kronecker's copious lecture notes and course mate

 rial into two textbooks, Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie and Vorlesungen über die
 Theorie der Determinanten, which he published in 1901 and 1903, respectively.
 The first of these closes with a proof of Dirichlet's theorem, which we will discuss
 here.

 Kronecker, in fact, wrote his doctoral dissertation on algebraic number theory under

 Dirichlet's supervision, completing it in 1845. Kronecker insisted that mathematics

 should maintain a clear focus on symbolic representations and algorithms, a com

 mitment that is evident throughout his work. Avoiding talk of "arbitrary" functions,

 real numbers, and so on, Kronecker focused instead on the construction of algebraic

 systems and explicit algorithms for calculating with these algebraic representations.

 For example, his article "Grundzüge einer arithmetischen Theorie der algebraischen

 Grössen" (Kronecker 1882) provides means of carrying out operations on systems of

 algebraic integers in finite extensions of the rationals. Similarly, "Ein Fundamentalsatz

 der allgemeinen Arithmetik" (Kronecker 1887) provides an explicit construction of

 a splitting field for any polynomial with integer coefficients, and he viewed this as

 filling a gap in Galois' work.41

 Kronecker's approach to number theory had a similar orientation. As Hensel put it

 in the introduction to Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie:

 He believed that one can and must in this domain formulate each definition in

 such a way that its applicability to a given quantity can be assessed by means

 of a finite number of tests. Likewise, an existence proof for a quantity is to be

 regarded as entirely rigorous only if it contains a method by which that quantity

 can actually be found. Kronecker was far from being one to completely reject a

 definition or proof that does not meet these highest requirements, but he believed

 that there was then something missing, and he held that completing it along these

 lines is an important task, by which our knowledge is furthered in an important

 sense.42 (Kronecker 1901, p. vi)

 41 See Edwards (1980), Edwards (1989), Edwards (2007), Edwards (2009) for a discussion of these works,

 and Kronecker's mathematics more generally.

 42 "Er meinte, man könne und man müsse in diesem Gebiete eine jede Definition so fassen, daß durch

 eine endliche Anzahl von Versuchen geprüft werden kann, ob sie auf eine vorgelegte Größe anwendbar
 ist oder nicht. Ebenso wäre ein Existenzbeweis für eine Größe erst dann als völlig streng anzushen, wenn

 er zugleich ein Method enthalte, durch welche die Größe, deren Existenz bewiesen werde, auch wirklich

 gefunden werden kann. Kronecker war weit davon entfernt, eine Definition oder einen Beweis vollständig

 zu verwerfen, der jenen höchsten Anforderungen nicht entsprach, aber er glaubte, daß dann eben noch etwas

 fehle, und er hielt eine Ergänzung nach dieser Richtung hin für eine wichtige Aufgabe, durch die unsere
 Erkenntnis in einem wesentlichen Punkte erweitert würde." We have modified and extended a translation

 due to Stein (1988, p. 250).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 305

 Kronecker's proof of Dirichlet's theorem is a focal point of the book, in that it brings

 together methods and ideas developed throughout the entire work. Here is Hensel's
 characterization:

 [The book] closes with the proof of the famous theorem that any arithmetic

 sequence, whose first term and common difference are relatively prime, contains

 infinitely many prime numbers. But Kronecker completed Dirichlet's proof of

 this theorem in a significant sense, in that he proved that one can determine,

 for an arbitrarily large number /r, a larger number p., so that in the interval

 (H ■ ■ ■ ß.) one is sure to find a prime number of the required form. This nice

 supplement to that famous proof is a fruit of the higher demands, mentioned

 above, that Kronecker placed on arithmetic proofs. And here it seems, in fact,

 that with this improvement of Dirichlet's theorem, nothing by way of simplicity

 or transparency has been lost.43 (Kronecker 1901, p. viii)

 The interaction between analytic and number-theoretic methods is a central theme

 of the Vorlesungen, which opens with a discussion of Gauss' distinction between the

 fields of number theory, algebra, and analysis, and argues that they cannot be cleanly

 separated. For example, Kronecker praised Leibniz' characterization of n in terms of
 the series

 7T 111 ^ (-1)"

 n 2" + 1

 h=0

 as providing a definition of n of a "fully number-theoretic character" ("durchaus
 zalhlentheoretischem Charakter").

 What these examples teach us holds, more generally, for all the definitions of

 analysis. These always lead back to the integers and their properties, and from

 that entire branch of mathematics, only the concept of a limit has so far remained

 foreign. Arithmetic cannot be separated from analysis, which has freed itself

 from its original source, geometry, and has developed independently, on free

 soil. Even less so, as Dirichlet has succeeded in obtaining the deepest and most

 beautiful results in arithmetic by combining the methods of the two disciplines.44

 (Kronecker 1901, pp. 4-5)

 44 "...schließt mit dem Beweise des berühmten Satzes, daß jede arithmetische Reihe, deren Anfangsglied

 und Differenz teilerfremd sind, unendlich viele Primzahlen enthält; aber Kronecker vervollständigt den

 Dirichletschen Beweis dieses Satzes in einem wesentlichen Punkte, indem er nachweist, daß man für jede
 beliebige groß anzunehmende Zahl /t eine größere Zahl ß so bestimmen kann, daß in dem Intervalle

 (Ii- -ß) sich sicher eine Primzahl der verlangten Form befindet. Dies schöne Ergänzung jenes berühmten

 Beweises ist eine Frucht der oben erwähnten höheren Forderungen, welche Kronecker an arithmetische

 Beweise stellte, und hier scheint es in der That, daß durch diese Verbesserung der Dirichletsche Beweis
 nichts an Einfachheit und Durchsichtigkeit verloren hat."

 44 "Was uns diese Beispiele lehren, ist nun maßgebend für alle Definitionen der Analysis überhaupt.

 Dieselben führen stets auf die ganzen Zahlen und ihre Eigenschaften zurück, und es ist von dem ganzen
 Gebiete des letzgenannten Zweiges der Mathematik der einzige Begriff des limes oder der Grenze der
 Zahlentheorie bisher fremd geblieben. Gegen die Anaylsis also, die sich von ihrer ursprünglichen Quelle, der

 Geometrie, befreit und auf freiem Boden selbständig entwickelt hat, kann die Arithmetik nicht abgegrenzt

 •ö Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 306 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 This interplay comes to the fore in the proof of Dirichlet's theorem. The text reports

 that Kronecker's version of the proof, in the case where the common difference is

 prime, was worked out in the lectures he gave in the winter semester of 1875/1876,
 whereas the general case was presented in the winter semester of 1886/1887 (Kro

 necker 1901, p. 442). Fixing a modulus m and an r relatively prime to m, recall that

 Kronecker aimed to provide, for a given number ß, an explicit upper bound ß on the

 integers one has to consider to find a prime number greater than ß and congruent to r

 modulo m. When it came to the analytic part of the proof, Kronecker explained that

 obtaining the desired bound is reduced to obtaining a positive lower bound on a certain

 analytic series that arises in the proof. He wrote:

 For the ambiguous [real] characters, Dirichlet's proof meets this requirement.

 But his methods are not sufficient to do the same for the series corresponding to

 the complex characters.45 (Kronecker 1901, p. 481)

 He went on:

 Generally speaking, this is a special case of the problem of finding, given a well

 defined nonzero number, a bound, above which it necessarily lies. This is not

 as easy as it seems at first glance; indeed, in some circumstances, the problem

 can count among the thorniest questions known to science.46 (Kronecker 1901,
 pp. 481^482)

 Kronecker took the opportunity to clarify the methodological stance toward analysis

 that is appropriate to these issues. Even though, in his work, he avoided the notion of

 an "arbitrary" real number, he recognized the importance of understanding particular

 number systems in analytic terms. For example, given a symbolic representation of

 a real number, one may wish to compute rational approximations. But knowing that

 a nonnegative real number is nonzero is not the same as having a positive, rational
 lower bound on its values.47 Kronecker mentioned the problem of bounding a nonzero

 determinant away from zero as an example of a problem that is generally difficult. He

 also noted that, given two convergent series, it can be difficult to determine which one

 Footnote 44 Continued

 werden, um so weniger, als es Dirichlet gelungen ist, grade die schönsten und tiefliegenden arithmetischen

 Resultate durch die Verbindung der Methoden beider Disciplinen zu erzielen."

 45 "Für die ambigen Charaktere erfüllt der Beweis von Dirichlet auch diese Forderung, dagegen reichen
 seine Methoden nicht aus, um dasselbe auch für die Reihen zu leisten, welche den complexen Charakteren

 entsprechen."

 46 "Überhaupt ist das hier in einen speziellen Falle sich darbietende Problem, für eine von Null verschiedene

 wohldefinierte Zahlgröße eine Grenze zu finden, über der sie notwendig liegen muß, nicht so einfach, als es
 auf den ersten Blick erscheint, vielmehr kann diese Aufgabe unter Umständen eine der heikelsten Fragen

 sein, die die Wissenschaft kennt."

 47 In modem terms, one can obtain such a lower bound by computing rational approximations until one

 obtains one that is sufficiently accurate to bound the number away from zero. Thus, the statement "if r ^ 0,

 then |r| > 0" was accepted by the Russian school of constructive mathematics in the 1950s and 1960s. This

 implication is equivalent to "Markov's principle," which is, however, rejected by strict constructivists. See,

 for example, Troelstra and Dalen (1988).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichiet's theorem 307

 has a greater value. These facts are now quite familiar in constructive and computable

 analysis.48

 Kronecker's treatment of characters provides an interesting combination of Dirich

 iet's approach and modern ones. Fixing a modulus m, Kronecker, like Dirichlet, pro

 vided a fully explicit description of the characters modulo m in terms of primitive

 elements of the powers of primes giving m and primitive roots of unity. However,

 with judicious choice of notation, he was at the same time able to suppress extraneous

 detail. For example, fixing primitive elements y,yo,yi,..., yK, one can express any

 element r relatively prime to m in the form

 r = ypy^ ■ ■ • y^'mod m.

 But then one can "package" the representing values (p, po. Pi PK) as a tuple, the
 "index system of r," denoted Indd r. For each of the cyclic groups in the decomposition

 of the group of units modulo m, suppose we also choose corresponding roots of unity,

 CO, CO0, CO), ... , CO/, 49

 Now let r be a unit modulo m, and Indd r = (p, po, p\ ps); we now assign
 to r the root of unity:

 Q(r) — (— 1 )pco?co? ... co?

 which we call a character of r, since the index system (p, po, p\ pK), and
 hence Cl(r), are uniquely determined.50 (Kronecker 1901, p. 444)

 We obtain all the possible characters by fixing primitive roots of unity co, coo, ■ ■ ■ ,coK,

 so that every tuple of roots can be represented in the form

 , ,k , ,h) , M\ .A'
 CO , COq , CO I . . . , Cliff ,

 where the k and k, 's are less than the cardinality of the corresponding cyclic group.

 When there is no fear of misunderstanding, we will, in the following, denote the

 underlying exponent system (k, ko, k\, • • • ) by (k) for short, and we will denote

 the corresponding character simply by

 nik)(r).

 48

 See, for example, Troelstra and Dalen (1988).

 49 As above, the powers of two require special treatment. In the discussion, Kronecker assumes that m is

 divisible by 8, in which case the units modulo that power of two form a product of two cyclic groups; the

 values of p and pg are the indices in those two groups, and to and too are the corresponding roots of unity.

 50 Es sie nun r eine Einheit modulo m, und Indd r = (p, pg. p\ />g); ordnen wir r jetzt die Ein
 heitswurzel:

 S2 (r ) = ...u

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 zu, so gehört zu jeder Einheit r eine und nur eine Einheitswurzel ß(r), welche wir einen Charakter von r

 nennen wollen, denn durch r is ja das Indexsystem (p. pg,...), also S2 (r ) eindeutig bestimmt.

 308 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Here, again, to each system of values (k, ko, - ■ ■) and each unit r there clearly

 corresponds a character £2(i)(r)-51 (Kronecker 1901, p. 445)

 In contrast, say, to Hadamard, the index (k) is not arbitrary; rather, (it) is taken to

 range over the specific representing data. But, the notation and organization of the

 proof enables us to ignore the details of the representation where they are not needed.

 Kronecker noted immediately that £2(*'(r) depends only on the value of r modulo m,
 since any two values with the same residue have the same index. He also notes that we

 have &k\rr') = £2(i)(r)£2(k\r'). The choice of representation has the further nice

 property that S2(*V)S2(* ](r) — &k+k'\r) where (k+kf) denotes the result of adding

 the elements of the tuples (k) and (k'), modulo the cardinality of the associated cyclic

 groups. Kronecker presented the first orthogonality principle:

 Yjn{0\r) = <p{m),
 (r)

 where r ranges over a system of residues of the units modulo m and (0) is the index
 of the trivial character, and

 for the remaining characters. Kronecker's proof requires unfolding the notation and

 calculating, but thereafter, the fact can be recalled and used in the above form. Similarly,

 he expressed the second orthogonality relation by the equations

 when ro is congruent to 1 modulo m, and

 ^nw(r) = 0
 (r)

 ^S2w(r0) = <p(m),
 (*)

 ^Qw(r) = 0
 (*)

 otherwise. He also expressed the dependence of a Dirichlet series on a character in

 terms of a dependence on (k), by writing

 1

 «=t p 1 ~pr~

 bezeichnen. Auch hier entspricht für ein festes Wertsystem (k, ko ) jeder Einheit offenbar r ein Character

 !2®(r)

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 51 "Wenn kein Mißverständnis zu befürchten ist, wollen wir im folgenden das zu Grunde gelegte Expo

 nentensystem (k, kQ, k] ) kurz durch (k) und den zugehöringen Charakter einfacher durch

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 309

 Kronecker's presentation provides us with an important lesson. The exposition is

 clearly designed to bring the central ideas to the fore and highlight relevant informa

 tion, but succeeds in doing so while providing explicit representations and algorithms

 throughout. This shows that although the moves toward abstraction that we have doc

 umented in this section can sometimes make it possible to suppress or even ignore

 algorithmic information, they do not require one to do so. In other words, the con

 ceptual reorganization opens the door to the use of other means of describing mathe

 matical objects and operations on them, means that can supplant algorithmic aspects.

 The question as to whether such means are permissible, meaningful, and appropriate

 to mathematics lay at the core of twentieth-century foundational debates.

 6.7 Landau

 Born in 1877, Edmund Landau received his doctorate at the University of Berlin in

 1899, having studied number theory under Frobenius. He completed a Habilitation

 thesis on Dirichlet series in 1901. Landau later presented proofs of Dirichlet's theorem

 in two textbooks, his 1909 Handbuch der Lehre von der Verteilung der Primzahlen

 (Landau 1909) and his 1927 Vorlesungen Uber Zahlentheorie (Landau 1927). We shall

 here focus on his presentation in the 1909 work, since the later presentation is already

 essentially what we have portrayed as "contemporary" in Sect. 3.

 Landau began by introducing the characters via the construction in terms of prim

 itive roots and roots of unity. However, the notation that he used to denote them

 changed over the course of the book. Initially, he used a notation that is quite similar

 to Dirichlet's notation for L-functions, writing

 where the index system ai, 02 ar, a, b serves to distinguish the characters just
 as Dirichlet's a, b, c, c',... distinguished his L-functions. However, after proving that

 there are <p(k) such characters, he simplified his notation to

 X(a\M2 a,M.h)(n),

 Xl("), X2(«) X<p(k)(n),

 and to Xx(") in the general case, thus adopting notation similar to both de la Vallée
 Poussin and Hadamard.

 But whereas Landau constructed the characters in the same way as Dirichlet,

 Dedekind, Hadamard, and de la Vallée-Poussin, he also recognized that they are char

 acterized by certain key properties and that it is only these properties that are needed

 in the proof. Indeed, after introducing the abbreviations for the characters, Landau
 wrote:

 ...I will prove four short and elegantly-worded theorems about them [the char

 acters], The reader may then quickly forget the rather complicated definition

 of these functions completely, and need only remember that the existence of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 310 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 a system of h distinct functions which possesses the four properties has been

 proved.52 (Landau 1909, p. 404)

 The four theorems that Landau was referring to are the following:

 Theorem 1 For any two positive numbers n andn',

 This "law of multiplication " holds for each of the h functions...
 Theorem IForn s n'(mod k),

 X(rtrt') = x(n)x(n').

 X(«) = X(n')

 Theorem 3 When n runs through a complete residue system modulo k, for x = 1,

 i.e. for the principal character

 however for x = 2,... h, i.e. for all other characters

 XX*(") = h'

 n

 ^Xx(n) = 0

 n

 h

 x=\

 Theorem 4 When n is fixed and the sum

 extends over all h functions, then

 h

 h

 ^Xr(«) = h for« = l(mod&),
 x=\

 ^Xj(n) = 0 for n fé 1 (modi),

 JT = 1

 52 "...ich werde über sie vier Sätze mit sehr kurzem und elegantem Wortlaut beweisen. Alsdann darf der

 Leser bald die recht komplizierte Definition dieser Funktionen vollkommen vergessen und braucht sich nur
 zu merken, daß die Existenz eines Systems von h verschiedenen Funktionen bewiesen worden ist, welche

 die vier Eigenschaften besitzen."

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 311

 therefore for all k — 1 other residue classes modulo kf' (Landau 1909, pp. 401 —
 408)

 These are exactly the four "important relations" given by de la Vallée-Poussin, and

 the analogues of the four properties enumerated by Dirichlet in 1840. What is novel

 here is Landau's explicit recognition that only these properties are used in the proof

 and that the specific construction is only needed to show the existence of a system of

 functions that satisfy them.

 Like Hadamard, Landau did not go so far as to allow the characters themselves to

 index the sum in Theorem 4 above, relying on a natural number proxy. But, like de la

 Vallée-Poussin, he gave an extensional classification of the three types of characters,

 although he also gave an additional description of the real characters in intensional
 terms.

 5-1 "Satz 1: Es ist für zwei ganze positive Zahlen n.n'

 X = X(")X("')

 Von jeder der h Funktionen wird also dies "Multiplikationsgesetz" behauptet...
 Satz 2: Es ist für 11 = »'(mod k)

 Satz 3: Wenn » ein vollständiges Restsystem modulo k durchläuft, ist für .v = I, d.h. für den Hauptcharakter

 X(») = X (»')

 Xx.v<") = h.

 n

 Xx.v<«) = 0

 h

 .v=l

 X.r('0

 dagegen für x = 2 h, d.h. für alle übrigen Charaktere

 Satz 4: Wenn n festgehalten und die Summe

 Uber alle Ii Funktionen erstreckt wird, so ist

 h

 h

 y, X-v(") = h für« = l(mod k),
 ,v=l

 y X.v (ii) = 0 für il ^ I (mod k),
 X— I

 dagegen

 also für alle k — I übrigen Restklassen modulo k."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 312 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Just as Landau's notation for characters changed over the course of the book, so,

 too, did his notation for L-functions. Initially, he denoted them in a manner similar

 to Hadamard's, writing Lx(s) = However, later on, after concluding his
 presentation of the proof of Dirichlet's theorem, Landau adopted a "more convenient"
 notation:

 Now let

 . , , v Xx(n)

 be the function corresponding to the character x(«) = Xx in); it is now more
 convenient to include the character in the notation,

 and, only when there is no fear of misunderstanding, write

 «=1

 Lis, x),

 L(s)

 for short, as before.54 (Landau 1909, p. 482)

 Landau did not explain why the modern notation is more convenient, but we will offer

 some suggestions in the next section.

 Landau's 1909 presentation is interesting because it has a transitional feel.

 Although he gave an intensional construction of the characters, he not only pro
 vided a thorough enumeration of their properties, but went out of his way to
 emphasize that these properties are all that matters to the proof. This is borne
 out by the fact that the division of characters into three classes can be carried
 out extensionally, without reference to their construction. And although he initially
 introduced natural number indices for the characters and L-functions and summed

 over these indices, he eventually adopted the modern functional notation for L
 functions.

 die dem Charakter x («) = Xx(") entsprechende Funktion; es ist jetzt bequemer, um die Charakter in die

 Bezeichnung aufzunehmen,

 zu schreiben, und nur, wenn kein Mißverständnis zu befürchten ist, wie früher kurz

 i ! ï V Xjt(«)
 L^s) = 2.—

 n=i

 L(s, x)

 L(s)."

 54 "Es sei nun

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 313

 When he wrote his 1927 textbook Landau 1927, Landau finally made the transition

 to a proof that is extremely close to our contemporary version. Indeed, he no longer

 defined the characters by describing how they are constructed, but, rather, defined them

 in terms of their characteristic properties. Moreover, he summed over the characters

 themselves, using expressions such as x(a). The only real difference between his

 proof and the one we presented in Sect. 3.4 is that he did not develop the general notion

 of a group-theoretic character, but, rather, defined them in terms of the particular

 group of units modulo k. This makes sense, given that the work is an elementary

 number theory textbook and characters are not needed for any other purpose. Roughly

 speaking, if we combine Landau's 1927 presentation with Weber's 1882 more general

 treatment of characters, the result is the presentation in Sect. 3.

 7 Changes in mathematical method

 In Sect. 4, we considered a number of ways in which characters are treated as bona fide

 objects in contemporary proofs of Dirichlet's theorem. We noted that none of these

 features are present in Dirichlet's original proof, for the simple reason that Dirichlet

 did not isolate or identify the notion of a character. Dedekind's 1863 presentation of
 Dirichlet's theorem did not use the term "character," but he did introduce the notation,

 X {n), for characters and identified the defining property of a homomorphism as their

 "characteristic property." As noted in Sect. 6.2, after Weber's paper of 1882 the general

 notion of a group character was in place, and all the subsequently published proofs of

 Dirichlet's theorem use the terminology of characters.

 But now, the set of characters modulo m can be defined extensionally, as the set of

 nonzero homomorphisms from (Z/mZ)* to the complex numbers, or intensionally, as

 functions defined by certain algebraic expressions involving certain primitive elements

 modulo the prime powers occurring in the factorization of m, and certain complex roots

 of unity. Even though the two definitions give rise to the same set of characters, proofs

 can differ in the extent to which they rely on the specific representations or the abstract

 characterizing property. Dirichlet's proof relied only on the symbolic representations.

 Somewhat surprisingly, both Dedekind's and Hadamard's division of the characters

 into the trivial, real, and complex cases was also described in terms of the characters'

 representations, even though the distinction is naturally expressed in terms of the values

 they take. Kronecker and de la Vallée-Poussin provided both descriptions, and even

 though Kronecker made it clear that all operations and classifications can be carried

 out, algorithmically, in terms of the canonical representations, his careful choice of

 notation and organization made the extensional properties salient. By 1927, Landau

 clearly favored the extensional characterization in his textbook.

 We have also observed that modern notation like ]TX x(n) allows us to carry out
 summations over the finite set of characters modulo m, but that this notation was

 not used by Dirichlet's early expositors. Dirichlet, Dedekind, and Kronecker all took

 summations to range over the tuples of integers representing the characters via an

 explicit algebraic definition, though Kronecker's way of letting a variable (r ) range
 over these tuples is more attractive than Dirichlet's use of a, b, c, c', In 1882,

 Weber wrote his sums with ellipses. Curiously, Hadamard in 1896, and Landau in

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 314 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 1909, assigned arbitrary integer indices to the characters and took sums to range over

 those indices. Of the proofs of Dirichlet's Theorem 3.1 that we have considered, the

 only one that takes summation over characters at face value is that of de la Vallée

 Poussin, who nonetheless adopted Dirichlet's 1840 notation Sx to denote such sums.
 By 1927, however, Landau had adopted the modern notation.

 Finally, we have emphasized the modern tendency to represent the dependence of an

 L-series on a character x as a functional dependence, with the notation L(s, x). Once

 again, de la Vallée-Poussin was the only nineteenth-century expositor of Dirichlet's

 theorem to do so, with the notation Z(j, / )■ We saw that Landau made the transition

 in the middle of his 1909 book and that, in his 1927 textbook, he relied exclusively on

 the notation L(s, x).

 At issue in all these developments is whether characters could be treated in much

 the same way as natural numbers and real numbers, or whether characters are different

 sorts of objects, whose treatment has to be mediated by more "concrete" mathematical

 representations. We contemporary readers of the nineteenth-century literature are now

 so familiar with a modern perspective that it can be hard for us to appreciate the reasons

 it took so long for the community to adopt it. Let us begin our analysis of the history,

 then, by reflecting on the countervailing pressures.

 We have had a lot to say about the notational and expressive conventions at play.

 The difficulty in settling on stable and useful conventions should not be minimized. For

 example, any mathematician writing a proof has to choose names for variables: Should

 one use m, n, and k to range over natural numbers, or x, y, and z? One desiderata

 is to maintain continuity with the background literature, but other constraints come

 into play: For example, one reason to favor m, n, and k may be that jc, y, and z are

 natural choices to range over other objects, like real or complex numbers, arising in the

 proof. It is significant, though not surprising, that Dedekind, 26 years after Dirichlet's

 proof was published, and de la Vallée-Poussin, fully 60 years later, both stuck with
 Dirichlet's choice of m and k for the first term and common difference in the arithmetic

 progression, respectively. Even today, q is often used to range over prime numbers in

 the definition of the L-series, and we still use the letter L exclusively, though most

 contemporary proofs use a and d in place of m and k.

 In a similar way, one has to settle on choices of notation. This also requires thought,

 even in places where the norms that govern the notation are fairly clear. For example,

 assuming one divides the set C of characters modulo k into the set consisting of

 the trivial character, C(nv, the set of real characters, Creai, and the set of complex

 characters, C^mpia, it is clear that a sum over C can be broken up accordingly:

 2>oc) = X F(X)+ X F(*)+ Z Fw
 X X^Qr/v X € Crval X € (-complex

 But, even so, one has to settle on the notation to express this relationship, and as the

 history of Dirichlet's theorem shows, it can be a long time before a particular means of

 expression becomes standard. The modern notation emphasizes the parallels between

 summing over sets C of characters and summing over sets C of natural numbers, but

 it is by no means obvious that conflating the two is a good idea.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 315

 In Sect. 2.1, we briefly touched on Frege's treatment of functions in the logical

 system of his Begriffsschrift (Frege 1879), developed in greater detail in Grundgesetze

 der Arithmetik (Frege 1893). Contemporary readers of the Grundgesetze may be struck

 by how many pages are devoted to explaining the syntax of the formal language.

 For those familiar with modern logic, Frege's lengthy explanations seem fiddly and

 pedantic. But, for Frege, getting the grammatical rules worked out was much of the

 battle. The syntax of a language only seems trivial when you already know how to

 speak it.

 But it would be a mistake to suggest that all the considerations that Dirichlet's suc

 cessors faced were "merely" notational. Means of expression often rely on substantial

 features of our understanding of the nature of that which is expressed. For example,

 consider the modern way of writing Dirichlet's famous example of 1927:

 f(x) =

 a if x is rational

 b otherwise.

 This bears superficial similarity to case-based definitions of number-theoretic func

 tions, or piecewise definitions of analytic functions, that were familiar at the time. But

 it was novel to base a case distinction on the property of being rational, and indeed,

 the notation masks significant assumptions about what it means to define a function

 on the reals. Consider Frege's brief account of the evolution of the function concept
 in 1891:

 In the first place, the field of mathematical operations that serve for construct

 ing functions has been extended. Besides addition, multiplication, exponentia
 tion, and their converses, the various means of transition to the limit have been

 introduced—to be sure, people have not always been clearly aware that they

 were thus adopting something essentially new. People have gone further still,
 and have actually been obliged to resort to ordinary language, because the sym

 bolic language of Analysis failed; e.g. when they were speaking of a function

 whose value is 1 for rational and 0 for irrational arguments.55 (Frege 1891, p. 12)

 Frege was not merely concerned to have a convenient notation to express the definition

 by cases. The definition of f above does that perfectly well, even today. The point
 is rather that the notation should come with clear rules of use. That is what Frege

 took to be lacking in the casual use of ordinary language and what he took his formal

 system to provide. Similar methodological concerns lie beneath the surface whenever

 we write lim,,-^ an to denote the limit of a sequence of real numbers, or / + J to

 denote the sum of two ideals in a ring of algebraic integers. There is nothing tame

 about the infinitary operations that underlie the notation.

 55 "Erstens nämlich ist der Kreis der Rechnungsarten erweitert worden, die zur Bildung einer Funtion

 beitragen. Zu der Addition, Multiplikation, Potenzierung und deren Umkehrungen sind die verschiedenen

 Arten des Grenzüberganges hinzugekommen, ohne daß man allerdings immer ein klares Bewußtsein von

 dem wesentlich Neuen hatte, das damit aufgenommen werde. Man ist weiter gegangen und sogar genötigt

 worden, zu der Wortsprache seine Zuflucht zu nehmen, da die Zeichensprache der Analysis versagte, wenn

 z.B. von einer Funktion die Rede war, deren Wert für rationale Argumente I, für irrationale 0 ist."

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 316 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 In contrast, foundational questions regarding the use of characters may seem mild.

 After all, it is easy to represent the characters modulo a positive integer k, and any

 character is determined by the values it takes on the finitely many residues modulo k.

 Nonetheless, the use and treatment of characters in proofs of Dirichlet's theorem bears

 upon central questions regarding the use and treatment of functions more generally,

 specifically regarding the relationship between a function and its various representa
 tions.

 Let us think of Dirichlet L-functions L(s, x) in quasi-computational terms. Such a

 function should take, as input, a real (or complex) value 5 and a character x and return

 a complex number. Let us set aside the (important) question as to what it means to

 take a real or complex number as input, or return one as output. What does it mean to

 accept a character as an input? Should one think of the character as being "presented"

 to the function as an infinite set of input-output pairs? Or as the list of finite values

 on the residues modulo kl (In that case, does the same conception work for function

 arguments that are not finitely determined?) Should one think, rather, of x as being

 some sort of procedure, or subroutine? If so, what sorts of procedures and subroutines

 are allowed in the definition of a functional with argument x ? Perhaps, instead, we

 should identify x. as Dirichlet did, with its representation in terms of an expression

 involving certain roots of unity. But recall that those representations relied on choices

 of primitive elements in the representation of k, although it turns out that the value of

 the L-function does not vary with different choices of the primitive elements. On our

 conception, does L somehow "depend" on the choices of primitive elements?

 These issues arise not only with respect to functional notation, but also with respect

 to statements involving quantifiers over characters. For example, the proof of the

 second orthogonality lemma requires the following fact:

 If n is relatively prime to k, there is a character x such that x (n) / 1.

 If we prove this as a separate lemma, we can then invoke the lemma for a given k

 to "obtain" a x with the relevant property. But what exactly have we "obtained"? A

 table of values? A procedure? A representation? If the lemma constructs a x via a

 representation of one sort, but our proof of the second orthogonality lemma relies

 on a different representation of characters, is it legitimate to apply the lemma in that
 context?

 The modern theory of computability and the semantics of programming languages

 offers various ways of thinking about computer programs which take functions are

 arguments. The issues are subtle and complex. In contrast, modern mathematics fol

 lowed a route whereby these subtleties are for the most part set aside. In particular,

 they are deemed incidental to the proof of Dirichlet's theorem. Roughly speaking,

 to make sense of a functional F(f) with function argument /, set theory identifies

 / "canonically" with its extension, a set of input-output pairs, without concern as

 to how / is represented or how (and whether) one can "compute" F(f). Set theory

 then imposes on mathematical language the restriction that the definition of such a

 functional F can only depend on the extension of /. (Or, put differently: modern

 mathematical conventions evolved to ensure the latter fact, and axiomatic set theory

 was designed to model and explain those conventions.)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The  concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem

 In the nineteenth eentury, the answers to the questions raised above were not at all

 obvious. Indeed, they are still debated among logicians and foundationally minded

 mathematicians today. Even for those inclined to dismiss those questions as irrelevant

 to the proof of Dirichlet's theorem, it would not have been immediately clear as to

 whether they really could be dismissed, and, if so, how that should be done. What may

 seem to be "merely notational" developments in the presentation of Dirichlet's theorem

 were part and parcel of the broader mathematical community's attempt to fashion an

 understanding of functions as objects that would better support the mathematics of the
 time.

 Setting aside issues of meaning, there may also be concerns about correctness. Any

 choice of notation that draws on an analogy between different domains presupposes

 that the analogy is appropriate, which is to say that sufficiently many properties carry

 over and that there are sufficient safeguards to bar the ones that do not. For example, a

 sum of the form XveS generally makes sense when S is finite and the term t(x)
 takes values on a domain with an addition that is associative and commutative, so that

 the order the one "runs through" the elements of S does not matter. Summing over

 infinite totalities is more subtle; it typically depends on having a notion of convergence

 for the domain in which f(jr) takes values and worrying about the order in which

 terms are summed. Now, choosing the notation £ t(x) may not be a good idea if it

 encourages users to transfer facts and properties between domains in an invalid way.

 This would explain why Dirichlet and de la Vallée-Poussin chose a special notation

 Sx for such sums, as such a new symbol would not come with any unwanted baggage.
 Adopting the contemporary notation may have required some kind of assurance that

 the intended contexts would be sufficient to control for proper use.

 In sum, mathematical conventions evolve, expand, and change. Any time a math

 ematician writes a line of text, he or she is situated in a tradition with implicit norms

 and conventions, and the line of text just written becomes part of that tradition. The

 fact that so many of these conventions are communicated implicitly does not make

 them any less important to mathematical understanding.

 When a mathematician writes a proof, the intent is that the inferences contained

 therein will be deemed by his or her colleagues to be correct and justified. Where

 the inferences are instances of familiar patterns, one desires that they will be easily

 recognized as such, so that the reader's effort is conserved for more substantial cogni

 tive tasks. When the inferences rely on assumptions that may be considered dubious

 or push familiar patterns of reasoning into unexplored territory, there is greater con

 cern not only as to whether the reasoning will be recognized as correct, but also as to

 whether it will be deemed appropriate to addressing the mathematical issues at hand.

 Thus, there are always strong pragmatic pressures to stick close to established con

 vention, and one should not expect fundamental aspects of the language and methods

 of mathematics to change in novel ways, unless there are strong forces pushing for

 such change.

 In the case of Dirichlet's theorem, we have seen some of the ways in which Dirich

 let's successors chose to modify, or "improve," his presentation. Now let us try to

 understand some of the perceived benefits. Kronecker's proof was explicitly designed

 to fill in information that was absent from Dirichlet's proof, in the form of explicit

 bounds on a quantity asserted to exist. Many of the other developments were explicitly

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 318 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 designed toward paving the way to useful generalizations. This was clearly Dedekind's

 intent, for example, in pointing out that the Euler product formula depends only on

 certain multiplicative properties of the terms occurring in the sum. Similarly, abstract

 ing proofs of properties of characters on (Z/mZ)* that rely on features specific to the

 integers modulo m paves the way to extending these properties to group characters

 more generally. Characters and their properties form the basis for representation the

 ory, which has been an essential part of group theory since the turn of the twentieth
 century (Hawkins 1971; Mackey 1980). Authors such as Hadamard, de la Vallée
 Poussin, and Landau were also interested in extending Dirichlet's methods to other

 kinds of Dirichlet series, which now play a core role in analytic number theory.

 But it would be a mistake to attribute all the benefits of the expository innova

 tions we have considered to increased generality. After all, these innovations play an

 equally important role in fostering a better understanding of Dirichlet's proof itself,

 by highlighting key features of the concepts and objects in question, motivating the

 steps of the proof, and reducing cognitive burden on the reader by minimizing the

 amount of information that needs to be kept in mind at each step along the way. It is

 true that these benefits often support generalization, but they do so in part by making

 our thinking vis-à-vis Dirichlet's proof itself more efficient.

 For example, proofs of Dirichlet's theorem that rely on explicit representations

 of the characters require us to keep the details of the representation in mind. Recall

 Dirichlet's original representation of an arbitrary character:

 X(n) = 9a(pßa)Yu>'Y ■ ■ ■

 Here the reader has to keep in mind that a, ß, y, y', and so on are the indices of n

 with respect to primitive elements chosen in the decomposition of the abelian group

 (Z//nZ)*, and 0, <p, w, co', and so on are the corresponding roots of unity. This infor

 mation has to be kept in mind throughout the proof, because the nature of the objects

 and the dependences of a, ß, y, y' on n may play a role in licensing an inference or
 calculation. Moreover, recall that we obtain all the characters by expressing all the
 roots

 9 = ©a, cp = <|>b, w = fic, w = fic',

 in terms of primitive roots of unity 0, <ï>, fi, fi',..., and letting a, b,... range over the

 appropriate exponents. Once again, this information has to be remembered throughout.

 Later proofs are easier to read simply because they do not require us to keep as much

 information in mind and highlight the relevant dependences when they are needed.

 One way of achieving this is by reorganizing the proof in such a way that some of

 the relevant information is localized to particular facts and calculations. For example,

 even if one resorts to representations to prove the orthogonality relations, if this is

 the only place they are used, then they do not need to be ready to hand when these

 relations are invoked in a calculation later on, where other analytic expressions and

 their properties are the objects of focus. Thus, modularity reduces cognitive burden and

 makes it easier to keep track of the global structure of the argument, providing high

 level outlines, or sketches, of the proof. Such restructuring paves the way to generality:

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 319

 Isolating context-specific details in well-insulated modules means that one can adapt

 the proof by changing the modules while preserving their external interfaces. But, to

 repeat, generality is not the only benefit: The restructuring improves the readability of

 the original proof as well.

 Even in situations where there is a lot of information in play at once, judicious

 notation and means of expression can make important relationships between the data

 more salient. For example, in Sect. 5, we saw that Dirichlet wrote

 1 1 v 1 1V 1
 !+/> 2 ql+lp 3 £—>
 1

 '<7

 + ...

 =—y ©"

 K ^

 ■amaQ-Pmbçi y,„CQ Ve'... log La b.c c>.

 where we would write

 ^ X(m)\ogL(s,x) = <p(q) "T +

 xe<Z/^Zj* /)=»i(mod(/) 9

 The second presentation highlights the relationship between the series L(s, x) and the

 characters; in particular, the value L(s, x) is multiplied by the value of the conjugate

 character, x\ at m in each term of the sum on the left-hand side. Dirichlet's notation

 obscures this relationship, since the logarithm of the appropriate L-series La.btC,C'... is

 multiplied by the character @~a",a <i>~ti"ibQ~y"<cQ~ynilC ... and the reader must sift

 through this expression to notice that the exponents -a, -b, -c, —c',... correspond

 to the subscripts of the L-series.

 The same problem applies to Hadamard's method of using arbitrary indices for the

 characters: Given a character \//v, there is no natural name for the index of its conju

 gate xl/v. Of course, one can introduce such a notation, but that requires keeping track

 of the relationship between the two notations, that is, the conjugation of characters

 and the associated operation on indices. And grouping the characters into different

 classes requires grouping the indices into different classes, again yielding an uncom

 fortable duality. (At least Kronecker maintained a monist consistency, insisting that

 all operations on characters are operations on their representations. So when is a

 character, Kronecker could write for its conjugate, since the conjugate character

 is obtained by negating the elements of the corresponding tuple.)

 Similar considerations may explain why Landau changed his notation for L

 functions in the middle of his 1909 work, from Lx(s) to L(s. x)- In the paragraph

 following his notation change, Landau showed that the theory of L-functions can be

 reduced to L-functions that correspond to particular types of characters, called proper

 characters. Roughly, proper characters modulo k are those that cannot be obtained as a

 character modulo K where K < k. To show that the theory of L-series can be reduced

 in the appropriate way, he proved that if x is an improper character modulo k and X

 is a corresponding proper character modulo K, we have (Landau 1909, pp. 482^)83)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 320 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 iO.X)=fl(l-^iofcX)]

 Here the ev are certain roots of unity, c is a natural number (which can be 0, depending

 on how many prime factors of k are contained in K), and the real part of s is assumed

 to be > 1. If Landau had kept his original notation, the left-hand side of the above

 equation would be written as Lx(s) where X — Xx- But how would we represent the

 right-hand side and, in particular, what index should we choose for XI We should note
 that one obvious choice for an index, x', would not be available, since Landau used

 this previously in connection with the conjugates of characters. In the text, Landau

 had identified a relationship between a character, /, and the corresponding proper

 character, X\ having to translate this to a relationship between indices would only

 clutter the exposition. These issues are compounded when, in later sections, Landau

 wanted to obtain functional equations to relate L(s,x) and L(l-s, ~x) and in doing so

 referred to the distinction between proper and improper characters (see, e.g., Landau

 1909 § 130). Using the old notation, we would need to keep track of three different

 subscripts to index the various characters.

 Consider, finally, the issue of uniformity of notation. We have already discussed

 concerns associated with the notation for summation over characters. But there is

 an obvious benefit to using the same notation for summing over finite sets of characters

 and summing over finite sets of integers, namely that the two operations really do

 share common properties. Indeed, the transfer is immediate via the Hadamard trick of

 assigning an integer index to each character. The option of introducing a new symbol

 every time one needs to index sums by finite sets of objects is clearly untenable, as it

 would result in a confusing explosion of notations. It does not seem at all surprising

 that Dirichlet's 1841 notation Sx was short-lived.

 To sum up, then, we have identified a number of advantages to the rewritings of

 Dirichlet's proof considered in the last section:

 • Essential properties of key objects (or expressions) were isolated, reducing the

 amount of information that someone reading the proof has to keep in mind at each

 • The organization of proofs became more modular, with information localized to

 very specific parts of the proof.

 • Expressions became more readable, since irrelevant details were suppressed, and

 the features that remained made dependences and relationships between terms
 more salient.

 • Notation became more uniform, highlighting commonalities between different

 step.

 domains.

 Changes like this often go hand in hand with attempts to generalize concepts and

 methods to other domains, since managing and controlling the volume of domain

 specific detail tends to bring to the fore aspects of the proof that transcend these

 specifics. But they also contribute to a better understanding of Dirichlet's proof itself

 and make the proof easier to read and reproduce from memory.

 Benefits such as these are often dismissed as merely "pragmatic" or "cognitive," but

 this downplays the fact that such considerations effectively shape and justify the norms

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 321

 that guide our mathematical practice. The history and philosophy of mathematics need

 to take them seriously.

 8 Conclusions

 Our history of Dirichlet's theorem has highlighted one mathematical development

 that encouraged a higher-order treatment of functions, but, of course, there were

 others. One important example is the development of functional analysis. In 1859,

 George Boole published A Treatise on Differential Equations (Boole 1859), in which

 he introduced the subject as a study of "variable quantities" subject to "known"

 relations between their differential coefficients. That work is noteworthy for its

 observation that differential operators can be viewed as algebraic expressions sub

 ject to certain laws. Integration was also viewed abstractly; in the expression y =

 f (p(x)Ax + c,

 the symbol / denotes a certain process of integration, the study of the various
 forms and conditions of which is, in a peculiar sense, the object of this part of

 the Integral Calculus. (Boole 1859, p. 2)

 Modern functional analysis takes the view that operations on functions like dif

 ferentiation and integration can themselves be viewed as functions, defined over
 spaces of other functions. In 1887, Vito Volterra published a seminal paper,
 "Sopra le funzioni che dipendono de altre funzioni" ("On functions that depend
 on other functions") (Volterra 1887), which adopted such a viewpoint. In 1901,
 Hadamard published Leçons sur le calcul des variations, which helped establish
 the foundations of functional analysis and, in fact, introduced the term "func
 tional." In 1930, Volterra published an English translation of a series of lectures
 he had given at the University of Madrid in 1925 (Volterra 1930), which began
 with a lengthy discussion of the notion. After presenting particular examples, he
 said:

 We shall therefore say that a quantity z is a functional of the function x(t) in the

 interval (a, b)when it depends on all the values taken by x(t) when t varies in

 the interval (a, b); or, alternatively, when a law is given by which to every func

 tion x(t) defined within (a, b)( the independent variable within a certain function

 field) there can be made to correspond one and only one quantity z, perfectly
 determined, and we shall write

 z = r|[«;>]|

 This definition of a functional recalls especially the ordinary general definition

 of a function given by Dirichlet. (Volterra 1930, p. 4)

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 322 S. Avigad, R. Morris

 The chapter as a whole describes an outlook that is essentially the contemporary

 mathematical viewpoint, yet in a way that makes clear that the viewpoint was one that

 the mathematical community was still getting used to.56

 Twentieth-century foundational efforts served moreover to unify the function con

 cept and provide a comprehensive framework to facilitate such higher-order treatment.

 In 1905, Borel, Baire, Lebesgue, and Hadamard engaged in their famous debate as

 to whether it makes sense to consider "arbitrary functions," not given by any rule or

 law.57 In 1914, Felix Hausdorff published his Grundzüge der Mengenlehre (Hausdorff

 1914), dedicated to Georg Cantor. The book established a modern set-theoretic foun

 dation and used it to support the development of point-set topology. After discussing

 the notion of an ordered pair, Hausdorff gave the concept of function its modern
 definition:

 ...we consider a set P of such pairs, satisfying the condition that each element

 of A occurs as the first element of one and only one pair p of P. In this way,

 each element a of A determines a unique element b, namely, the one to which it

 is connected in a pair p — (a, b). We denote this element associated to a, which

 is determined by and dependent on a, by

 b = f(a),

 and we say that on A (i.e. for all elements of A) a unique function of a is defined.
 We view two such functions f(a), f'(a) as equal when and only when the
 corresponding sets of pairs P, P' are equal, that is, when, for eacha, f{a) —
 /'(a).58 (Hausdorff 1914, p. 33)

 Thus, in the early decades of the twentieth century, the modern view of a function

 took root. A function could map elements of any domain to any other; one could specify

 a function by specifying any determinate law; functions could serve as arguments to

 other functions; and functions could serve as elements of algebraic structures and
 geometric spaces.

 Our study of the treatment of characters in number theory has focused on only one

 small part of the grand historical development that resulted in this way of thinking.

 Despite its narrow focus, the case study has illuminated some important factors that

 56 See also the Griffith Evans' helpful introduction to the 1959 Dover reprinting of Volterra's lectures
 (Volterra 1930).

 57 The "five letters" are translated as an appendix to Moore ( 1982), reproduced in Ewald (1996), volume
 2, pp. 1077-1086.

 58 "...betrachten wir eine Menge P solcher Paare, und zwar von der Beschaffenheit, daß jedes Element a

 von A in einem und nur einem Paare p von P als erstes Element auftritt. Jedes Element a bestimmt auf

 diese Weise ein und nur ein Element b, nämlich dasjenige, mit dem es zu einem Paare p = (a.b) verbunden
 auftritt; dieses durch a bestimmte, von a abhängige, dem a zugeordnete Element bezeichnen wir mit

 b = f(a)

 und sagen, daß hiermit in A (d. h. für alle Elemente von A) eine eindeutige Funktion von a definiert sei.

 Zwei solche Funktionen f(a), f'(a) sehen wir dann und nur dann als gleich an, wenn die zugehöringen
 Paarmengen P, P' gleich sind, wenn also, für jedesa, f (a) = f'(a) ist."

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 323

 contributed to the modern view. We have emphasized the difficulties inherent in devel

 oping a coherent, rigorous way of treating functions as objects, as well as concerns as

 to how one could do so in a way that is appropriate to mathematics and preserves all

 the information that is essential to a rigorous argument. We have also explored some of

 the benefits associated with the methodological changes. Many of these accrue to the

 ability of the new language and notation to highlight central features and relationships

 of the objects in question, while suppressing details that make it harder to discern the

 high-level structure of a mathematical argument. We also emphasized the importance

 of representing mathematical concepts and objects in order to capture those features

 that are uniform across different domains of argumentation, so that these uniformities

 can be packaged and used in a modular way.

 Finally, we have argued that understanding and evaluating the considerations that

 shape mathematical language and inferential practice is an important part of the history

 and philosophy of mathematics. Over time, mathematics evolves in such a way as

 to support the pursuit of distinctly mathematical goals. One of these is the goal of

 maintaining an inferential practice with clear rules and norms, one that allows its

 practitioners to carry out, communicate, and evaluate arguments that can become

 exceedingly long and complex. Another is the goal of promoting efficiency of thought,

 leveraging whatever features we can to extend our cognitive reach and transcend our

 cognitive limitations. The challenge remains that of developing appropriate ways of

 coming to terms with such "pragmatic" and "cognitive" considerations.59

 References

 Avigad, Jeremy. Methodology and metaphysics in the development of Dedekind's theory of ideals. In

 (Ferreirös and Gray, 2006), 159-186.

 Avigad, Jeremy. 2006. Mathematical method and proof. Synthese 153: 105-159.
 Avigad, Jeremy. 2008. Understanding proofs. In (Mancosu, 2008), 317-353.

 Avigad, Jeremy. 2010. Understanding, formal verification, and the philosophy of mathematics. Journal of

 the Indian Council of Philosophical Research 27:161-197.

 Avigad, Jeremy, and Rebecca Morris, n.d. Character and object. In preparation.

 Beaney. Michael (ed.). 1997. The Freue Reader. Maiden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
 Boole, George. 1859. A treatise on differential equations. Cambridge: Macmillan and Co.

 Bottazzini, Umberto, and Jeremy Gray. 2013. Hidden Harmony-Geometric Fantasies: The rise of complex

 Cantor, Georg. 1895. Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten Mengenlehre. Mathematische Annalen 46:

 function theory. Berlin: Springer.

 481-512.

 Cayley, Arthur. 1854. On the theory of groups, as depending on the symbolic equation H" = I. Philosophical
 Magazine 7:40-47. Reprinted in his Collected Mathematical Papers, volume 2, 123-130. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press. 1889.

 Chorlay, Renaud, n.d. Questions of generality as probes into 19th century analysis. To appear in K. Chemla,

 R. Chorlay, D. Rabouin, editors. Handbook on Generality in Mathematics and the Sciences.

 de la Vallée Poussin, Charles Jean. Démonstration simplifiée du théorèm de Dirichlet sur la progression

 arithmétique. Mémoires couronnés et autres mémoires publiés par E Académie Royale des Sciences, des
 Lettres et des Beaux-Arts de Belgique 53:1895-1896.

 de la Vallée Poussin, Charles Jean. 1897. Recherches analytiques sur la théorie des nombres premiers.

 Brussels: Hayez.

 59 See Avigad (2006, 2008, 2010), and the essays in Mancosu (2008) for initial philosophical attempts in
 that direction, and Harel et al. (2008), Harel and Kaput ( 1991 ) for a pedagogical perspective.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 324 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Dedekind, Richard. 1854. Über die Einführung neuer Funktionen in der Mathematik. Delivered as a Habli

 tationsvorlesung in Göttingen on June 30, 1854. Reprinted in (Dedekind, 1932), volume 3, chapter LX,
 428^138, and translated by William Ewald as "On the introduction of new functions in mathematics" in
 (Ewald, 1996), volume 2,754-762.

 Dedekind, Richard. 1888. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Braunschweig: F. Vieweg & Sohn. A later

 edition reprinted in (Dedekind, 1932), Volume 3, Chapter LI, 335-391. The second edition, with a new

 preface, was published in 1893, and is translated by Wooster Beman as "The nature and meaning of
 numbers" in Essays on the Theory of Numbers, Chicago: Open Court, 1901; reprinted by New York:
 Dover, 1963. The Beman translation is reprinted, with corrections by William Ewald, in (Ewald, 1996),
 volume 2, 787-833.

 Dedekind, Richard. 1894. Über die Theorie der ganzen algebraischen Zahlen. Supplement XI to the fourth

 edition of (Dirichelt, 1863), 434-657. Reprinted in (Dedekind, 1932), volume 3, chapter 46,1-222.

 Dedekind, Richard. 1932. Gesammelle mathematische Werke, volumes 1-3, edited by Robert Fricke, Emmy

 Noether and Öystein Ore, Braunschweig: F. Vieweg & Sohn. Reprinted by Chelsea Publishing Co., New
 York, 1968.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune. 1829. Sur la convergence des séries trigonométriques qui servent

 à représenter une fonction arbitraire entre des limites données. Journal für die reine und angewandte
 Mathematik, 4:157-169. Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), 117-132.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustave Lejeune. 1835. Ueber eine neue anwendung bestimmter integrale auf die
 summation endlicher oder unendlicher reihen. Abhandlungen der königlich Preussischen Akademie der
 Wissenschaften, 391-407. Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), 237-256.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune. 1837. Beweis eines Satzes über die arithmetische Progression.

 Bericht über die Verhandlungen der königlich Presussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Berlin.
 Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), pages 307-312.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune. 1837. Beweis des Satzes, dassjede unbegrenzte arithmetische Pro
 gression, deren erstes Glied und Differenz ganze Zahlen ohne gemeinschaftlichen Factor sind, unendlich

 viele Primzahlen enthält. Abhandlungen der königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 45

 81. Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), 313-342. Translated by Ralf Stefan as "There are infinitely many

 prime numbers in all arithmetic progressions with first term and difference coprime", arxiv:0808.1408.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune. 1840. Über eine Eigenschaft der quadratischen Formen. Journal

 fir die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 21:98—100. Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), 597-502.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune. 1841. Untersuchungen über die Theorie der complexen Zahlen.

 Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 22:190-194. Reprinted in (Dirichlet, 1889), 503-508.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustave Lejeune. 1863. Vorlsesungen über Zahlentheorie. Vieweg, Braunschweig.

 Edited by Richard Dedekind. Subsequent editions in 1871, 1879, 1894, with "supplements" by Richard
 Dedekind. Translated by John Stillwell, with introductory notes, as Lectures on Number Theory, Amer
 ican Mathematical Society, Providence, Rl, 1999.

 Dirichlet, Johann Peter Gustav Lejune. 1889. Werke, edited by Leopold Kronecker. Berlin: Georg Reimer.
 Edwards, Harold M. 1980. The genesis of ideal theory. Archive for history of exact sciences 23: 321-378.

 Edwards, Harold M. 1989. Kronecker's views on the foundations of mathematics. In The history of modern

 mathematics, ed. D.E. Rowe, and J. McCleary, 67-77. San Diego: Academic Press.

 Edwards, Harold M. 2007. Kronecker's fundamental theorem of general arithmetic. In Episodes in the

 history of modern algebra (1800-1950), ed. Jeremy Gray, and Karen Parshall, 107-116. Providence,
 RI: American Mathematical Society.

 Edwards, Harold M. 2009. Kronecker's algorithmic mathematics. Mathematical Intelligencer 31:11-14.
 Eistenstein, Gotthold. 1850. Eine neue Gattung zahlentheoretischer Funktionen, weche von zwei Elementen

 abhängen und durch gewisse lineare Funktional-Gleichungen definirt werden. Bericht über die zur

 Bekanntmachung geeigneten Verhandlungen der königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenshaften

 zu Berlin, 36-42. Reprinted in Eisenstein's Mathematische Werke, volume 2, pages 705-711, Chelsea
 Publishing Company, New York, 1989.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1748. Intwductio in Analysin Infinitorum, tomus primus. Lausannae. Publications E101

 and E102 in the Euler Archive.

 Euler, Leonhard. 1784. Speculationes circa quasdam insignes proprietates numerorum. Acta Academiae
 Scientarum Imperialis Petropolitinae 4. Publication E564 in the Euler Archive. Translated by Jordan
 Bell as "Speculations on some characteristic properties of numbers", 2007, arXiv:0705.3929.

 Everest, Graham, and Thomas Ward. 2005. An introduction to number theory. London: Springer.

 0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The concept of "character" in Dirichlet's theorem 325

 Ewald, William (ed.). 1996. From Koni to Hilbert: A source book in the foundations of mathematics, volumes

 I und 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Ferreiras, José. 1999. Labyrinth of thought: A history of set theory and its role in modern mathematics.

 Ferreiras. José, and Gray Jeremy (eds.J. 2006. The architecture of modern mathematics. Oxford: Oxford

 Frege, Gottlob. 1879. Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen

 Denkens. Halle: Louis Nebert. Translated by Michael Beaney in (Beaney, 1997), 84-129.

 Frege, Gottlob. 1891. Function und Begriff. Jena: Hermann Pohle. Reprinted in ( Frege, 2002), and translated

 by Peter Geach as "Function and concept" in (Beaney. 1997). Page number references are to the original

 Frege, Gottlob. 1893. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. Jena: H. Pohle, volume 1, volume 2, 1903. Excerpts

 translated by Michael Beaney in (Beaney, 1997), 194-223 and 258-289.

 Frege. Gottlob. 2002. Funktion-Begriff-Bedeutung, edited by Mark Textor. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and

 Basel: Birkhäuser.

 University Press.

 publication.

 Ruprecht.

 Gauss, Carl Friedrich. 1801. Disquisitiones Arithmeticae. Leipzig: G. Fleischer. Reprinted in Gauss' Werke,

 Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, Göttingen, 1863. Translated with a preface by Arthur A.

 Clarke, New Haven; Yale University Press, 1966, and republished by New York: Springer, 1986.

 Hadamard, Jacques. 1896. Sur la distribution des zéros de la fonction Ç (s ) et ses conséquences arithmétiques.

 Bulletin de la Société Mathématique de France 24: 199-220.

 Harel. Guershon, Evan Fuller, and Jeffrey M. Rabin. 2008. Attention to meaning by algebra teachers.

 Journal of Mathematical Behavior 27: 116-127.

 Harel, Guershon, and James Kaput. 1991. The role of conceptual entities in building advanced mathematical

 concepts and their symbols. In Advanced mathematical thinking, ed. D. Tall, 82-94. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

 Hausdorff, Felix. 1914. Grundziige der Mengenlehre. Leipzig: Veit and Company. Reprinted by Chelsea

 Hawkins, Thomas. 1971. The origins of the theory of group characters. Archive for History of Exact Sciences

 Publishing Company, New York, 1949.

 7: 142-170.

 20: 282-300.

 ematical Society 2: 215-249.

 Klein, Felix. 1893. A comparative review of recent researches in geometry. Bulletin of the American Math

 Kleiner, Israel. 1989. Evolution of the function concept: A brief survey. The College Mathematical Journal

 Kronecker, Leopold. 1870. Auseinandersetzung einiger eigenschaften der klassenzahl idealer complexer
 zahlen. Monatsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaf ten zu Berlin, 881-882.

 Reproduced in (Kronecker, 1895-1930), volume 1, pages 271-282.

 Kronecker, Leopold. 1882. Grundziige einer arithmetischen Theorie der algebraischen Grössen. Riemer,

 Berlin. Also published in Journal für reine und angewandte Mathematik, volume 92, 1-122, and (Kro
 necker, 1895-1930), volume II, 237-387.

 Kronecker, Leopold. 1887. Ein Fundamentalsatz der allgemeinen Arithmetik. Journal für die reine und
 angewandte Mathematik 100:490-510. Reprinted in (Kronecker. 1895-1930), volume Ilia, pages 209
 240.

 Kronecker, Leopold. 1901. Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie, edited by Kurt Hensel, B. G. Teubner, Leipzig.

 Republished by Springer, Berlin, 1978.

 Kronecker, Leopold. 1895-1930. Werke, edited by Kurt Hensel, volumes 1-5, B. G. Teubner. Leipzig.

 Reprinted by Chelsea Publishing Co., New York.

 Landau. Edmund. 1909. Handbuch der Lehre von der Verteilung der Primzahlen, volume 1. Leipzig: B. G.

 Landau, Edmund. 1927. Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie. S. Hirzel, Leipzig. Translated by Jacob E. Good

 man, as Elementary number theory, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.

 Legendre, Adrien-Marie. 1788. Recherches d'analyse indéterminée. Histoire de l'Académie Royale des

 Sciences de Paris, 465-559.

 Luzin, Nikolai. 1998. Functions. The American Mathematical Monthly 105:59-67 (Part I) and 105:263-270

 Teubner.

 (Part II).

 Mackey, George W. 1980. Harmonic analysis as the exploitation of symmetry: A historical survey. Bulletin

 of the American Mathematical Society 3: 543-698.

 Mancosu, Paolo (ed.). 2008. The philosophy of mathematical practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Monna, A.F. 1972. The concept of function in the 19th and 20th centuries, in particular with regard to the

 discussions between Baire, Borel and Lebesgue. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 9: 57-84.

 Moore, Gregory H. 1982. Zermelo's axiom of choice: Its origins, development, and influence. New York:

 326 J. Avigad, R. Morris

 Springer.

 Morris, Rebecca. 2011. Character and object. Master's thesis. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh

 Pengelley, David. 2005. Arthur Cayley and the first paper on group theory. In From Calculus to Computers:

 Using the Last 200 Years of Mathematics History in the Classroom, ed. Amy Shell-Gellasch, and Dick
 Jardine, 3-8. Washington, D.C.: Mathematics Association of America.

 Stein, Howard. 1988. Logos, logic, and logistiké. In History and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics, ed.

 William Aspray, and Philip Kitcher, 238-259. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

 Tappenden, Jamie. 2006. The Riemannian background to Frege's philosophy. In (Ferreirös and Gray, 2006),

 Troelstra, A.S., Dirk van Dalen. 1988. Constructivism in mathematics: An introduction, volumes 1 and 2.

 97-132.

 Amsterdam: North-Holland.

 2:97-105, 141-146 and 153-158.

 Volterra, Vito. 1887. Sopra le funzioni che dipendono de altre funzioni. Rend. R. Academia dei Lincei

 Volterra, Vito. 1930. Theory of Functionals and of Integral and Integra-differential Equations. Blackie and

 Son, Ltd., London and Glasgow. Translated by M. Long and edited by Luigi Fantappiè. Reprinted with

 a preface by G. C. Evans, a biography of Vito Volterra and a bibliography of his published works by E.
 Whittaker, New York: Dover, 1959.

 Weber, Heinrich. 1882. Beweis des Satzes, dass jede eigentlich primitive quadratische Form unendlich viele

 Primzahlen darzustellen fähig ist. Mathematische Annalen 20: 301-329.

 Wilson, Mark. 2006. Wandering significance: An essay on conceptual behavior. Oxford: Oxford University

 Press.

 Wussing, Hans. 1984. The Genesis of the Abstract Group Concept: A Contribution to the History of the

 Origin of Abstract Group Theory, translated from the German by Abe Shenitzer and Hardy Grant.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 Youschkevitch, A.P. 1976. The concept of function up to the middle of the 19th century. Archive for History

 of Exact Sciences 16: 37-85.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

