 

 

 

 

The Hidden Agenda of Science Studies for Developing Countries
Author(s): Stephen Hill
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 4, No. 3/4 (Autumn - Winter, 1986), pp. 29-32
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690409
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:49 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/690409?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:49:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 COMMENTARY

 The Hidden Agenda of Science Studies for Developing
 Countries

 Stephen Hill

 Department of Sociology and

 Centre for Technology and Social Change
 University of Wollongong, Australia

 Editor's Note: This paper was stimulated by Michael

 Moravcsik's 1985 4S Review article, "Science in the De-

 veloping Countries," and explores the assumptions behind

 the research program that Moravcsik proposes. It argues that

 science in developing countries needs to be viewed in full
 recognition of the relatively marginal role that national

 science is able to play in the flows of technology and knowl-
 edge that power economic development. An alternative re-

 search agenda for science studies follows this shift in perspec-

 tive. Responses to this commentary will appear in a future
 issue of S&TS.

 Introduction: Identifying the Hidden
 Agenda

 Professor Moravcsik, in his recent article, "Science
 in the Developing Countries," published in 4S
 Review,' has focused attention on developing coun-
 tries as an unexploited field for research in science
 studies. He points to two sources of motivation to do
 such research - one academic, the other practical. As
 an academic motivation, he proposes that developing
 countries offer a different domain to test theories and

 development process that is patently incorrect for
 developing countries. His assumed theory is that if a
 developing country builds science institutions as in
 the West, then "even a minor amount of improvement
 in science development would have a large impact."2
 This assumed theory never quite reaches the surface,
 but underlies almost all the research questions he
 proposes concerning, for example, "the nature of sci-
 ence," "motivations and justifications," "require-
 ments for productive scientific work," the popular
 development of "scientific thinking," "development
 and maintenance of scientific manpower," and so on.
 They all focus on building science, and assume more
 science is good. Such a view can otherwise be de-
 scribed as a "cargo cult of science. "3 As with New
 Guineans building ceremonial landing strips for air-
 craft during World War II in the false belief that this
 would attract planes loaded with industrial society's
 "cargo," the cargo cult of science assumes that by
 building good research institutions, appropriate de-
 velopment will follow.

 histories derived within advanced country studies. As
 a practical motivation, Moravcsik proposes that be-
 cause most of the developing countries are in the
 process of building their science infrastructures, "fac-
 tual information on the problems and circumstances
 that exist" would assist them.

 Both of these goals are commendable. But the re-
 search program proposal that follows is a distraction
 from the issues of real importance that developing
 countries confront. Developing countries are in a situ-
 ation of increasing disadvantage with respect to their
 dominance by advanced country-induced knowledge
 flows. They do not have time to play on the edges of
 "interesting" academic questions, but for the sake of
 survival, must focus very scarce science (and all other)
 resources where they can have maximum impact. The
 sort of "factual information" that Moravcsik proposes
 is marginal rather than central.

 However, the reality in developing countries is that
 science is but a marginal add-on to the knowledge
 flows that transform their social and economic life.

 The real thrust of technological progress is likely to
 follow from where the nation is positioned in relation
 to access to international technology, and the nation's
 bargaining power to obtain it on favorable terms. With
 massively higher expenditures on leading edge tech-
 nologies in the West, the developing nations can ex-
 pect to gain a marginal toe-hold on the future through
 national research, but that's all.4 Such a purchase on
 the future will however only follow if a clear priority
 focus is developed and the very scarce national re-
 sources are concentrated and supported to give this
 focus a strong power of resolution. Thus, a view of
 developing countries' science that assumes more sci-
 ence' and better quality' science per se are good avoids
 the more fundamental concern about how this re-

 search should be targeted to make any difference at all.

 What is basically wrong with the Moravcsik pro-
 posal is that, in spite of claims to the contrary, it
 assumes a theory about the role of science in the

 Furthermore, in developing countries, science is not
 bedded into a rich and well-prepared national tech-
 nological environment like it is in the United States,

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 4, No. 3/4 * 29

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:49:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 nection from the local knowledge-flow milieu, it also
 feeds connection with the international centers of sci-

 Germany, or Japan. So, no matter how "good" the
 science is, it simply is unlikely to connect with the
 surrounding user environment as it can in these ad-
 vanced nations. Thus, while good quality "un-
 directed" science in the West may produce spin-offs
 that quickly come to rest in commercial development,
 "spin-offs" in developing countries whirl out into a
 vacuum.s There is also a severe danger, indeed an
 almost universal danger, that because the technological
 environment of developing countries is poor, any
 research results that have real industrial potential will
 be swallowed up by international interests simply
 because local industry will be unable to translate this
 knowledge effectively into commercial practice. Thus,
 the more that national research concentrates on aping
 science-centered practices of the West to the detriment
 of developing a different science that first and fore-
 most links with a different environment, the more the
 research is likely to become irrelevant to pressing
 development issues. Even more insidiously, the mod-
 el is likely to aid and abet the very forces that hold the
 national technology and economy into international
 obeisance in the first place.

 While the science-centered model feeds discon-

 ence development (both in international legitimation
 of research topics that mirror advanced nation re-
 search concerns, and in career structures that are built

 on international discipline contribution rather than lo-
 cal problem solving). So the model feeds the very fires
 that are ignited from advanced nation application of
 science, that burn the center out of the fabric of the

 developing nation's own economy. The cargo cult
 approach may lead to a higher international profile in
 publications, but not to a central influence on the
 nation's own development process.'

 Such a set of conclusions simply cannot be seen
 when one stands within a narrowly defined per-
 spective that studies "science." It only becomes clear
 when one stands apart and looks at national science as
 one element in a far more pervasive knowledge gener-
 ation and flow process.

 It follows from this shift in perspective that one asks
 quite different research questions in science studies
 than those proposed by Moravcsik. First, a very high
 priority must be given to understanding how national
 science, whatever its quality,' can be effectively tar-
 geted towards the most critical development con-
 tributions in the particular national context. Second,
 an equally high priority must be accorded to under-
 standing how to construct knowledge bridges that link
 indigenous research with its social and economic envi-
 ronment. However, while these are priority questions
 in their own right, they also frame any other science
 studies questions about any aspect of the research
 process, and its comparison with practices in the

 West. This is so because, along with the priority ac-
 corded to targeting and linkages, one moves from a
 position (such as Moravcsik's) that assumes external
 power to be irrelevant to internal science direction and
 use, to one that assumes that external commercial and
 international power commands, transforms, and fil-
 ters the way science is conducted and used. We can
 choose in our science studies to conduct research as if
 such an environment does not exist, or we can choose
 to address our questions towards what can be done
 within an international power frame to foster greater
 power for national science. The ideology is written
 into the questions.

 Examples of More Appropriate Science
 Studies Questions

 Some examples might assist the reader to see the
 sort of science studies questions that follow from the
 shift in perspective proposed in this critique. The
 examples relate to the highest priorities - "tar-
 geting," "linkages," and the "research process." As
 will become quite obvious, the questions are not just
 about science, but treat science as one component in
 an overall knowledge-flow system; without know-
 ledge of the rest of the system, knowledge about
 science is irrelevant.

 Targeting

 1. What are key links in the technological system of
 the national economy that have been broken by
 the introduction of modernizing technologies?
 What are the key "gaps" in the national techno-
 logical system that only national science is likely
 to fill?

 2. What areas of scientific research can be selected

 and fostered to reintegrate higher and lower
 technological systems within the economy?

 3. What areas of fundamental research need to

 receive greatest financial support with respect to:
 - potential contribution to the development of
 critical national physical and social resources;
 - "generic" technologies that could have the
 greatest multiplier effect through the total
 economy?

 Linkages

 1. What can case studies of successful vs. un-

 successful technology transfer from government
 laboratories tell us about the conditions that de-
 termine success and failure in terms of:

 - laboratory liaison with users in formulating

 research questions;

 - the linkage of ongoing research with user in-

 terest;

 30 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 3/4

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:49:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 - the role of fundamental research in solving

 practical problems;

 - the influence of laboratory patterns of expec-
 tations and rewards on the encouragement or
 discouragement of effective targeting of re-
 search towards user needs, and involvement

 - international vs. local connectedness of the

 national scientific enterprise, as demonstrated
 in, for example, publication patterns, inter-
 national flows of scientists, and patterns of
 training?

 3. What are the effects of such transformations on

 of scientists in the full transfer process;

 local research and application effectiveness?

 - the role in laboratory/user liaison of alternative
 types of institutional mechanisms within the
 laboratory structure, such as commercial or
 liaison units, advisory committees, and joint
 researcher-user projects;

 - the technological "receptivity" of users to the
 technological changes introduced by labor-
 atory research;

 - the levels of associated technical support pro-

 vided during technology transfer;

 - the levels of associated managerial, capital,
 and other support provided during tech-
 nology transfer?

 2. How can "success" vs. "failure" in the appli-
 cation of national scientific effort be defined and

 indicated in, for example:
 - national economic contribution, impact on re-
 distribution of social and economic advantage,
 technological multiplier effect within the
 economy, and contribution to national re-
 source ownership and exploitation;

 - impact on upgrading the technological sophis-

 tication of the user environment;

 - contribution to the national scientific stock of

 knowledge; contribution to the international
 scientific stock of knowledge?

 Research Process

 1. How does the mode of formulation of research
 projects relate to subsequent application success
 in terms of:

 - disciplinary vs. problem centered/multi-

 Concluding Remarks

 The alternative perspective presented in this cri-
 tique does not deny that the particular conditions of
 science in developing countries are worthy of study.
 Rather, it suggests that behind the approach pre-
 sented by Moravcsik lies a hidden agenda that more
 accurately reflects the ideological location of science in
 advanced nations, and seriously distracts from an
 understanding of science in developing nations. In
 particular, the "cargo cult" perspective on science
 studies reifies national science above the total pattern
 of knowledge flows that create technological and eco-
 nomic development. The perspective assumes that
 what is good for science in America is good for science
 in the Third World, and that the radically different
 power of science within these two contexts is irrele-
 vant; the perspective further assumes that generalized
 rather than targeted growth of science is an appropri-
 ate strategy for a nation where scientific resources are
 extremely scarce. As soon as one looks outside the
 laboratory window in the Third World, it becomes
 very clear that these assumptions are simply incorrect.
 Meanwhile, there is a desperate need for information
 as a platform for Third World science policy, so that
 distraction in science studies towards the ideological
 assumptions of the West could be dangerously mis-
 leading to the science policy that evolves within the
 Third World. It could indeed contribute to retaining
 the Third World in the position of relative power-
 lessness they presently are seeking to escape through
 national scientific effort.

 disciplinary focus;

 - organizational strategies that encourage single
 vs. multidisciplinary approaches to research;
 - modes and efficiency of access to international

 scientific literature and data base sources;

 - modes and efficiency of access to national and

 international sources of information on the

 It is for this reason that the intention of this paper
 was to demonstrate that when one commences with

 the alternative assumptions that science is for the
 knowledge-poor, and is set within an internationally
 dominated power environment, a quite different
 agenda of science studies questions emerges.

 kind of problem being researched?

 2. In what ways is the national scientific capability

 transformed from a Western "universalistic" sci-

 Footnotes

 ence model according to:
 - organizational, bureaucratic, planning, re-

 ward, and status systems;

 - local cultural influences on, for example, the
 meaning of research, the actions that are ap-
 propriate in dealing with the organization's
 user environment, conflicts between mod-
 ernizing and traditional cultures;

 1. Michael J. Moravcsik, "Science in the Developing Countries:
 An Unexplored and Fruitful Area for Research in Science Studies",
 4S Review, 3, 2-13 (1985).

 2. Ibid. p. 3.
 3. For a detailed presentation of the way that such a "cargo cult" of
 science can distort research practice in a developing country, see
 Stephen Hill, "Contrary Meanings of Science - Interactions between
 Cultural and Personal Meanings of Research in a Developing Coun-
 try Research Institution." Pp. 195-230 in Stuart S. Blume (ed.),
 Perspectives in the Sociology of Science, London: John Wiley, 1977.

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 4, No. 3/4 * 31

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:49:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4. The present critique is intentionally a perspective' paper. The
 assertions here about the role of science in Third World countries are

 supported by a detailed analysis of science in the Asian and Pacific
 region. This evidence is presented in A. Rahman and S. Hill,
 "Science, Technology and Development in Asia and the Pacific - Progress
 Report, 1968-1980", UNESCO: SC82/CASTASIA II/ Ref 1, (1982).
 5. Even within the most advanced countries, the incidence of

 significant spin-offs from fundamental research is severely re-
 stricted. The assumed centrality of such a concept derived from the
 rather more spectacular advances that have followed in
 technologically-rich environments of the American space program
 massively funded electronics research, and so on. When looked at
 the other way around, i.e., in terms of the relative contributions to
 the pattern of technological changes that have occurred in general
 industrial development, the significance of "spin-offs" is radically
 reduced; "spin-offs" only come to rest when there is a highly
 receptive technological environment awaiting them. See R. M. Bell
 and S. C. Hill, "Research on Technology Transfer and Innovation."

 Pp. 225-274 in F. Bradbury et al. (eds.), "Transfer Processes in Technical
 Change." The Netherlands: Sijthoff and Noordhoff, 1978.

 6. This "other view" of the role of science in developing countries
 is now being recognized, not only within some academic circles, but
 also by policy decision-makers in the Third World. To take but one
 example, since UNESCO's 1982 CASTASIA II Conference (on Sci-
 ence, Technology and Development within Asia) - where Gov-
 ernment Ministers from the 26 nations of the region participated -
 there has been a growing realization within government circles in
 the region that there is a need to switch gears to a "demand" or
 environment-centered approach to science from a "cargo cult"
 perspective. This has emerged particularly in High Level Regional
 Conferences and Training Programs that the Center for Technology
 and Social Change has been organizing over the last two years.

 Endorsing Referees:

 Henry Etzkowitz
 William B. Lacy

 32 0 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES e Vol. 4, No. 3/4

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:49:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

