 

 

 

 

The analytic geometry of genetics: part I: the structure, function, and early evolution of

Punnett squares
Author(s): W. C. Wimsatt
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 66, No. 4 (July 2012), pp. 359-396
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23251736
Accessed: 19-05-2020 12:09 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2012) 66:359-396
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-012-0096-7

 The analytic geometry of genetics: part I: the structure,
 function, and early evolution of Punnett squares

 W. C. Wimsatt

 Received: 20 October 2011 / Published online: 15 May 2012
 © Springer-Verlag 2012

 Abstract A square tabular array was introduced by R. C. Punnett in (1907) to
 visualize systematically and economically the combination of gametes to make geno
 types according to Mendel's theory. This mode of representation evolved and rapidly
 became standardized as the canonical way of representing like problems in genetics.
 Its advantages over other contemporary methods are discussed, as are ways in which
 it evolved to increase its power and efficiency, and responded to changing theoretical

 perspectives. It provided a natural visual decomposition of a complex problem into a
 number of inter-related stages. This explains its computational and conceptual power,
 for one could simply "read off' answers to a wide variety of questions simply from

 the "right" visual representation of the problem, and represent multiple problems, and

 multiple layers of problems in the same diagram. I relate it to prior work on the evolu
 tion of Weismann diagrams by Griesemer and Wimsatt (What Philosophy of Biology
 Is, Martinus-Nijhoff, the Hague, 1989), and discuss a crucial change in how it was
 interpreted that midwifed its success.

 1 Introduction

 The Punnett square, first invented in 1906, rapidly became one of the most important

 conceptual tools of classical Mendelian genetics. It proved to be remarkably tolerant
 and adaptable to theoretical change. Used by theorists on different sides of major
 debates in between 1909 and 1926, it became a central tool as Mendelian genetics

 Communicated by: Manfred Laubichler.

 W. C. Wimsatt (EI)

 Department of Philosophy, Conceptual Foundations of Science, and Evolutionary Biology,
 University of Chicago, 1115 E. 58th St., Chicago, IL 60637, USA
 e-mail: wwim@midway.uchicago.edu

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 360 W. C. Wimsatt

 became Morganian genetics, and in principle1 should be capable of surviving the
 molecular revolution. The popularity, success, and adaptive radiation of its various

 forms arise primarily from their special virtues as problem-solving tools. This, in turn,
 has to do with their combinatorial, nearly decomposable—and ultimately—with their

 spatial character. This study will address several questions and explore the connection
 of this history to ideas of cultural evolution and transmission.

 I. Jim Griesemer and I have sought to exploit the particular suitability of scientific

 visualizations as materials to study conceptual evolution. I review features of
 diagrams we noted in 1989, add others that have since emerged as important,
 and comment on relevant differences between the Weismann diagrams of that

 project and Punnett squares. These review the features of Punnett Squares as
 model organisms for studying cultural evolution, and are analogous to reflec

 tions on the "Methods" section of a scientific paper. Since both "organism" and

 "methods" are unfamiliar, I focus in detail on their "natural history," particularly

 features that are methodologically relevant for studying cultural evolution.

 II. Punnett squares are fundamentally tabular arrays. Why describe them as visu

 alizations rather than as a specialized form of text? I explore logical features
 that make it appropriate to do so—features that they have simply as tabular

 arrays, and additional ones that they possess as special kinds of tabular arrays.
 These are crucial to their particular and highly innovative character as sci
 entific inventions. Their representational power and adaptability derives from

 their use as visual devices that exploit our cognitive heuristics effectively to aid

 understanding of complex relationships in genetics. These features: how their

 "physiology" makes them powerful scaffolding or symbionts facilitating a set
 of inferences crucial to the use and development of classical and cytogenetics,
 and didactically important for population genetics, explains their high scientific

 "fitness," and rapid spread and evolution as classical genetic developed.

 III. A closing discussion reviews some of the reasons why Punnett squares have

 proved to be such effective and widely adaptable tools.

 2 Properties of diagrams as good units for studying conceptual evolution

 In Griesemer and Wimsatt (1989), we argued that scientific diagrams in general, and
 Weismann diagrams in particular are ideal "study organisms" to track conceptual

 evolution.2 Many features noted then also fit Punnett squares and new ones emerge.

 ' The Punnett square was not invalidated by the revolution in molecular genetics. But hybridizations
 between whole organisms capable of producing an array of gametic types is not a central theoretical tool

 in the days of PCR. Thus the Punnett square has lost its centrality and methodological relevance, and may
 disappear entirely from molecular genetics texts. Such tools and analytical structures are still relevant for

 population genetics, so variants of the Punnett square are likely to survive there in any case.

 2 Diagrams are not the only plausible choices. In 1989, we suggested that equations also had many desir
 able properties to use as objects to track scientific evolution. Physical artifacts and possibly experimental
 procedures need to be added to this list, though both have their own special problems. (Basalla 1988
 discusses the former, and Clark and Fujimura 1992 the latter). The concrete reality and relative ease of

 dating physical artifacts is misleading. If we cannot find out in substantial detail how they were used and

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 361

 I take for granted issues discussed there: differences between biological and cultural
 evolution and heredity; whether the latter are Lamarckian or Weismannian and what
 that would mean3; the problem of how to characterize conceptual change on vari
 ous scales; and whether to regard diagrams as analogous to organisms or to traits of
 organisms in their evolution. We have recently elaborated our views on these issues
 Wimsatt and Griesemer 2007. I will mark points in the present analysis affected by
 these discussions.

 We have collected over 150 Weismann diagrams over a dozen years (we had 41 in
 1989),4 but Punnett squares are so easily found (for reasons I will explain below) that
 I collected more than 200 in about 3 months.

 Weismann diagrams and Punnett squares are clearly in the same phylum as concep

 tual organisms, but they occupy not only different conceptual niches but also different

 kinds of niches. Major differences deriving from the use of Punnett squares as com
 putational tools make features quite important for Weismann diagrams less so for
 Punnett squares, and conversely. I review six features discussed in 1989 (pp. 93-98),

 and comment on their sometimes different importance for Punnett squares. I add other

 features that have emerged since as important for both, or are particularly relevant to

 Punnett squares. The following properties of diagrams made them particularly good

 objects to study cultural evolution.

 2.1 Features originally noted

 1. Locality and 2. Well-boundedness We tend to regard the organism-environment
 boundary as well-marked, and different in this from cultural elements. This is a

 Footnote 2 continued

 manufactured, we are likely not to be able to understand many of their characteristics. Experimental proce

 dures are promising for their successive refinement and proximity to the problems laboratory scientists face.
 Notebooks of laboratory procedures represent a mother lode of rich data. (Schank 1991 has a theoretical
 framework for dealing with these.) But the expertise for appreciating all their characteristics rarely extends

 far beyond the participants in the original research.

 David Hull (in conversation) has suggested explicit definitions. These may work in some cases, but if
 these definitions turn on other key concepts, they would share many of the problems of locality discussed
 for concepts. For equations, you must be willing to track "non-fundamental" ones or else there will nei
 ther be enough instances nor enough changes in them to be useful. "Non-fundamental" equations in turn
 suggest mathematical models. These have some of the disadvantages of theories, but are usually both
 more localizable and more common, since most theories will have a cluster of associated models derived

 as tools for applying them in different areas. But a useful discussion of the evolution of models requires
 both knowledge of the detailed theoretical developments in an area—something which few historians or

 philosophers of science possess, and as well a large number of models with known genealogies and which
 differ in small respects so that they can be usefully compared. Despite all these difficulties, Jeff Schank
 has gotten lovely preliminary results in analyzing the 22 predator-prey models found in Hassell (1978)
 and the many (2-3 times more) other related models he found while doing so. See Schank and Koehnle
 (2007). Also see new theoretical perspectives on models that provide relevant dimensions of comparison,
 particularly Schank and Koehnle (2007), Wimsatt (1987) and Wimsatt and Schank (1993).

 3 See Chap. 9 of Callebaut (1993), especially the diagram of cultural inheritance (Figure 9-2, p. 428) and
 commentary on it (pp. 425-429). (That diagram, a descendant of Fig. 1 in Griesemer and Wimsatt, is a
 Weismann diagram for cultural inheritance!) See also Wimsatt and Griesemer (2007).

 4 I can provide a complete bibliography of the Weismann diagrams and Punnett squares identified so far

 for interested parties.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 362 W. C. Wimsatt

 potential problem for "populational" theories of cultural evolution.5 Unlike ideas,
 concepts, theories, or even propositions, diagrams are paradigmatically well-bounded,
 "small," and local in character. Anyone can tell the boundaries between a picture, and

 its surrounding text, and in this they are better than most things we could talk about for

 analyses of scientific change. We have no problems with counting them, and usually
 with agreeing on the count. Diagrams are also well-bounded, and their niche reaches
 out to include figure labels and explications in the text necessary to interpret them—

 usually within the surrounding page or two. Even with references elsewhere in the

 text, the very modularity of the figure is an aid: unlike ideas, figures and equations are

 usually numbered, and referred to by number.6

 Theories are "much larger" in terms of the work necessary to understand and ana

 lyze them than diagrams. Absent the confident formalism of logical positivism where

 theories just were a set of axioms and definitions, their boundaries have become less
 clear: theories shade off into applications, models, technologies, experimental exem
 plars, procedures, techniques, methods of data presentation and analysis, ad infinitum.

 Many of these they share with other theories, so these ambiguities make it difficult

 to tell where one theory leaves off and another begins, as well as where theory ends

 and other kinds of things begin. Moreover, I do not see interesting questions that such
 boundary disputes would answer. (Reasons for these boundary problems in cultural
 evolution are explored in Wimsatt and Griesemer 2007.)

 Other theoretical candidates, representations of important ideas or concepts, are also

 problematic. They occur in various contexts and are used for different ends and applica

 tions in a text. Context is often crucial to understanding them: an apparently monolithic

 concept may have multi-dimensional and often conflicting meanings. Recovering these
 is a laborious process requiring extended textual analysis, often of other works of the
 author over an extended period of time, during which the stability of these meanings
 is itself in question. (Authors change their minds over the lifetime of an argument,
 usually without warning.) Not surprisingly, such studies have relatively low reliabil

 ity—different students of the texts disagree about the meanings of key terms for the
 writer. Some studies surely require this kind of detail but their labor-intensive charac

 ter is inconsistent with doing many of them, as would be required for a comparative
 evolutionary analysis. The locality of diagrams is by contrast clear and simple, and
 simplifies many of the problems discussed below.

 3. Easy scoring, evaluation, and comparison of characters While one may need
 to reach into the text to interpret a diagram, most traits can be read off from the icon

 itself. At most, general knowledge of the intended significance of a diagram's proper

 ties are needed to score and interpret it. By contrast, most of the characters of an idea,

 even where intrinsic, must be evaluated by looking at the relational properties of the

 5 Levins and Lewontin (1985) discuss the difficulty of separating characterizations of the organism and

 environment because many of the relevant properties are relational (including the "organismal" property of
 'fitness' and the "environmental" concept of the 'niche').

 6 One must also add explicitly recognized assumptions, which can play a role like axioms or equations in
 derivations, and are often marked off in list or tabular form.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 363

 idea.1 (This explains the popularity of functional theories of meaning, e.g., Putnam
 1975, though when conjoined with an apocalyptic holism, these go too far.) Anal
 ysis of Punnett squares has revealed at least 25 characters, most easily and reliably
 scored. It should be possible to use formal taxonomic methods to analyze their descent

 relationships,8 probably unlike any of the entities normally studied by conceptual evo
 lutionists. To our knowledge, no-one has even tried.

 4. Easy determination of ancestry Determining ancestry for diagrams is easier than
 for ideas or (until recently) for biological organisms, for at least two reasons: (1)
 dating is relatively unambiguous, and not itself the subject of theory-mediated deter
 minations—something true for published text as well as for diagrams. (2) Citations
 (indicating ancestry) are much more commonly given for the sources of diagrams
 than for ideas. Comparable data for organisms over evolutionary spans of time would

 require both a rich genetic database and substantial analysis.

 Citations are common for diagrams, which are subject to copyright, and thus like

 quoted text. Authors also seem to have more invested in claiming originality for ideas

 than for diagrams. (So sanctions for pinching diagrams without attribution might be
 less, Hull 1988). But false claims for originality of diagrams should be easier to detect

 than for text, and far less contestable than claims over ideas. A person's reputation is
 too valuable a quantity to risk so cheaply.) Thus, lines of descent for diagrams are less

 likely to be hidden than those for ideas.

 Punnett squares differ from Weismann diagrams in two important respects. As com

 putational tools, they are treated more like ideas—not subject to copyright. (Punnett

 squares are often referred to as a "method" rather than as a kind of diagram.) For all

 their status as common currency, they are still commonly marked in ancestry by name,
 in interestingly different ways among different "dialect" groups, e.g., as the "chess
 board" and "checkerboard" methods by English and American authors, respectively.
 If ideas were presented in figures that were literally (e.g., photographically) copied,
 copyrights would apply and explicit citations would remain common. Here the second
 difference enters: Punnett squares are basically tables. Absent special artwork (which

 they often contained) tables may be more easily (and cheaply) typeset than literally
 copied from the other source.9 Punnett squares with artwork—especially attractive

 7 I treat graphical marks that are parts of the figure are intrinsic properties of it, though their interpretations
 are mediated both by general conventions for reading diagrams (e.g., that time is represented from left
 to right in graphs), and by more specific conventions for reading diagrams of that type, (such as that the
 "starting point" for a cellular descent tree is interpreted as a zygote). Elements of the diagram may also
 refer—iconically or conventionally—to features of the external world. Symbol keys are special. It is clear

 by convention that the key is supposed to tell what the symbol means, and one also understands the key
 by seeing how the symbol is used. Perhaps symbol keys are more like explicit definitions. The relational
 character of concept meaning seems more analogous to representational features of the diagram that depend

 upon and become apparent only from the surrounding text.

 8 Cladistic methods assume monophyly, which is problematic given the multiple parentage and cross
 lineage borrowing characteristic of scientific and more generally of cultural evolution on the time scales

 appropriate for our analysis. This seems a bigger problem for Punnett squares than for Weismann diagrams
 because of feature 11 below, though analysis should probably start using cladistic methods in a purely

 heuristic and exploratory fashion for the purely pragmatic reason that those tools exist.

 9 The cost is not just that of production, but also of seeking (and often paying for) permissions.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 364 W. C. Wimsatt

 artwork—were more likely to be copied and cited. If just typeset as tables, they were

 more likely to be reset anew; if anything was cited, it would be the experimental work
 on which they were based.

 5. (Relative) context-independence Greater ease in interpreting diagrams than ideas

 or concepts flows from their relatively well-delimited context-dependence. First, most
 character traits of diagrams are intrinsic properties, which can be read off from the

 icon without reference to context at all, or at most to the generic context of diagrams of

 that type. The conception of a diagram as a cellular descent tree is sufficient to read off

 the properties of most diagrams of Weismannism. This is contextual knowledge not

 specific to any one of the diagrams. Many features of Punnett squares follow because
 they are tabular arrays, and we have conventions for reading and interpreting tables
 or arrays. Second, relevant context for diagrams seems generally much smaller and

 more compact than the relevant context for ideas. This should break down only when

 the interpretation of a feature of a diagram is dependent on the interpretation of an

 idea or ideas about which there is some argument.

 More than diagrams of Weismannism, Punnett Squares were neutral across differ

 ent theoretical contexts,10 and widely used by all sides in arguments over the nature

 of heredity and hereditary units. One need not read the arrays unaffected by which
 theory you believed. They were not absolutely neutral. Punnett's earliest interpre
 tations best fit an abstract Mendelism of algebraic factors, while the emergence of
 their interpretation as a gametic cross-multiplication naturally suggested some sort
 of material embodiment. Accounts of underlying processes differed for Bateson and
 Punnett's embryologically inspired reduplication theory of linkage from the Morgan

 school, who invoked differential crossing-over and recombination rates among factors
 linearly arranged along a physically and theoretically characterized chromosome. One
 could hardly have imagined more different sorts of mechanisms to explain the same
 phenomena. This affected some of the associated iconography (Morgan's Drosoph
 ila group often represented relevant differences with icons of different chromosomes
 (Morgan et al. 1915); Bateson and Punnett never did). But these differences had no

 impact on how the diagram was constructed and used at the time they spread through
 out genetics. There was no critical reason to tie Punnett squares to chromosomes until

 more than two decades later, when the chromosome theory was widely accepted and
 new theoretical developments allowed a new cytogenetic function for the diagrams

 But even when theoretically neutral, diagrams may not be pragmatically neutral: if the activities they

 serve become less relevant to the research of an area, they may be relegated to a teaching role, or even die off

 through simple inattention to their problems. Punnett squares are essential to the presentation of classical

 genetics, and survive in texts even when they no longer satisfy problem-solving functions for researchers.

 Many more molecular texts go directly to how the molecular machinery works—usually without Punnett
 squares or discussion of classical breeding experiments. Population geneticists have more need, not only of

 their own special (locus-invariant) versions of Punnett squares but also the structure of their theory is more

 closely allied with the results of classical genetics and to classical (gamete-invariant) Punnett squares. This
 association might change through elaboration of the interest of evolutionists and evolutionary geneticists
 in development and developmental genetics. The latter is now pursued in quite a molecular fashion, but

 even if it were not, it is not clear that Punnett squares would have any other than a very peripheral role in
 presentation of results there.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 365

 based directly on aspects of chromosome morphology and behavior. This will be
 discussed in the second paper.

 The interpretation of diagrams may be relatively independent of context while their

 fitness to make the points in question changes significantly. The context—particularly

 the problem context—leads to introduction of the diagram, and determines its fitness.
 A diagram particularly useful in conveying an idea will be used if known and avail

 able. If existing diagrams are relevant but not quite right, context enters crucially in
 the explanation of changes made to accomplish the new purposes of the different con

 text. The diagram's context thus points to relevant features of their ecology to identify

 selection pressures affecting their evolutionary change. The desire to communicate
 should lead authors to mark these selective factors clearly. By contrast, identifying

 relevant selective factors in nature is often the most difficult and hotly contested part
 of an adaptationist analysis (Gould and Lewontin 1979).

 6. Portability Greater context-independence of diagrams makes them easier to study,
 but also easier to borrow. Similar reasoning applies for equations.11 Less context
 dependence makes them easier to understand, and more likely to be borrowed.
 Diagrams and equations thus have a greater potential for migrating out of their
 original contexts. With less context-dependence, there is also a greater chance that
 they will prove to be useful elsewhere, i.e., they have a greater chance of being able
 to migrate into and successfully colonize new contexts. In other words, their heritabil

 ity of fitness is higher. This is a truly fundamental desideratum of evolving objects.
 These consequences of context-independence naturally make diagrams good concep
 tual organisms, serving both to increase their reproductive rates and also to increase

 their probability of evolution through adaptive radiation into new contexts.

 Compare practices governing ideas imported through quotation. Quote marks sty

 listically isolate the quotation and indicate that the quoted material is not in its natural

 context. Quotation is frowned upon as a way of expressing one's own ideas, as opposed
 to accurately expressing the ideas of others—particularly relevant if they are about to
 be attacked. No similar onus attaches to borrowing diagrams. Publishers of profusely
 illustrated elementary textbooks—no doubt strongly influenced by images of large
 royalty costs and desires for a unity of style—are an exception. Such books are prob
 ably the biggest single source of redrawn illustrations, with journals having strong
 style requirements a likely close second. (See, e.g., the redrawn version of Wilson's
 Weismann diagram (1896, Fig. 5, p. 11) as Fig. 1, p. 243 of Gilbert (1985) textbook
 on Developmental Biology.)

 2.2 New features

 Features not in our original list will be marked with "g" or "p" postscripts (for "gen

 eral" or "Punnett," respectively) to signify whether they seem to apply more generally

 or may be special to Punnett squares (or other sufficiently similar devices).

 11 Equations are precisely localized, and though often not as readily understood as diagrams, are almost
 invariably items of high importance since they are both central reflections of the assumptions and structure

 of a theory or model, and also crucial tools for its application to new problems.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 366 W. C. Wimsatt

 7g. Compactness Diagrams are compact representations of complex relationships—
 the old saw that a picture is worth a thousand words—another reason for borrowing
 them. True for Weismann diagrams, it is even more so for Punnett squares. Equa
 tions are also paradigmatically compact. All could count as cultural "informational
 macromolecules." As concentrated carriers of information, more effective to some

 audiences, and generators of further perspectives and ideas, there are ample reasons

 for borrowing them, or for using diagrams rather than or to supplement words. Prob
 lems particularly suited for pictorial representation tend to have a multi-dimensional

 character (Wimsatt 1991). This contributes to the high information density of their
 representations, and makes them less suitable for presentation or analysis via a linear

 text stream.12 This is true of Weismann diagrams and—even more clearly—of Punnett
 squares, as we will see below.

 8g. Number of cases With just 41 Weismann diagrams found in 1989, it was already

 clear that there would be many more distinguishable variants of a successful diagram

 than of a successful theory or concept. With 150+ of each variety known and more
 to be discovered, it is now abundantly clear! The emphasis is on "distinguishable,"
 and perhaps "recorded." Hull (1988) demonstrated large variations among scientists
 who claim to hold the "same" theory: variations in the finer details of exactly what
 they believe, differential weightings placed on scientific principles held in common,

 how they use and what they know about different applications of the theory, and the
 like.13 As the "populational" view of theories replaces the older "typological" view,
 evolutionary models of scientific change become increasingly attractive and inevitable.

 But how do we detect this variability? The finer discriminations required to individ

 uate variants of a theory are not trivial, and seem to require more specialized knowledge
 and insight than philosophers, historians, sociologists of science, or any single scien

 tist could muster, and enormous efforts to find, record, and analyze the differences.
 This diversity emerges from the scientific community: individual scientists often are

 not aware of these differences, or do not mark them as important.14 Without the labor
 (and exceedingly rare opportunities) for studies like Hull's remarkable 20-year longi

 tudinal "insider's" study of nearly 100 systematists as they worked their ways through
 a scientific revolution, no-one would ever bother to record in any detail what 20 or

 12 This issue alone should raise questions about translatability theses which, during the hegemony of lin
 guistic philosophy, regularly claimed that anything meaningful was translatable into language, which was

 taken to mean speech or text.

 ' ^ I have developed a model of scientific change utilizing "generative entrenchment," or degree of use and

 dependence of individual scientists on various elements of the theory and the means of its application. Var

 iability of response among scientists in how they deal with specific anomalies is predictable in terms of the

 differential generative entrenchment they have for the same principles because of the different applications
 they have been making of the theory in their diverse conceptual and experimental niches. See Wimsatt
 (1999, 2001), Wimsatt and Griesemer (2007), and also Douglas Allchin (1991) ecological model of theory
 competition and differentiation.

 14 Scientists are usually quite aware of differences between their views and those of their collaborators or

 competitors. (Whether they perceive—or remember—them accurately is another matter, as Hull shows.) But

 these locally perceived differences, taken individually, do not yield a broad overview. Secondly, differences

 within the community are usually papered over when individuals represent "the views of the community"
 to those outside. See Hull (1988).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 367

 50 or 90% of the scientific community thought at different historical times. And for
 many problems that labor may be in search of answers to the wrong question.

 Diagrams, tables, and other graphical devices are widely used in research and

 teaching, and widely recorded in research papers and textbooks.15 Large numbers and
 relative ease of analysis provide opportunities for the study of conceptual evolution
 with higher resolution, broader scope, lower cost (primarily in time and necessary
 specialist's knowledge) than one could have thought possible. (Diagrams and tables
 are like Drosophila—the geneticist's ubiquitous fruit fly. By contrast, tracking theo

 ries is like trying to do genetics by breeding elephants). The questions about scientific
 evolution one is likely to address most effectively are bound to change with this dif

 ferent kind of resource. But it should also give workable purchase on new questions,
 which were not answerable before. And just as there are many more diagrams than
 theories, there are many more of some types of diagrams than others. As adaptable

 computational tools, there are many more Punnett squares than Weismann diagrams.
 There is usually only one Weismann diagram per book. For Punnett squares, 5-8 or
 more is common. Texts like Babcock and Clausen (1918) or Sturtevant and Beadle
 (1939) have 20 or more.

 9g. "One Shot" illustrations versus working tools Virtually all Weismann diagrams
 we considered in 1989 were "one-shot" illustrations of a theoretical claim. The use of

 cellular descent trees in the comparative description of gametogenesis in the life his

 tory of diverse kinds of organisms applies very similar diagrams as descriptive tools for

 comparative morphology, and requires many such diagrams. These fill the third (1925)
 edition—a large fraction of the 500-plus illustrations—of E. B. Wilson's book. The
 most common diagram in that book is what Tufte (1983) calls the "small multiple"—a

 compound diagram or illustration with homologous (or analogous) instances of the
 same structure drawn over and over again for comparative purposes (in this case, in

 different organisms, with the individual figures often taken or redrawn from the works

 of different authors).

 Punnett squares also serve taxonomic functions—to describe and classify the hered
 ity of combinations of characters in the various organisms studied. This gives them

 15 This confident statement hides an important—even a critical—problem for students of scientific change.
 Libraries know that they should keep old journals, but old textbooks—unless the authors are famous—are
 remaindered, offered in library sales, and increasingly in the last two decades, ignored by the growing used

 book market. Kuhn tells us that a science that fails to forget its history is lost, and old science textbooks

 are of little value to most people. Used science texts do not sell and bring so little that many book dealers

 no longer buy them. They are often simply discarded or shredded. The chance of finding all editions of
 an important textbook even in one of our leading university research libraries is small. These texts are
 complex ecosystems for hundreds of diagrams and tables of different sorts, and tracing their respective
 fates through successive editions is often a sensitive indicator of what is going on with the application
 and teaching of a scientific theory by and to those "in the trenches." We are losing the data necessary to
 study an unusually and multiply accessible case—that of scientific evolution—and at as great a rate as
 we lose biological variability with the juggernaut mass destruction of tropical rain forest. Steve Gould has

 reported (personal conversation) similar problems in pursuing some of his own research on illustrations of
 the evolution of man in scientific and semi-popular textbooks. We should deal with this. A few thousand
 volumes, well-chosen and collected editions of key textbooks would provide an enormous reserve wealth

 of data for future researchers, and if we could enlist the aid of amateur collectors, many a university library

 could very cheaply acquire such a resource. I have more detailed suggestions for how to accomplish this.

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 368 W. C. Wimsatt

 Parents
 (P.)

 F,
 Gametes

 ©-1

 ©«  ©?.

 Yellow
 Round

 Yellow
 Round

 ©™

 Yellow
 Round

 Yellow
 Round

 F2

 ©

 ©e  /^cVi V

 hc^)Yr

 Yellow
 Wrinkled

 Yellow
 Round

 Yellow

 Wrinkled

 Yellow
 Round

 Green
 Round

 Green
 Round

 ©s

 Yellow
 Round

 ©5 Yellow

 Round

 & Yellow

 Round

 Yellow

 Wrinkled

 Green
 Round

 Green
 Wrinkled

 Fig. 27. Diagram showing the independent assortment in peas of two pairs of characters in
 which dominance is complete. In a cross between a plant homozygous for yellow and round
 seeds and a green, wrinkled-seeded one, the appearance, genotype, and gametes of parents
 and Fx are shown. The results of random union between the four types of gametes formed
 by the Fi heterozygote are presented in the F2 checkerboard.

 Fig. 1 Sinnott et al. (1950), Fig. 27, p. 63

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 369

 another shared characteristic with "taxonomic" Weismann diagrams—they have a
 specific identity rather than the broad schematic character appropriate to a general
 conceptual illustration. Roughly a dozen classic experiments or series of experiments
 involving specific characters of specific organisms performed by specific scientists
 are cited and drawn upon, then redrawn again and again. The all-time winner among
 Punnett squares (the analogue to Wilson (1896) diagram of Weismannism in popular

 ity) is the case of yellow versus green and round versus wrinkled peas. It takes two of

 Mendel's original characters—indeed the two which are easiest to diagram iconically.
 Figure 1 is descended from a diagram in Conklin (1915), with ancestors going back
 to Darbishire (1911) and Walter (1913). In its iconic form, it is probably the diagram

 most commonly reproduced and cited, rather than reset.

 A diagnostic feature of working tools is also reflected in this case: they will be used

 more than once. Thus, if a kind of diagram is a working tool, we should find multiple

 variants of it in the same book. And conversely, there is no reason to have multiple

 conceptual illustrations of the same idea in one book, so multiple diagrams of a given

 type indicate its use as a representational tool for a class of related problems, objects,
 structures, or data structures. This is just what we find for Punnett squares. They are

 used more abstractly than Wilson's taxonomic diagrams: we almost never find books in

 which the same hereditary pattern (say a 9:7 ratio) is diagrammed more than once, even

 though additional cases are often listed to support the importance of that hereditary

 pattern with its representative diagram.16 Instead, each diagram reports a paradigmatic

 experimental case reflecting a different kind of hereditary pattern. The exemplary case
 becomes a pattern-matching template that the reader is expected to learn to apply and

 recognize in their own research. Sinnott et al. through various editions (e.g., 4th ed.,

 1950) present a canonical collection of eight Punnett square templates for di-hybrid
 crosses. Seen all together, their use as pattern recognition tools becomes clear. Like

 the various figures of the syllogism that students of Aristotelian logic were expected

 to learn, they are perhaps even richer in the diverse types of information one could
 bring to them or get out of them.

 Punnett squares were used as tools for computation, bookkeeping, and teaching a

 complex combinatorial theory. They are extremely compact data structures for stor

 age and rapid recall of many different kinds of data. In some contexts, they seem little
 more than a useful and elegant way of teaching genetics. This impression would be

 misleading. Their structure elegantly reflects fundamental causal features of the the
 ory.17 Their 2-dimensional form represents the diploid and sexual nature of metazoan
 genomes. Not even limited to bisexual organisms, they were also used for mating

 16 This is surely a context-dependent difference—one as it were in the eye of the beholder. To a comparative

 anatomist or morphologist, the different cases reported in Wilson's "small multiples" were not an exhaustive

 survey of taxa, but as broad and representative sample as he could find. Thus, the various "highly specific"

 diagrams in his figures could each themselves be taken as representative abstractions—a first guess at what
 the anatomist or develop-mental biologist could expect to find for species in that taxon, or phylogenetically

 closest to that species.

 17 This point is also nicely made by Lindley Darden in her exemplary book, Theory Change in Science:
 strategies from Mendelian genetics (Darden 1991). Her point was directed to hybrid-cross (tree) diagrams,
 probably even more commonly used (particularly by the Morgan school) than Punnett squares, but it also
 fits here. See her discussion of the use of diagrams pp. 192-196.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 370 W. C. Wimsatt

 systems with multiple sexes or mating types in protists and self-incompatibility sys
 tems in plants—see the many examples in Darlington (1937). Punnett squares were

 for decades fundamental tools to apply relevant theory, not merely popular dydactic
 devices, and were used essentially universally.18

 lOp. and lip. High selection intensities for crucial characters, and near-decom
 posability of phenotypes Key innovations in Punnett squares spread with unusual
 rapidity—the use of a gamete-invariant format, explicit representations of gametes

 along the margins, and standardized orders for presentation of the gametes, notation

 for genotypes in the cells, and the common mapping of phenotypic characters into
 the cells. (Other features became universal for more specialized applications, such as

 the use of algebraic multipliers for relative frequencies of gametic types in population

 genetics). Once introduced, many of these characters became essentially universal
 within 2-5 years, close to the fastest response possible. They appeared in other work

 within a year or two, and it took much of that time to revise and print a book! Since
 most series of editions had separations of 5 years or more, there were unavoidable lags

 that masked the true rate of spread of the ideas, which was truly remarkable.

 Some of these changes gave big improvements in problem-solving ability and

 spread rapidly to different authors in a manner worthy of special attention. Boyd and
 Richerson (1985) note that cultural evolution involves "horizontal transmission," like

 diseases—i.e., from author to author. But the spread here is multiply horizontal: When

 picked up by other authors, desirable features are not only inherited by all diagrams of
 that specific type but also adopted wholesale and applied to all Punnett squares—they
 are spread within the cultural objects. This kind of cross-lineage "horizontal infection"

 is second-order, and resembles more the (horizontal) plasmid-mediated spread of resis
 tance to antibiotics between bacterial strains, each (horizontally) transmitted to hosts.

 Because the value of such features is relatively context-independent (if they work for

 one type of Punnett square, they are likely to work for most) and nearly decompos
 able (they can be changed without changing other features), the author generalizes

 18 Failure to use them is rare. William Castle, a premier exception, appeared to prefer algebra. Though he
 called them "ingenious" (1916, p.104), his praise is patronizing: "A checkerboard ... will be found very
 clarifying ... for the beginner, particularly if he is not accustomed to thinking in algebraic terms, when he

 comes to deal with crosses involving simultaneously three or four independent characters." (p. 106). This is

 hubris on his part. A glance at Mendel's paper shows that a 2-factor Punnett Square is already significantly
 simpler than its algebraic expansion. Three is forbiddingly complex algebraically, though readily compre
 hensible in a Punnett because of the cognitive advantages of 2-dimensional tables I discuss in the next
 section. Mendel does not do four. More than 90% of Punnett Squares are 2-factor. Three are uncommon.

 I have never seen four. As Castle notes, these would involve 16 distinguishable phenotypes, 256 genotypes,
 and a 16x16 table. (How would you fit one in a text?) Baur (1914) presents a 5-factor case, but not in a
 Punnett square. He uses a confusing welter of trees in several illustrations and a dozen pages of text.

 A deeper reason for the dominion of 2-factor crosses, as the Drosophilists demonstrated, is that even the
 most complicated interactions arising in linkage mapping (with constant breakdowns of Mendel's second
 law) require only data on crosses reporting 2 factors at a time—even though some of these operations
 required constructed strains with markers or factors at as many as 7 loci to get the right data (Wimsatt

 1992). And as the Drosophilist's research program took hold, linkage became the primary target. This data

 reduction (for linkage mapping only, not gene interactions in general) anticipates and is isomorphic with von

 Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) famous argument (and their construction of a "lottery") that everything
 you wanted to know about preferences could be gotten from comparisons of a preference with at most two
 others.

 *£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 371

 them relatively painlessly. At the feature level, inheritance appears to be hyper-hor
 izontal. This kind of hyper-horizontal transmission is common in cultural evolution
 because of the conceptual near-decomposability of many of our problems and the
 potential independent inheritance—through imitation—of many of the features of our
 solutions, a kind of modularity. Weismann diagrams tended to be borrowed whole—
 usually through reproduction of the whole illustration, type-face, and all. The more
 easily reset tabular forms of many Punnett squares facilitate this kind of piecemeal
 lateral borrowing. (Boyd and Richerson 1985; Wimsatt and Griesemer 2007 review
 and analyze many relevant complexities of cultural evolution.)

 The greater decomposability or separable inheritance of traits for Punnett squares

 appears to yield less heritable variation of many small or neutral traits than for Weis

 mann diagrams because their tabular character makes them easily reset. (Typological
 characteristics are likely to be changed if the tables are reset rather than copied.) So
 Punnett squares are more likely to be simply reconstructed than Weismann diagrams,
 and differences which do not make a difference are free to vary. This is a method

 ological disadvantage: features with high heritability that do not make a functional

 difference aid in tracking ancestry. This problem is more acute for Punnett squares:
 as common tools they are less commonly accompanied by explicit citations. Despite

 this, some descriptive terms in the text are quite diagnostic of different lineages—thus

 the (absolutely identical) "chessboard method" and "checkerboard method" found on
 English and American sides of the Atlantic—appellations apparently heritable from
 teacher to student.

 3 On the visual nature of tabular forms in general (and Punnett squares
 in particular)

 To illustrate the discussion of Punnett squares, consider Fig. 27, p. 63, of Sinnott et al.
 (1950). [It appears in the first edition of Sinnott and Dunn in 1925 (Fig. 27) and is
 preserved in later editions in 1932 (Fig. 33) and 1939 (Fig. 27)]. While richer than most
 earlier variants, it is nonetheless paradigmatic as the most widely visible diagram in a

 long lineage, and some features which vary widely earlier have become fixed in it—by
 design or by convention, through processes of generative entrenchment Wimsatt and
 Griesemer (2007).

 (1) This case is paradigmatic as a popular diagram from a very popular genetics text.

 It was reproduced or redrawn widely in other texts.

 (2) It depicts the inheritance of round versus wrinkled, and yellow versus green peas

 first described by Mendel in 1866. This case became emblematic with the oblig

 atory description of Mendel's work in textbooks, and occurs more often than any
 other single Punnett square or empirical case. The earliest Punnett squares of
 this cross are found in Darbishire (1911), p. 207, Dendy (1912), p. 203 (clearly

 copied from Darbishire), and Walter (1913), Fig. 44. The first with iconic repre
 sentations of characters are presented in mono-hybrid (2 x 2), di-hybrid (4 x 4),

 and tri-hybrid (8 x 8) forms by Conklin in 1915 (Figures52, 53, and 54, pp. 240,

 241, and 245, respectively), and subsequently reproduced or redrawn in other
 books (including Morgan 1916, Fig. 22, p. 54) before Sinnott and Dunn.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 372 W. C. Wimsatt

 Fig. I. Diagram showing the nature of the ratio 9 : 7 in F,. The oharaoter, colour for

 example, appears only when C and B meet. Each square is a zygote, and the
 lettering shows its gametio composition. The hatohed squares represent coloured
 plants; the plain are whites.

 Fig. 2 Bateson et al. (1906), Fig. 1, p. 153 (2-factor cross)

 It is a gamete-invariant array, in which the possible gametic types coming from

 males and females are arrayed along the top and (left) side margins (symbolized
 by letters), and repeated in the squares down and across, respectively. In it, whole
 genotypes are depicted in the matrix array as the intersection of corresponding
 gametic types (again symbolized by letters), their analytical composition deliber

 ately mimicking the biological process of composition as sperm and egg fuse to

 form the zygote, and the array representing the possible offspring of that mating,

 how they arise, and their proportions. This is the dominant type of genetic array.
 It gives all the information of the algebraic expansion of a Mendelian cross, but

 in a much more tractable form for seeing its consequences.
 The location of the gametes (male on top, female on left side) and their order

 (AB, Ab, aB, ab, from left to right and top to bottom) while initially different,

 and then variable, had before 1925 become fixed by convention, a fixity which

 serves higher-order pattern recognition.

 It is a two allele at two locus or 4 x 4 table—not only the first type represented
 (see Fig. 2) but also far and away the most common. (The 2x2 single-factor
 cross came after the 4 x 4 and was invented as a teaching tool to convey the
 "logic" of construction of the 2- and 3-factor arrays).
 It associates phenotypic states with each genotype in the various cells of the

 array. Indeed, it redundantly deploys two of the three most common devices for

 indicating this; using (a) words and (b) iconic representations of these pheno
 typic character states. Even though redundant, the latter facilitate higher-order

 pattern recognition. The third and probably most common device (c) is a pattern

 4?} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 373

 ing scheme, like those found in Figs. 2,3, and 5. This last feature is paradigmatic
 (in both figures in the original Bateson et al.'s paper of 1906), though it is not
 essential for a Punnett square. Devices containing only genotypic representations
 are common.19

 Other features are not paradigmatic, but nonetheless quite common.

 (7) Although a particular case, it is presented as an instance of broader types.
 It both shows an example of a di-hybrid dominant-recessive pattern, and also
 illustrates the phenomenon of independent assortment, often called "Mendel's
 second law." The mode of presentation and assessment of the different experi

 ments makes it clear that it is the type that counts. Thus texts tend to discuss each

 type known, but only one representative of each (usually the first discovered).

 (8) Subsidiary arrows indicate the origin of gametic types, imbedding the process of

 zygote formation in the rest of the mating cycle.

 To consider this Punnett square as nothing more than a table, remove everything
 which is overtly iconic: imagine the pea icons erased, leaving only the gametic
 and genotypic letters preserved in the square array, with—as appropriate—the word
 descriptions of the character states added. Punnett squares are used for inferences

 getting from gametes to genotypes, or from genotypes to identify the ways in which
 they could have been composed by gametes, or from these associations to expected

 phenotypic patterns or ratios, or from observed phenotypic patterns or ratios to possible

 gametic or genotypic explanations of them. They are combinatorial computers which
 allow you to see, and to integrate or differentiate in different ways the information

 necessary to reason about hereditary patterns, and to do so effectively and efficiently,

 with minimal error.20 Thus simplified, the diagram resembles Fig. 1 from the original
 1906 paper of Bateson et al.

 Why should Punnett squares (or tables generally) be regarded as diagrams or visu
 alizations, rather than as a specialized form of text? They are both: this is not a
 necessary opposition. Tables are text. They can be and usually are read in the normal

 textual order—left to right and top to bottom (in English). But tabular arrays also have

 a visual form that functionally exploits their 2 (or higher)-dimensional character, and

 facilitates readings in different orders of different assemblages of information. For
 categorical data, the tabular array exploits topological features of a multi-dimensional
 structure. When data with ordinal or metrical properties is used, this dependence on

 the dimensional structure of the array becomes even stronger.

 19 This makes a decision about what to call a Punnett square. Since the "method" is more often referred to

 than the "square," arrays with and without associated phenotypic characters are both counted as employing

 the "chessboard" or "checkerboard" method, and it is the array form or representation that gives the leap in

 cognitive facility, I have decided to call both Punnett squares—in affect naming the array form as its crucial

 core. But as we will see, the interpretation of the array is also crucial, so crucial that it is tempting to ask in

 retrospect whether Punnett did indeed invent the Punnett square!

 20 The most obvious omission in description of the genotype to modern eyes is the deliberate lack of
 distinction made between whether the gamete or gene comes from mother or father. This was a strongly

 held assumption from Mendel on, but fails to recognize the phenomenon of "genetic imprinting" (usually
 associated with DNA methylation) and some other modes of "maternal effect" in which the action of the

 gene differs when inherited from mother or father. Nonetheless, the gametic array remains perhaps the best
 way of representing the Mendelian consequences of this phenomenon.

 4^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 374 W. C. Wimsatt

 Some of the strongest evidence for their multi-dimensional character should be the

 pursuit ofnotational and other modifications that facilitate the perceptual exploitation

 of different significant lower dimensional slices or higher dimensional aggregations of

 the data. This is characteristic both of the use and of the evolution of Punnett squares.

 The designed use of our powers of spatial pattern recognition in understanding, orga

 nizing, and getting information out of the table is a dead giveaway that we are dealing
 with a visual object. That does not mean that they are (must be) iconic pictures. These

 particular diagrams are abstract representations of processes (more like a flowchart or

 biochemical pathway than an architect's structural plan.) The evidence I provide for
 their being visual objects is evidence (1) for their multi-dimensional character, and

 (2) that we use them as such. It amounts first to saying that in their logical structure,
 they are spatial representations. And second, that they are arranged on the page so as

 to utilize our natural perceptual heuristics for perceiving and analyzing spatial objects

 to communicate modes of organization and relationships among the data.

 The "spatial" features discussed fall into three groups:

 A. intrinsic properties of tables, features which follow from the nature of any tabular

 array (and thus features which confer a visual character on any table);

 B. additional intrinsic properties of Punnett squares that follow from their specific

 subject matter (largely the combinatorial properties of Mendelian genetics) and
 how it is represented; and

 C. further extrinsic or contextual properties (such as the additional of symbolic icons

 for the characters whose variations provide the data, or to locate the process of
 zygote formation addressed by the Punnett square in the larger context of the
 reproductive cycle.)

 3.1 Intrinsic spatial properties of tables

 • Crossed invariant structure It is natural to see a two-dimensional table with two or

 more rows and columns as having what I would call a "crossed invariant" structure.

 A property characteristic or component of each entry in the array is invariant down

 each column (but different across rows), and another property is invariant across

 rows (but different down columns). This can generalize for higher dimensional

 arrays. This structure is responsible for many of the properties that follow.

 • Multiple possible reading orders Unlike normal textual material, tabular arrays

 not only allow but also actively encourage multiple ways of getting at, grouping,

 and using the information in the table. Considering just the planar structure of the
 table (its organization as a 2-dimensional data structure), the vertical and horizon

 tal columns as whole, and the vertical and horizontal location of any entry in those
 columns will be significant. Any entry may be accessed as a datum by multiple

 paths, and may be grouped with different larger units which are only partially
 ordered by inclusion, fundamentally spatial properties of all tables. Thus, a cell

 will be a part of a row and of a column, neither of which includes the other, though
 both of which are included in the whole table.

 • Multiple possible groupings or decompositions of the data With a 2 (or higher

 dimensional table, each entry has more neighbors. So one can group the entity with

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 375

 contiguous elements in more ways. When alternative groupings are each signifi
 cant, the object can have a hierarchial (when the groupings or decompositions are

 nested) or multi-dimensional (or multi-perspectival) character (when the groupings
 or decompositions are cross-cutting). Multiple possible groupings or decomposi
 tions of a cross-cutting character indicates multiple possible reading orders and
 multiple sources of information. (Multiple reading frames will do even in a one
 dimensional continuum, as genetic frame-shift mutations for reading messenger
 RNA demonstrate.)

 3.2 Additional intrinsic spatial properties of Punnett squares

 • Other properties arise from the indexical, combinatorial, and other special prop
 erties of components of the problems that Punnett Squares represent. In different

 contexts, the descending diagonal, ascending diagonal, and for array elements, its

 off-diagonal symmetry pair are all significant, making multiple possible inputs,

 outputs, and combinations of them relevant to the solution of different problems.

 • A third dimension is produced by adding further information to the cells. Most
 common is information about the phenotypes associated with the genotypes—the
 color and the shape of the peas in Fig. 1. This is important because it allows con

 struction of predicted Mendelian ratios among offspring. Other information allows

 adaptation of Punnett squares to other specialized tasks. (The first item under C

 below gives a very partial list.) This layers different kinds of data "vertically" (out

 of the plane of the paper) in different planes parallel to that of the table.21 This

 makes mappings of individual array elements to these additional properties, and

 patterns of relationship in their distribution significant. In the simplest case (widely
 used for Punnett squares), when the properties form equivalence classes (as when

 multiple genotypes make the same phenotype), class membership of a cell or group
 of cells becomes significant (e.g., producing expected "Mendelian ratios") as does

 the "shape" or pattern these cells form on the underlying matrix.

 • The combinatorial properties of the problem space give it closure properties—

 thus it is possible to talk about all possible gametes, genotypes, phenotypes, geno
 type-phenotype mappings, etc., relative to a given formulation which defined a
 problem-space.

 • Some representations have additional metrical features: The height or width of
 rows and columns and the areas of cells may have explicit implied significance
 as expected probabilities or frequencies of different classes of events or types

 of objects. The properties thus measured are defined with the strongest possible
 metric—a ratio metric.

 • In some other contexts, the order of gametes is not just categorical, but may be

 significant as defining at least a partial ordering, which, together with rules for

 21 This is not metaphorical: in class I use as many as 7 overlays, each containing different information to

 construct and illustrate functions of multi-layered Punnett Squares arising from the juxtaposition of property
 distributions.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 376 W. C. Wimsatt

 the combination of these partial orderings, is important for formulation of some
 problems, e.g., in quantitative genetics.

 • Punnett squares represent the production of genotypes which have physically sig

 nificant syntactic properties (e.g., the distinction between allelelic and non-allelic

 variations). These are combinatorially coded in different ways significant to their

 representation.

 • Other elements exploit a systematic "visual logic" as suggested in Griesemer

 (1994). Some examples: (1) the coadaptation of notation in cells to facilitate seeing
 the relation of components of the cell to others in the same row and column—the

 relevant invariances, as in Fig. 8. (2) devices used to mark phenotypic information

 off from genotypic information as in another plane. Thus the verbal coding of the

 character states in Fig. 1 gives the relevant information in a form appropriate to

 individual cells in the matrix, but seeing the broader patterns in the distribution of

 types in the 9:3:3:1 ratios is facilitated by adding the formally redundant iconic

 representations of the characters. Similarly, the relative numbers of larger circles in

 the different cells of Fig. 9 give a qualitative perceived density to the squares which
 models the intensity of the perceived shade of the wheat in the case discussed.

 3.3 Extrinsic and contextual spatial properties of Punnett squares

 • Punnett squares represent genotypes that produce phenotypes. Either may, in

 their physical realizations, have characteristic spatial properties that are iconi

 cally depicted because they are important. Thus peas may be represented as green
 or yellow (with color or black and white shading) and round or wrinkled (as in
 Fig. 1)—phenotypic properties. Genes may be represented as on the same or differ
 ent chromosomes, with allelic states represented with symbolic or pattern coding,

 as in Fig. 16, (Sinnott and Dunn 1939, Fig. 68, p. 185). Different karyotypes pro
 duced in meiosis by hybrids of different chromosomal rearrangements of the same

 factors may be represented in diagrammatic form (Sturtevant and Beadle 1939, see
 Fig. 74, also Figures70-76). (These "karyokinetic figures" strongly affect fitness
 since they may result in abnormal additions to or deletions from gametic geno
 types, and this is predictable from analysis of their forms.) In these cases the added

 icons are extrinsic to the nature of Punnett squares, though their use in this form

 of constrained canonical representation facilitates new kinds of analysis, higher

 order pattern-recognition, and may even be essential to the performance of their

 specialized functional role (as in the representation of the physical geometry of
 karyotypes).

 • Locating the Punnett square in a causal sequence or flow chart diagram may code
 both the physical natures of the processes, and their causal order, using spatial
 location and conventions for depicting causal and temporal processes. This infor

 mation is conveyed by placing a Punnett square in a larger context. This feature is

 at least partially intrinsic to the Punnett square if we take the nature of its inputs
 (gametes) as given. Thus, Fig. 66, p. 170 of Sinnott et al. (1950) depicts details
 of the process of gametogenesis as well as their combinatorial assortment (in this

 case, concretely, of chromosomes).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 377

 4 The evolution and adaptive radiation of Punnett squares

 It seems most likely that Punnett squares arose directly as an alternative representation
 of the combinatorial logic of Mendelian genetics. They have some logical similarities
 with Galton's bivariate normal statistical distributions and tables, and other similari

 ties with 2x2 tables used for multiple purposes in statistics. But in the second paper

 of this series, I argue that neither of these are plausible ancestors, and that Bateson's

 commitment to and interpretation of Mendelism, internal evidence in the explanation
 of the tables and and the logic of their use all favor a direct Mendelian inspiration.

 The early conception of Punnett squares is somewhat problematic, and will be dealt

 with more fully in another paper. Only the smaller (2-factor, 4x4) table from the 1906

 paper of Bateson et al. is a Punnett square. The conception of the Punnett square as we

 know it (a gamete-array) emerged gradually over the next 7 years, with insightful mod
 ifications or supplements by Bateson (1909), Herbert (1910), Darbishire (1911), and
 probably most substantially, jumping the Atlantic, by Walter in 1913. Punnett's own

 diagrams and descriptions in 1907 and 1911 were problematic, and did not contribute

 to the modern interpretation. Analysis of the larger 3-factor 8x8 table from the same

 1906 paper shows that it was constructed according to different (and possibly hybrid)

 principles, possibly at Galton's suggestion22. The result is confusing at best, is not a
 Punnett square, and cannot be seen as an ancestor to the 8 x 8 3-factor Punnett square

 first introduced by Walter in 1913 (Fig. 55, p. 189) in his elegant depiction (Fig. 9) of
 Nilsson-Ehle's quantitative coat-color inheritance in wheat.

 More seriously, it raises the question whether any of them, and Punnett in par
 ticular, had grasped fully the principles behind the construction of Punnett squares.
 It would be as if Mendel had argued that different principles were required for 3
 factor inheritance than for 2-factor (rather than just appropriately different algebra to

 cover the added factor). It was Mendel's clear understanding, given an n-factor case,

 that we know how using the same principles to construct an n + 1-factor case, which
 indicated the rich mathematical power and generality of the theory: that it could handle

 cases of arbitrary multi-factorial complexity. The same power was there for Punnett

 squares, but Punnett apparently did not see it: not in 1906 or 1907, and perhaps not
 later. Indeed, it makes sense to ask in retrospect whether Punnett did indeed invent the

 Punnett square!

 Even with this understanding of how to construct larger Punnett squares to represent

 more segregating factors, there remained a crucial ambiguity in their interpretation.

 They were interpreted in one way by Punnett, and probably by Bateson, Saunders and

 their contemporaries in that period. But over the 6 years from 1907 until 1913, another

 interpretation emerged. It was only at this later point that the Punnett square and the
 "chessboard" (or "checkerboard") methodology spread rapidly and became universal

 and the new interpretation rapidly became entrenched. It is possible to track its emer

 gence through modifications in how the arrays are presented, constructed, talked, (and

 of course thought) about. The change was like a "Gestalt switch" in total effect, but

 one achieved gradually and through definable intermediate stages. It was a Kuhnian

 22 Robert Olby has shown me a letter from Galton to Bateson in 1905 discussing the form of the 8 x 8
 table published in the 1906 paper.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 revolution writ small, and provides hope for those who would seek Darwinian con
 tinuity in a world of conceptual saltation. This new interpretation, a different way of

 reading the Punnett array, was critical to its emergence as a powerful conceptual tool.

 One can thereby understand why the enormous expansion in its use owes a great deal
 to this change.

 378 W. C. Wimsatt

 With this reinterpretation, Punnett squares became powerful and adaptable tools—

 much more so that their (few and partial) competitiors. This reconceptualization was

 extremely fertile, and did not change the logical design of the table, but only its interpre

 tation. It was followed almost immediately by a rapid increase in their use, and further

 diverse changes—an adaptive radiation to occupy new kinds of conceptual niches, as
 discussed in the second paper in this series. In this two-stage process—a period of "rel
 ative quiescence" or "invisible change" followed by an enormous adaptive radiation,
 the evolution of Punnett squares is reminiscent of pre-Cambrian evolution (slower or

 at least invisible, because most of the evolution was in "soft parts" which were not pre

 served) followed by the "Cambrian explosion" in which there was a rapid (and visible)

 adaptive radiation of different and diverse organisms.23 For Punnett squares all was
 preserved, but the less visible evolution proceeded largely in single less well-known

 texts replaced almost immediately by later stages in other less well-known texts, until
 with the adaptive radiation following 1913 they came to be represented essentially
 simultaneously in virtually all texts for which they were appropriate.

 4.1 The first Punnett squares and their relatives

 William Bateson—Mendel's most zealous missionary to the English speaking world—
 set out after the rediscovery of Mendel's work in 1900 to explore the application of
 Mendel's principles throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. The first "Punnett
 Square" (Fig. 2) appeared in a classic paper he co-authored with his students, R. C.
 Punnett and E. Saunders, describing patterns of inheritance in sweet peas (Bateson
 et al. 1906, Fig. 1, p. 153). Within a decade, the Punnett Square became the canonical
 way of representing and thinking about problems involving the outcomes of multi

 factorial crosses. It is hard to find a genetics text even today without one. They evolved

 rapidly, with changes in how they were read and interpreted, in format and notation,

 new ways of adding additional layers of information, and new uses for different pur
 poses. They became one of the most ubiquitous tools for representing and concep

 tualizing problems in classical genetics, and related sub-disciplines like cytogenetics

 and population genetics. Only the tree diagrams used to describe the results of crosses

 and linkage maps have been of comparable use in the history of genetics. These three

 devices represented diverse kinds of information compactly and intuitively. Two of

 them particularly—the Punnett square and the linkage map—functioned to organize
 and process different specific kinds of complex data, serving as computational tools

 of impressive power in the days when the complexity of even relatively simple com
 putations really mattered. (For more on linkage maps, see Wimsatt 1991, 1992, and
 Kohler 1994; for more on the mating-cross tree diagram, see Darden 1991.)

 23 Comparison with the Cambrian explosion was suggested by Greg Mikkelson.

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 379

 Five kinds of arrays differing fundamentally in their construction, organization, and

 many of their properties are called Punnett squares or resemble them. In consequence,

 they are applied to different kinds of problems. Two kinds are found in the 1906 paper,
 though no comment is made about their radically different logical forms. Their first

 (Fig. 2) is used on a problem in the inheritance of two independent factors—in modern

 terms, a "two locus" case. I call this form gamete-invariant, because constant gametic

 types are found in each cell of each given row, and, separately, in each cell of each
 given column.24 (A cell in the table is analogous to a point located by its x- and y
 coordinates, only the coordinates are gametic types. Each cell contains two gametes,

 and is defined by the intersection of the row and column for those gametes). The gen

 erality of this representation stems ultimately from the importance of sex and diploidy

 in genetics and in evolutionary biology. The use of a 2-factor (i.e., 2 locus) problem is

 less crucial, though, for various reasons, the 2-factor cross became the primary appli

 cation for Punnett squares. They were applied broadly to diverse problems involving
 individual matings in classical and modern transmission genetics.

 A second type, a modification of the first which appeared much later, is a quantita

 tive gamete-invariant array. This was first introduced by Hogben in 1946, in a different
 discipline, population genetics.25 It was applied primarily to one-locus cases, though
 sometimes with more than two alleles. It used the frequencies of gametes in popu
 lations to predict genotype frequencies under various different assumptions. I will
 discuss it more fully in the second paper in this series. Most authors who use them
 call both of these types Punnett squares, so I will also.

 In a particularly interesting third type, the locus-invariant array, the genotypes
 possible at one locus (AA Aa, aA, aa) are arrayed along one margin and the genotypes
 possible at a second locus (BB, Bb, bB, bb) arrayed along the other. (The gamete
 invariant array for this case would have gametes (AB, Ab, aB, and ab) arrayed along

 both margins.) Both compose genotypes but in different, indeed orthogonal, ways. The

 2-locus genotypes in the cells of a locus-invariant array are the logical composition of
 the row and column contributions of single-locus genotypes. The whole array gives
 the whole range of possibilities (Fig. 3). For the special case of Mendelian dominance
 at both loci it localizes the four distinct phenotypes in compact regions, unlike Pun
 nett's gamete-invariant array (Fig. 2). Surprisingly, it appears to occur in pure form
 in only one case (Wilson 1916, unnumbered table, p. 17). This type seems at first
 like a powerful and genuine alternative to gamete-invariant arrays. Understanding its

 limitations gives a deeper understanding of the strengths of the gamete-invariant array,

 so I discuss it at length.

 For 2-loci the locus-invariant array seems to fit the logic of Mendel's paper well. But

 its advantages stop there, and there are severe disadvantages. First, the representation

 24 A gamete has one copy of a gene from each locus. Since genes at the same locus are denoted by the same

 letter, and differentiated by using either capital and small letters (A and a, B and b,...) where they represent

 dominant and recessive traits, or subscripts (Aj, A2, A3,...) at loci where more than two alternative alleles

 are found, gametes will be represented by strings of different letters of the alphabet (e.g., aBc or A1B4 C3),

 whereas loci will be represented by pairs of the same letter (e.g., Cc or C3 C5).

 25 This is not the only quantitative gametic variant array. The Morgan school used quantitative coefficients

 as multipliers in arrays for some linkage problems in the early 1920s. But this persisted, while that died out

 quickly.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 380 W. C. Wimsatt

 Locus-Invariant Array

 AA Aa aA aa

 Third, the locus-invariant array works as a 2-dimensional square array only for
 2 factors. The natural generalization of the locus- invariant schema requires going
 to higher dimensions—adding a dimension to the array for each segregating factor
 or locus considered. So 3 factors would require going to three dimensions. The only
 alternative is an awkward decompositions into four 4x4 arrays to stay in three dimen

 sions. This last course was taken for the other figure in the 1906 paper of Bateson et al.,

 producing for a 3-factor cross an 8x8 array organized according to a strange hybrid

 26 Figure 12.3 ofWimsatt (2007, p. 290) is a gamete-invariant Punnett square designed specifically to show
 how recombination, gametic organization, bisexuality and diploidy place physical constraints that affect
 linkage disequilibrium.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 3 Locus-invariant array

 fails to correspond to physically significant modules in the inheritance process. Entries

 along row and column each include an allele from both parents, together comprising
 the combinatorial possibilities at a locus. Combining them gives the possibilities at

 both loci simultaneously. This gives an algebraic unity but the contribution of a gamete

 is nowhere represented. As a result the locus-invariant representation is less adaptable
 when it matters to a process how the genes are packaged and transmitted. Recombi
 nation and linkage problems require treating chromosomes or gametes as units, and
 these emerge as crucial in classical genetics.26

 Second, taking gametes from each parent as the basic elements to be combined

 rather than doing the logical assembly of a genotype locus by locus also allows one to

 parcel out the contributions of the two organisms to different sides of the array. This

 is often an advantage in conceptualizing problems in both genetics and evolutionary
 biology.

 The analytic geometry of genetics 381

 scheme that was nearly unintelligible.27 (By contrast, the 8x8 gamete-invariant Pun
 nett square for 3 factors is a natural and easily readable extension of the 4x4 array
 for 2 factors).

 So the mathematical generality of Mendel's scheme as applied to 2, 3, 4, or n

 factors, could not be reflected in a 2-dimensional representational scheme with the

 locus-invariant format. But it can with the gamete-invariant format because diploidy

 and sex mean that there will always be exactly 2 gametes! List all the gametes of each
 parent in a mating and you have the makings of a 2-dimensional gamete-invariant

 array. Any number of alleles and loci can be represented merely by listing the gametic

 combinations possible from the specific alleles at different loci present in the parents,
 and listing them at the head of the rows and columns in an array. This is done by an

 operation exactly analogous to producing a truth-table.

 A natural extension of this procedure lists all gametic combinations one could
 assemble in a population by different choices of mates. This larger array has sig
 nificance in population genetics. Thus the representational generality of the gamete
 invariant Punnett square is equal to (indeed greater than) the possible crosses among
 multi-allele, multi-locus genotypes in any Mendelian (indeed in any Morganian)
 scheme.

 A fourth and apparently very different variant is represented by the second figure

 in the 1906 paper (Fig. 2, p. 160). It is in fact what one would get if one constructed
 a 3-factor locus-invariant 4x4x4 cubic array, and then took the third dimension

 apart as four slices for the four possible values of the third-factor genotype, each slice

 a 2-factor 4x4 locus-invariant array for the first 2 factors, and laid out the four slice

 meta-array in a plane as a 2 x 2 of 4 x 4. Unfortunately, the net effect is no longer
 locus-invariant in 2-dimensions. This kind of array has no name, though it might be

 appropriate to call it a Galton array. I have (courtesy of Robert Olby) correspondence
 from Galton to Bateson dated October 1,1905, in which Galton proposes what is (with

 minor notational changes) the same 3-factor table. I will discuss it more fully in the
 second paper in this series.

 A fifth kind of array, representing the results of crossing whole genotypes without

 breaking them down to the gametic level appears from time to time in various forms.

 Most commonly, the purpose is to represent fertility or infertility in crosses between

 different mating types, species or self-incompatible plants, as in its apparent first use by

 Morgan to depict the distribution of fertility or infertility in matings in Ciona (1913,
 p. 218, Fig. 105). This kind of array makes sense only where the different gametic

 combinations from a genotype produce the same outcome for the question asked (e.g.,

 for uniform effects at the level of a cross between different species), or where no

 information is available that can be used to generate alternatives at the gametic level
 which can be related to the outcome. I will not discuss it further here.

 Punnett publishes the first edition of his book, Mendelism, in 1905, with no pic

 tures. In 1907, a second edition includes several 2-factor arrays. These are particularly

 interesting because they are redrawn and differ from the 1906 array, and presumably

 27 Their 8x8 array for the 3-factor cross will be analyzed in the second paper in this series.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 382 W. C. Wimsatt

 A A AA
 RB

 rJ b

 a

 B

 —

 A  (t

 ti b

 AA

 I B

 <2. A
 BB

 a. A

 £ B

 h\t\

 1/ 1/

 /a a

 >

 n

 A a

 tr

 b

 a.

 A
 B I

 a A

 (/ u

 a.  a

 BH

 a.

 CL

 r\ I

 cl a

 L t1)

 a  a

 i

 0

 Fig. 4 Unnumbered figure, p. 45, of Punnett (1907)

 best reflect his own understanding of them. The key last three sentences of this quote
 looks quite unusual to modern eyes:

 ... we may briefly recapitulate in a generalized form the main features of the phe
 nomenon, ...with the help of the diagram opposite [Fig.4], Aa and Bb denote
 two pairs of unit-characters such that A is dominant to a and B is dominant to

 b. If we suppose one of the original parents to have been homozygous for A
 and B, and the other for a and b, we may represent them as AABB and aabb,
 respectively. The constitution of the F1 individual must therefore be A Bab, and

 since it is heterozygous for the Aa pair, it will give in F2, AA + 2Aa+aa. This is
 denoted by the four large squares of the diagram. Again, since the F1 individual
 is heterozygous for the Bb pair, the F2 generation will be of the form, BB + 2Bb

 + bb for this pair of characters. This is represented in the diagram by dividing
 up each of the original squares into 4 again. ... (Punnett 1907, pp. 44^16).

 This description suggests that he saw the square as being in a hierarchial "Frac
 tal-Recursive" form, in which each additional segregating factor generates a 2 x 2
 division of each square of the preceding stage28. If so, it would have been more diffi

 28 That is, if he saw it as indefinitely extendable. There are no 3-factor squares by either Bateson or Punnett,
 save for the strange one in their 1906 paper.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 383

 A a

 N = 0 N = 1

 N = number of di-allelic segregating loci

 N = 2 (fractal-hierarchial) N = 2 (gamete invariant) P
 Two Different ways of reading a two-factor Punnett Square

 which are logically identical but cognitively divergent

 T T Y T genetics. 1913.«

 Fig. 5 Fractal versus cross-multiplying views of Punnett squares

 cult to see it as a cross-multiplication of (or a cross-decomposition to) gametic types.
 These two representations of the Punnett square are extensionally equivalent: they can

 produce the same arrays in the same order. But they are cognitively divergent: the
 conception of how they are generated and structured is different, and seeing them as
 a cross-multiplication of gametic types is enormously more fruitful.

 Punnett's diagram in 1907 is also anomalous in how he writes the genotypes.
 Although his figure is a gamete-invariant array (like Fig. 2), it begs to be misread
 as a locus-invariant array because of the natural reading order from left-to-right. We
 see the two A's together in the top row and reify them as a locus, and the B's below
 them as a second locus. (But then we are tricked, because this is not a locus-invariant

 array: the locus specifications change at both the A-locus and the B-locus as we go
 across rows or down columns. We can see the invariant gametes only by reading from
 top to bottom—an "unnatural act" in our culture, unless there is something else to
 guide the eye in that direction. (Sinnott et al. use vertical notation with vertical chro

 mosomes in their Fig. 66 (1950 p. 170), but no such help is provided here.) Seeing the

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 array as gamete-invariant requires moving the eye from top-to-bottom in a cell to pick

 up the alleles in a column, and then scanning for that chunked assemblage across rows
 or down columns of cells. Figure 5 directly compares the two interpretations with the

 corresponding correct notation:

 Even by 1911, when he has reverted to the preferable notation of the 1906 array,
 Punnett did not appear to see his squares as a gametic cross-multiplication, but as a

 writing exercise:

 A convenient and simple method of demonstrating what happens under such
 circumstances is the method sometimes termed the 'chessboard' method. For

 384 W. C. Wimsatt

 two series each consisting of four different types of gamete we require a square

 divided up into 16 parts. The four terms of the gametic series are first written

 horizontally across the four sets of four squares, so that the series is repeated

 four times. It is then written vertically four times, care being taken to keep to the

 same order. (Punnett 1911, p. 37.)

 This description of Punnett's method (and its first baptism as the "chessboard
 method") is much closer to a cross-multiplication of gametic types, but he still does
 not conceptualize the alternatives individually. Rather he suggests copying the whole
 column of gametic possibilities from one parent across the different columns (each
 representing a given gametic type from the other parent) until one has covered all
 the columns, then following this by copying the row of gametic possibilities from

 the other parent down through all the rows of the individual gametic possibilities of

 the first. The emphasis is on the series, rather than on individual gamete types. It is

 like a vector multiplication of possibilities rather than a scalar multiplication of the
 effects of individual outcomes. And it plays more naturally as a symbolic operation
 than as a material physical combination—a view consonant with Bateson's resistance
 to genetic atomism at that time (see Coleman 1970). It does, however, resonate with
 the figures introduced by Bateson in 1909 and Herbert in 1910.

 4.2 The evolution of the "gametic cross-multiplication" form of Punnett square

 How do we get from this elegant but awkward hierarchial-fractal representation to

 the extensionally, combinatorially, and logically equivalent, but generatively or cog

 nitively divergent conception of a Punnett square as a cross-multiplication of gametic

 types? Starting with Punnett's diagram in 1907 we can count four successive stages

 in which the eye is invited, ever more effectively, to physically trace the crossed tra

 jectories of a gametic array, or to see the tracks as decomposed into units in ways
 appropriate to the second representation. This is achieved in the final stage. When it

 is achieved, the three earlier stages disappear from the literature29, as the fourth stage

 and variants of it become effectively universal. Along with the crucial transitions men

 tioned a number of other changes, ranging from important to trivial in significance,

 29 Punnett is an exception here. He retains the images from his 1911 book through two later editions, the
 last in 1927.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 385

 9 6

 AB  Ab  aB  ab

 AB  AB  AB  AB

 AB  Ab  aB

 ab

 Ab  Ab  Ab  Ab

 AB  Ab  aB  ab

 aB  aB  aB  aB

 AB  Ab

 aB  ab

 ab

 ab

 ab

 ab

 A

 AB

 Ab

 AB

 AB

 • •

 Ab

 AB

 • • •

 a B

 AB

 • • • •

 a b

 AB
 Ab

 X

 Ab

 Ab

 • • • •

 aB

 Ab

 X K

 a b

 aB

 • • •

 AB

 aB

 • • • •

 Ab

 aB
 0
 aB

 aB
 0 Q
 a b

 c

 B

 ab

 • • • •

 AB

 a b

 X X

 Ab
 ab
 © ©
 aB

 ab

 A

 a b

 Fig. 52.—Punnett's Square for Dihybrids.

 A, female gametes arranged vertically ; B, male gametes arranged

 horizontally ; C, male and female gametes superimposed.

 Fig. 6 Herbert's 1910 4 x 4, Fig. 52 p. 129

 are occurring and becoming fixed and entrenched. The second paper in the series will
 describe and discuss them.

 The first stage beyond Punnett's representation is found only as a transitional form
 in the books of Bateson (1909) and Herbert (1910). Both use the interesting exposi
 tory device of decomposing a single-factor 2x2 square into horizontal and vertical
 components contributed by the respective gametes, and then recomposing the whole

 square out of the superposition of the two component squares, complete with male and

 female symbols marking where the gametes come from. Herbert also decomposes the

 4x4 2-factor case (Fig. 6), which Bateson leaves to the imagination. He is the first to

 call it a Punnett square. Presentation of the squares for each sex makes clear the "read

 ing directions" which show invariance for the two gametes in the composite diagram.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 386 W. C. Wimsatt

 Fig. 7 Darbishire (1911/1913),
 gametes
 unnumbered figure, p. 214
 AB Ab aB ab

 AB AA.BB

 AA.Bb

 Aa.BB

 Aa.Bb

 Ab

 AA.Bb

 AA.bb

 Aa.Bb

 Aa.bb

 aB

 Aa.BB

 Aa.Bb

 aa.BB

 aa.Bb

 ab

 Aa.Bb

 Aa.bb

 aa.Bb

 aa.bb

 When Herbert composes them below, the gametes are separated above and below,
 retaining their integrity, so they are readily visually tracked across and down. This

 kind of diagram showing the assembly of Punnett squares is found only rarely again,

 and then under special circumstances30. It is almost as if these partial diagrams were
 giving instructions for teachers as to how to compose them on the boards, (e.g., "Write
 down everything for one sex first!") Once that knowledge was disseminated, one could

 suppose, it was passed down in the classroom and did not need to be presented in the
 textbooks, where one saw only the already composed squares (Fig. 7).

 The next stage is provided by Darbishire in 191131, who generates an uncommonly

 large collection of (unnamed) Punnett squares and a discussion of their use extending
 over several chapters. He experiments with a profusion of variants. The notation is

 in flux in this period, forced by discovery of new complexities of inheritance, each
 of which he illustrates in a Punnett square. After discussions of notations with dif

 ferent letter abbreviations of the (supposed two) alternative character states, and the

 D/R notation favored by Bateson for dominant and recessive unit-characters32, and
 various special symbols, he settles on using the modern A/a, B/b, C/c, ...notations

 for dominant and recessive factors at loci A, B, C, .... His genotypic specifications

 -,(l Thus, Crew (1925, pp. 18-19) uses it for a special case where the sexes need to be distinguished—a
 situation producing a 3:1 ratio of gametic types in one sex and a 1:1 ratio in the other.

 31 I have only seen the 1913 edition of his book, though remarks in the preface suggest that there are no
 significant changes from the first (1911) edition. Similarly, I use the 1913 edition of Bateson's book, which

 makes a similar claim relative to the 1909 edition. Should either edition have typographic changes in the
 relevant figures, I would have to change this assessment.

 32 Carlson 1967 (Chap. 4) discusses the confusions introduced by the idea of the "unit-character" and
 explanations of the notational changes throughout this period.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 387

 136

 GENETICS

 causes the former to recede from view, these nine
 genotypes may be combined into four phenotypes as
 follows: —

 Phenotypes . .

 Genotypes . .

 1 |o
 4S(g)(n')V
 2 S(G)SV
 2SK(TF)f
 SYSY

 3 so

 a iff

 i iVcT

 SGSG

 WYJVY

 WGWQ

 2 SG(W)G  2 W YW(G)

 From this analysis it may be said that the Mendelian
 ratio for a typical dihybrid is phenotypically 9:3:3:1,
 while that for a monohybrid, as we have already seen,

 cf  sg
 o
 V
 i
 sg-»

 sg

 wr

 wy

 sy

 ■l

 sy

 wg
 1

 wg

 sg

 sg

 sg

 sg

 wy

 sy

 wg

 vr-»

 wr

 wy

 wy

 wy

 sg

 wy

 sy

 wg

 sy

 sy

 sy

 sy

 sy

 sg

 wy

 SY

 wg

 wg

 wg

 wg

 WG

 wg

 ©

 ©

 ©

 ©

 ©

 ©

 ©

 ©

 sg

 ©

 ©

 ®

 ©

 ©

 ©

 @

 Fig. 44.—Diagram to illustrate the possible combinations arising in the

 second filial generation (Fj) following a cross between yellow-smooth
 YS and green-wrinkled CW peas.

 Fig. 8 Walter (1913), Fig. 44, p. 136

 in the cells, however, are of the confusing form, "Aa.Bb," which again suggests a
 locus-oriented rather than a gamete-oriented reading order—preserving the strongly
 locus-centered nature of Mendelian combinatorial thinking, where number of loci is

 the primary determinant of the kind of problem you are dealing with. This scheme

 buried the gametes as the symbols at positions 1 and 3 or 2 and 4 in the symbol string
 for the genotypes. However, he recognized the importance of keeping track of them

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 388 W. C. Wimsatt

 T

 ©00

 ©0 ®

 (D ® 0

 • ©0

 ®e «

 c> © 0

 ® ® 0

 » « »

 © © 0  ©  ©  ©  ©00  © © 0 © e ©  © © ®  ©60  © e »

 ©©0
 ©00
 6

 Q) 0 a
 0 00
 5

 ©e0
 ©00
 5

 • © 0
 ©00
 5

 ©9a
 ©©0
 4

 ® © »
 ©©0
 4

 ® ©0
 ®0 ®
 5
 ® © 0
 © e 0
 5
 ©00
 9 ©0
 5
 <D©0
 ® e e
 4

 ©00
 ® © 0
 4

 fl>©0
 a & 0
 4

 © © 0
 « O ®

 ©e •
 ©© ®

 © © 0
 © © 9
 4

 4
 © 6 •
 © o 0
 4

 ©90
 ©60
 4
 ©90
 ® ©0
 4
 ©90
 © 9 9
 3
 © e 0
 « © 9

 3
 © e 0
 • 90
 3
 © ® 0
 o e ®

 <D © ®
 © © 0
 4
 ©0 e
 © ® ®
 3
 ©0 ®
 ® © 9
 3
 (DO ®
 « © 0
 3
 ©0 ®
 ® e »

 a © 0
 ©e 9
 4
 ® © 0
 ©90
 4

 ® ©0
 • ©0
 4
 ® ©0
 © ® 9
 3
 e ©0
 • © «
 3
 »©0
 •90
 3
 • ©0
 o e e

 © 9 a
 ©© 9
 3
 © 9 0
 ©90
 3
 © 9 e
 • ©0
 3
 © 9 ®
 ©99
 z
 © o ®
 ® © ®
 2

 © e ®
 • 90
 2.

 © ® e
 see

 © © e
 ©©9
 3
 ® © 9
 © ®"0
 3
 ® © ®
 ® ©0
 3
 ® © 9
 ©99
 2

 ® © ®
 ® © 9
 2

 ® © ®
 ® ® 0

 2
 ® © ®
 ® 0 ®

 • 9 9

 ©©0
 3

 ® 9 ®

 ©e •
 2

 o 0 a

 9 & 0
 ©©0
 4
 ® e 0
 ©© 9
 3
 ® e 0
 © e 0
 3
 *90
 ® ©0
 2

 ©90
 2

 ft © •

 ® ©0

 « 0 •

 © 9 ®
 1

 a 9 •

 ® © •
 J

 a o ft

 3
 9 6 0
 ©99
 2

 ® 9 0
 • © »
 2
 • 90
 • 90
 2
 • e0

 ® ® 0

 •

 1

 • • 9

 4> 9 9

 a « •

 3

 2

 2

 2

 1

 1

 1

 0

 Fiq. 65.—Diagram to illustrate Nilsson-Ehle's case of trihybrid red
 wheat. The large screwheads each represent a single determiner for
 the red character. The small screwheads symbolize the absenoe of
 the red character, or white. The number in each square indicates
 how many doses of the "red" determiner ia present. For further
 explanation see text.

 Fig. 9 Walter (1913), Fig.55, p. 189

 because he wrote the gametic types at the head of the columns and the left of the
 rows. This action naturally contributes to and only makes sense in the context of a

 "gamete-invariant" mode of thinking. This was a critical notational change, for it
 supported a new way of thinking. Its importance is reflected in its near-immediate

 subsequent universality.

 The final stage in this series is generated in 1913 by Herbert Walter, then assistant

 professor at Brown, in the first edition of his visually inventive textbook, where he

 experimented even more richly than Darbishire with the visual possibilities of the new

 devices. His key move was to combine the nicely separated gametes in the genotypic

 specification of Herbert or Bateson with their listing in the margins in the style of Dar

 bishire (with arrows added) to produce a diagram in which the cross-multiplication of

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 389

 gametes was an almost unavoidable consequence of the visual tracking of the eye in

 reading the table. I offer two (of many) diagrams from Walter. The first, Fig. 8 (Walter's

 Fig. 44, p. 136) is his presentation of the 2-factor case. See how readily the eye picks
 out the relevant invariant gamete in scanning this figure across or down, facilitated

 here by lining up the gametic entries in the cells with their source gamete along the top

 or side margin—and, specifically, not with each other. The cells are numbered (from
 1 to 16, for a 2-factor table), a practice which commonly pointed in earlier texts33
 to an accompanying "break-out" table (p. 137) which listed genotype, count of cells

 and cell identifying numbers having that genotype, corresponding phenotype of that
 genotype, and count of cells and cell identifying numbers having that phenotype. But

 just as Punnett squares became truly common after Walter, the break-out table in the

 form of a linear list was increasingly dropped as the array form became more familiar

 and/or ways were found to incorporate its information (particularly the phenotypic

 data) into the Punnett square. The numbering of cells died with it, or even before as

 the expectations associated with Punnett squares became common conventions.

 Some of Walter's inventiveness with visual illustrations and his mastery of the
 potential of the method is found in his symbolic representation of Nilsson-Ehle's
 tri-hybrid cross for seed color in red wheat (Fig. 9). Walter diagrammed two 3-factor

 crosses, and was the first to do so in a gamete-invariant form, making them the first

 3-factor Punnett squares. Walter's other tri-hybrid diagram (Fig. 47, p. 141) used the
 modern notation ("A/a" form) for Castle's work on inheritance of coat characteristics

 in guinea pigs (using the letters "R/r," "S/s," and "P/p" for "rosetted," "short hair," and
 "pigmented" traits and their recessive counterparts, respectively. But Nilsson-Ehle's

 tri-hybrid represented a case of the so-called quantitative inheritance, in which alleles

 at each of three loci contributed (or not) equally to the intensity of the red seed color.

 Arguments between "Mendelians" and "Biometricians" (who argued that quantitative

 inheritance was different in kind from Mendelian inheritance) in the preceding decade

 generated special interest in such cases (Provine 1971). To indicate this symmetry of
 alleles at different loci in their mode of action, Walter denoted the genotypic states

 with large and small screw heads (the large ones contributed to the red tint, the small
 ones did not), with the different loci indicated by the differing angles of the screw

 slots.34 He also indicated the phenotypic state in each cell by counting the number of

 large screw heads, (seven color states, from 0 to 6), but since the larger screw heads
 used more ink and physically filled the box more, the icons also gave a redundant qual

 itative representation of the color intensity of the wheat through filling and darkening
 of the box.

 Walter's book was widely read if the spread of his diagrams and their conven
 tions is any indication. Both his Punnett squares and his inventive Weismann dia

 grams (Griesemer and Wimsatt 1989) were widely borrowed. The next 15 years saw

 an explosion of books on genetics, heredity, and evolution, many going through several

 editions. Centrally important scientists such as Morgan, Castle, and Conklin wrote or

 33 This form appears to originate in Darbishire (1911, see e.g., p. 211).

 34 While it was important to tell which was which in the conduct of breeding experiments, they were

 functionally inter-substitutable in affecting seed color, and this iconic device elegantly allowed one to step

 in to identify them when necessary while generally stepping back to better appreciate their net effect.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 390 W. C. Wimsatt

 coauthored multiple books and monographs. I found no text after 1913 that discusses
 genetics in any depth without using Punnett squares. Virtually all use the mature
 form found in Walter's book—many of them, with their own added variations. In this

 period also we get the fixation of several conventional features that were still variable

 in Walter. These are things that could equally well be done in various ways, as long as

 everyone does it the same way—the classic problem of the coordination game. Thus
 with rare exceptions (inevitably made appropriate by other devices and contexts), we
 have the order of gametes fixed as AB, Ab, aB, ab'. With somewhat more variability,

 the male gametes are commonly arrayed across the top and the female gametes down
 the left side.35

 4.3 Alternatives and competitors—advantages of the Punnett square

 There are no alternatives to Punnett squares that accomplish the same purposes with
 the same elegance and comprehensibility. Algebraic expansions like those in Mendel's
 paper are in principle equivalent, but in practice difficult to comprehend. A partial

 alternative, the widely exploited mating-cross tree-diagram achieved a currency prob
 ably unmatched by any other form of representation (see Darden 1991), probably
 because it was the dominant form for representing single-factor crosses. Two-factor
 crosses were too complex for this form, as we can see in the last figure, discussed
 below.

 The common "tree diagram" was phenotypic rather than genotypic in its repre

 sentation, and could not serve exactly the same function as the Punnett square. In
 some cases (with matings of the right known genotypes), there was still a 1-1 map
 ping between distinguishable phenotypes and genotypes, and one could write down
 genotypes for the offspring of these tree diagrams, but this was only under special
 conditions. Nonetheless, it persisted as a common form (even more common than the
 Punnett square, though less interestingly variable) because of its natural correspon
 dence with the physical process of mating two individuals of known phenotypes. It

 listing their offspring, classified by phenotype, underneath in a manner reflecting the
 long-standing form of genealogical or family trees. (Bateson 1909, pp. 214-241 has

 half a dozen examples of the latter, and it is reasonable to see the tree diagrams in part

 inspired by them.)

 There is one diagram (Fig. 10) which is logically equivalent to the 2-factor 4x4

 table of the gamete-invariant Punnett square, though, in its representation of the par

 ents and F1 generations, it is also part tree diagram. Interestingly, it was as much a

 •^ There is a reason even for the difference between these two cases: the order of gametic types can make

 a difference in the pattern produced by a given mode of inheritance, and if there were not agreement on
 this order, it could hinder learning or recognizing this array pattern, so there is a definite advantage for

 agreement on standards here. But for characters commonly investigated in this period, the arrays were
 symmetric about the diagonal of homozygous elements because it made no difference whether one got a
 given allele from the male or from the female parent. This fact made it natural to go to Darlington and
 Mather's explicitly symmetric "diamond" array, a new competitor in superficial form, but logically and
 functionally identical: it simply rotates the array clockwise by 45 0 (1949, Fig. 15, p. 67.) which has seemed

 to be growing in popularity in these politically sensitive times. Ironically there are now growing reasons to

 revert to the classical form with the currently increasing interest in asymmetric cases of maternal inheritance

 and "genetic imprinting" motivated by developmental biology.

 ^ Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 391

 Fio. 45.—The heredity of human hair according to data by C. B. and
 G. C. Davenport. The arcs represent the somatoplasrns of four iridi-,
 viduals. Within the arcs are the gametes formed by these individuals.
 The dominant character is placed on the outside of the arc where i1
 will be visible.

 Fig. 10 Walter (1913), Fig. 45, p. 138 "arc diagram"

 failure as Walter's version of the Punnett squares were a success. This is Walter's "arc

 diagram" [my terminology]. Though logically equivalent as a representation to the

 Punnett square, it was hardly visually equivalent. It appears in just one place in his

 text, right after the introduction of 2- and 3-factor Punnett squares. He kept it there in

 subsequent editions, but never tried to expand its scope of application to replace them,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 392 W. C. Wimsatt

 and to my knowledge it was never copied by anyone else.36 Whatever his intention,
 it is a standing testimonial for Punnett squares. The complexity with which it repre

 sented the gametic combinations, the necessity to track a network of multiple crossing

 arrows (a problem also of many tree diagrams37), and its lack of compactness made

 it enormously more visually complex, and much more difficult to see the systematic
 character of its relationships. One can see Walter's diagram as a kind of transformed

 or disassociated Punnett square—an atavism in which (to exploit a material analogy)
 the regular geometry of an integrated circuit chip regresses to the complex intersect

 ing wiring harnesses stringing together the corresponding separate circuit boards and
 components of computers a generation before. Through it, one can really appreciate

 the remarkable visual economy of the Punnett square.

 These advantages arise in even the simplest case. The mono-hybrid cross is intelli

 gible without the 2 x 2 Punnett square, though even this simplest of crosses benefits

 from it. And, as commonly noted, seeing the 2 x 2 mono-hybrid cross gives you the

 logic for understanding the di- and tri-hybrid Punnett squares, and in principle, for

 constructing Punnett squares of any arbitrary size. Even the di-hybrid cross is almost

 too cumbersome to represent (and surely to think about) in any other way, and the

 idea of using a "tree diagram" (the only plausible alternative) to represent a tri-hybrid
 cross is almost too forbidding to think about.

 It is clear why "Punnett squares" were adopted even without seeing Walter's "arc

 diagram," though the arc diagram helps to remind you what you're missing! Any reader
 of Mendel's paper who has struggled with how to see order in his linear lists of the

 16 di-hybrid or 64 tri-hybrid types of offspring, or to verify which hybrid types came

 from which combination of gametes, sees its advantages immediately. The systematic,
 causal, and combinatorial order which comes from seeing these results as 4 x 4 and
 8x8 tables, where rows and columns are gametic types from the two parents, and the
 squares are the genotypes resulting from their combination, is astounding. Another
 really significant advantage (which I did not appreciate until I did 8x8 tables for
 myself, though it helps already for 4 x 4) is how the whole table can be composed
 by simply copying invariant contributions down columns and across rows in a way
 that makes it automatic and virtually error free. The resulting freedom from having
 to think, "Now what do I write in this space?" when constructing the tables by writ

 ing down the genotypes in sequence (which I did at first!) speeds their construction

 enormously and probably significantly reduces errors.

 36 Its use to diagram data collected by the Davenports in 1907 and 1908 raises the possibility that Walter
 invented this diagram before he had seen any Punnett squares, or at least Darbishire's productive modifica

 tions which he presumably built upon. For all its complexity, it has some nice features, e.g., in his proposal

 to ".. .place the dominant character on the outside of the arc where it will be visible." Like Punnett's expo
 sition of 1911 quoted above, this diagram tends to chunk and to cross-multiply whole arrays of gametic
 possibilities rather than individual alternatives.

 ■7 In my experience, tree diagrams work well only for a single-factor cross, or (as with Morgan's depiction
 of linkage between sex-linked characters) of two-factor crosses where special conditions limit the number

 of phenotypes of the offspring in any given cross to no more than four. A full characterization of data for

 the sex-linkage case involved multiple (from 3 to 6) tree diagrams, which may also favor them, since they
 correspond naturally to a series of individual matings in an experimental design or narrative.

 •£} Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 393

 5 Conclusions

 I have not discussed here a whole other dimension of possible influence of the Punnett
 square. It provided a very successful paradigm which all biologists educated after
 about 1920 had to see because of its center stage position in a science which was

 itself becoming central to the rest of biology. Punnett squares were also explorations

 of the combinatorial potentials of a different kind of data structure—the tabular array.

 One wonders how many other problems in biology unrelated to the combinatorics of

 forming offspring found an organizing schema in this paradigm. An obvious case to
 start with (though I have not done the relevant history) is the 4 x 4(x4) table for the

 mapping from the base sequences of the triplet code to the amino acids they code for.
 (This table is found in all modern molecular genetics textbooks!) This is an extension

 to a different part of genetics—but still quite close to home. I suspect that there are

 many other examples further afield.)

 Punnett squares have a variety of particular virtues both as instruments of con
 ceptualization and of computation. Their widespread use on problems like those they
 were originally invented for is thus not surprising. But this does not explain their

 enormous adaptive radiation into a variety of new contexts where they have played a
 role in conceptualizing and solving a number of diverse problems. This radiation will
 be elaborated in the second paper of this series. Their special virtues arise through

 a representation of information involving actual and possible matings which makes
 transparent the natural fracture lines of a complex problem into independently solv

 able sub-problems. The result is like (it is almost iconic for) some kinds of integrated
 circuit chip, in which data can be read (or fed) in on a variety of alternative input
 lines, and almost immediately the answers can be read off (or out) in a variety of

 output modes. I have used as many as seven multiple overlays simultaneously for the

 representation and solution of complex problems involving the interaction of gametic

 states, frequencies, and phenotypic characters. Each overlay adds a particular kind of
 information to each cell, and its addition to the common matrix of information allows

 the representation and solution of a new kind of problem or problems. The overlays can

 be "mixed and matched" to represent and solve different kinds of problems. Viewed in

 this way, the evolution of this mode of representation is seen to increase the operating
 efficiency and range of this device, extending its computational virtues to new kinds

 of problems.

 Some of their advantages are simply products of their powerful combinatorial struc

 ture, but this is not enough. (Why then are not locus-invariant forms more common?

 They should have the same combinatorial advantages.) Like a good metaphor, this
 representational device appears to work almost any way you look at it. Another rea

 son beyond their modularity and computational efficiency explains their spread, and
 explains as well why this very modularity is possible. The reproductive cycle and

 bisexuality is so common to different life forms, and so important in understanding

 their adaptations that something which addresses its structure as centrally as the Pun

 nett square will have a central role in organizing and solving a diversity of problems.

 Its role in genetics is in many ways like that of the conservation laws in physics: it can

 show how to set up a problem, and provides important constraints on its solution for

 many different kinds of problems. This explains why the gamete-invariant form rather

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 394 W. C. Wimsatt

 than the locus-invariant form is the dominant representation in genetics. The number
 of loci is the number of differentiating characters, and was a central variable in the for

 mulation of problems in Mendelian genetics. But since the gametes represent natural
 biological and physical objects, which are indeed separated at a stage of the life cycle
 and recombined at another—which loci are not—this use of a natural fracture point
 in natural objects made the gamete-invariant form a much more theoretically fruit
 ful representation. The gamete-invariant representation also factors the genotype and

 conjoint phenotypic results into the two genetic variables most readily manipulated in

 mating experiments—the genetic composition of the two gametes. Indeed it is the only
 representation which can be given a straightforward causal account corresponding to

 the genetic processes of segregation and independent assortment as they occur in the

 gametes, and gametic fusion as it occurs in the zygote. Thus it is mechanically faithful

 to the biology, whereas the locus-invariant representation is misleading.

 You can cut nature any way you choose, but you would be a fool to do so, both for

 positive and for negative reasons. On the positive side, if you cut nature at its joints,

 you find those divisions confirmed again and again as you approach them from the
 perspective of different problems, with different methods, and at different levels of

 organization. Gametes are real joints, in the only sense of "real" appropriate to science

 (Wimsatt 1981): they are detectable, derivable, and usable in a variety of ways. And
 then there is the negative side: because of this multiple consilience of problems and
 methods at these common boundaries, it is also less frequent that a decomposition
 along these boundaries will lead to a serious misrepresentation of a problem—a pars
 ing which generates a legion of "functional localization fallacies." In science we want

 not only productive tools that produce lots of results, but also safe tools which yield a
 higher proportion of good results. There are no magic bullets, and no-one but perhaps
 a philosopher would look for them. But that does not mean that we cannot seek brands

 which misfire less frequently.

 Acknowledgments This work has benefited from continuing discussions with Jim Griesemer through
 which we have set many of the perspectives which inform this work. Robert Olby has been exceedingly
 generous with his time, wisdom, and bibliographic resources. The work and perspectives of Edward Tufte,
 Elihu Gerson, and Bruno Latour have provided fertile orientations. Greg Mikkelson provided assistance
 in tracking down texts and xeroxing figures on short notice and a useful sounding board for germinating

 ideas. Finally, I thank John Douard for continuing conversations on this and related topics, and an occasion
 without which this would not have happened—or at least not for quite a while

 I. Sources for Punnett squares and other diagrams

 Babcock, E.B., and R.E.Clausen. 1918. Genetics in relation to agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Bateson, W„ R.C. Punnett, and E. Saunders. 1906. Experimental studies in the physiology of heredity (report
 to the Evolution Committee of the Royal Society, III), 2-11. London: The Royal Society [p. 152-161 in
 Bateson's collected papers].

 Bateson, W.W. (1913, third impression with additions, 2 earlier printings in 1909). Mendel's principles of

 heredity. London: Cambridge University Press.

 Baur, Erwin. 1914. Einfiihrung in die experimentelle vererbungslehre. Berlin: Verlag von der Gebruder

 References

 Borntraeger.

 £j Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The analytic geometry of genetics 395

 Callebaut, W. 1993. Taking the naturalistic turn: Or how real philosophy of science is done. Chicago:

 University of Chicago Press.

 Castle, William E. 1916. Genetics and eugenics. Cambridge: Harvard (4 editions through 1930).
 Conklin, E. 1915. Heredity and environment. Princeton: Princeton University Press (5 editions through

 1923).

 Boyd.

 Press.

 Press.

 Crew, EA.E. 1925. Animal genetics: An introduction to the science of animal breeding. London: Oliver and

 Darbishire, A.D. 1911. Breeding and the Mendelian discovery. London: Cassell and Co.
 Darlington, C.D., and K. Mather. 1949. The elements of genetics. London: Allen and Unwin (reprinted 1969

 by Schocken Books, New York).

 Dendy, A. 1912. Outlines of evolutionary biology. New York: Appleton.
 Gilbert, S. 1985. Principles of embryology. Sunderland: Sinauer.
 Hassell, M.P. 1978. The dynamics of arthropod predator-prey systems. Princeton: Princeton University

 Herbert, S. 1910. The first principles of heredity. London: A & C Black.
 Hogben, L. 1946. An introduction to mathematical genetics. New York: Norton.
 Mendel, G. 1866. Experiments in Plant-Hybridization (English trans: 1902). Cambridge: Harvard University

 Morgan, T.H. 1913, 1914. Heredity and sex, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia University Press (pagination

 from 1914 ed.).

 Morgan, T.H. 1916. A critique of the theory of evolution. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Morgan, T.H., A.H. Sturtevant, H.J. Muller, and C.B. Bridges. 1915. The mechanism of mendelian heredity.

 New York: Henry Holt and Co.

 Punnett, R.C. 1907. Mendelism, 2nd ed. London: MacMillan and Co.

 Punnett, R.C. 1911. Mendelism, 3rd ed. London: MacMillan and Co. (5 editions through 1927).
 Schank, J.C., and T.J. Koehnle. 2007. Modeling complex biobehavioral systems. In Modeling Biology:
 Structures, Behaviors, Evolution, ed. M.D. Laubichler, and G.B. Muller, 219-244. Cambridge, MA:
 MIT Press.

 Sinnott, E., and L.C. Dunn. 1939. Principles of genetics, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Sinnott, E., L.C. Dunn, and T. Dobzhansky. 1950. Principles of genetics, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Sturtevant, A.H., and G. Beadle. 1939. An introduction to genetics. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
 Walter, H. 1913. Genetics, 1st ed. New York: MacMillan (1913, 1917 reprint).
 Wilson, E.B. 1896. The cell in development and inheritance. London: Macmillan Co.
 Wilson, E.B. 1925. The cell in development and heredity, 3rd ed. New York: MacMillan.
 Wilson, James. 1916. >4 manual of Mendelism. London: A.&C. Black, Ltd.
 Wimsatt, W.C. 1987. False Models as means to Truer Theories. In Neutral Models in Biology, ed. M. Nitecki,

 and A. Hoffman, 23-55. London: Oxford University Press.

 Wimsatt, W.C., and J.C. Schank. 1993. Modelling—A Primer (or: the crafty art of making, exploring,
 extending, transforming, tweaking, bending, disassembling, questioning, and breaking models). Now
 public domain through BioQUEST library of strategic simulations.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 2007. Re-Engineering Philosophy for Limited Beings: Piecewise Approximations to Reality.

 Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

 II. Other references

 Allchin, D. 1991. Resolving disagreement in science: The Ox-Phos controversy, 1961-1978, Ph.D. disser

 tation, Committee on the Conceptual Foundations of Science, The University of Chicago.

 Basalla, G. 1988. The evolution of technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Boyd, R., and P. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the evolutionary process. Chicago: University of Chicago

 Press.

 Carlson, E.A. 1967. The gene: A critical history. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.

 Clarke, A., and J. Fujimura. 1992. The right tool for the job. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Coleman, W.L. 1970. Conservative thought in science: the case of William Bateson. Centaurus 15:228-314.
 Darden, L. 1991. Theory construction in science: Strategies from Mendelian genetics. Oxford: Oxford

 University Press.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Darlington, C.D. 1937. Recent advances in cytology. Philadelphia: The Blakiston Co. (reprinted, 1988, by

 The Garland Publishing Co., New York).

 Gould, S.J., and R.C. Lewontin. 1979. The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm. Pro

 ceedings of the Royal Society of London, B 205: 581-598.

 Griesemer, J.R. 1994. Image and argument: Towards a visual logic of weismannism. Unpublished talk,

 conference on visualization in science, Galveston Medical Center, Galveston TX, April 30, 1994.

 Griesemer, J.R., and W.C. Wimsatt. 1989. Picturing Weismannism: A case study in conceptual evolution.

 What Philosophy of Biology Is (essays for David Hull), ed. M. Ruse, 75-137. The Hague: Martinus-Nij
 hoff.

 396 W. C. Wimsatt

 Hull, D. 1988. The processes of science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Kohler, R. 1994. Lords of the fly. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Levins, R., and R.C. Lewontin. 1985. The dialectical biologist. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Provine, W. 1971. The origins of theoretical population genetics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Putnam, H. 1975. The meaning of 'meaning'. In Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science, vol. 7, ed.

 K. Gunderson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

 Tufte, E. 1983. The quantitative display of visual information. New Haven: Graphics Press.
 von Neumann, J., andO. Morgenstem. 1944. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton: Princeton

 University Press.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 1981. Robustness, reliability and overdetermination. In Scientific inquiry and the social

 sciences, ed. M. Brewer, and B. Collins, 124-163. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 1987. False models as means to truer theories. In Neutral models in biology, ed. M. Nitecki,

 and A. Hoffman, 23-55. London: Oxford University Press.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 1991. Taming the dimensions-visualizations in science. In PSA-1990, vol. 2, ed. M. Forbes,

 L. Wessels, and A. Fine, 111-135. East Lansing: The Philosophy of Science Association.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 1992. Golden generalities and co-opted anomalies: Haldane vs. Muller and the Drosophila
 group on the theory and practice of linkage mapping. In Fisher, Haldane, Muller, and Wright: Founders
 of the modern mathematical theory of evolution, ed. S. Sarkar, 107-166. Dordrecht: Martinus-Nijhoff.
 Wimsatt, W.C. 1999. Genes, memes, and cultural inheritance, invited contribution for April 1999 Biology

 and Philosophy special issue on influence of R. C. Lewontin. 14: 279-310.

 Wimsatt, W.C. 2001. Generative entrenchment and the developmental systems approach to evolutionary

 processes. In Cycles of contingency: Developmental systems and evolution, ed. S. Oyama, R. Gray, and
 P. Griffiths, 219-237. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 Wimsatt, W.C., and J.R. Griesemer. 2007. Reproducing entrenchments to scaffold culture: The central role
 of development in cultural evolution. In Integrating evolution and development, ed. R. Sansom, and R.
 Brandon, 227-324. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 12:09:07 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

