 

 

 

 

Thomas Harriot's optics, between experiment and imagination: the case of Mr Bulkeley's

glass
Author(s): Robert Goulding
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 2 (March 2014), pp. 137-178
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569628
Accessed: 19-05-2020 10:00 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569628?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:137-178
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0125-1

 Thomas Harriot's optics, between experiment
 and imagination: the case of Mr Bulkeley's glass

 Robert Goulding

 Received: 9 March 2013 / Published online: 27 July 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract Some time in the late 1590s, the Welsh amateur mathematician John Bulke

 ley wrote to Thomas Harriot asking his opinion about the properties of a truly gargan

 tuan (but totally imaginary) piano-spherical convex lens, 48 feet in diameter. While

 Bulkeley's original letter is lost, Harriot devoted several pages to the optical properties

 of "Mr Bulkeley his Glasse" in his optical papers (now in British Library MS Add.

 6789), paying particular attention to the place of its burning point. Harriot's calcula

 tional methods in these papers are almost unique in Harriot's optical remains, in that he

 uses both the sine law of refraction and interpolation from Witelo's refraction tables in

 order to analyze the passage of light through the glass. For this and other reasons, it is

 very likely that Harriot wrote his papers on Bulkeley's glass very shortly after his dis

 covery of the law and while still working closely with Witelo's great Optics', the papers

 represent, perhaps, his very first application of the law. His and Bulkeley's interest in

 this giant glass conform to a long English tradition of curiosity about the optical and

 burning properties of large glasses, which grew more intense in late sixteenth-century

 England. In particular, Thomas Digges's bold and widely known assertions about his

 father's glasses that could see things several miles distant and could burn objects a half

 mile or further away may have attracted Harriot and Bulkeley's skeptical attention;

 for Harriot's analysis of the burning distance and the intensity of Bulkeley's fantastic

 lens, it shows that Digges's claims could never have been true about any real lens (and

 this, I propose, was what Bulkeley had asked about in his original letter to Harriot).

 There was also a deeper, mathematical relevance to the problem that may have caught
 Harriot's attention. His most recent source on refraction—Giambattista della Porta's

 Communicated by: Jed Buchwald.

 R. Goulding (I>3)

 Program in History and Philosophy of Science & Program of Liberal Studies,
 University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
 e-mail: Goulding.2@nd.edu

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 â Springer

 138 R. Goulding

 De refractione of 1593—identified a mathematical flaw in Witelo's cursory suggestion

 about the optics of a lens (the only place that lenses appear, however fleetingly, in the

 writings of the thirteenth-century Perspectivist authors). In his early notes on optics,

 in a copy of Witelo's optics, Harriot highlighted Witelo's remarks on the lens and della

 Porta's criticism (which he found unsatisfactory). The most significant problem with

 Witelo's theorem would disappear as the radius of curvature of the lens approached

 infinity. Bulkeley's gigantic glass, then, may have provided Harriot an opportunity

 to test out Witelo's claims about a piano-spherical glass, at a time when he was still

 intensely concerned with the problems and methods of the Perspectivist school.

 1 John Bulkeley

 In March 1591, Thomas Harriot, then working as mathematician to Walter Raleigh,

 received a letter from John Bulkeley of Mona (that is, the Welsh island of Anglesey).

 It accompanied a long mathematical treatise in which Bulkeley made an inevitably

 unsuccessful attempt on that perennially popular conundrum, the quadrature of the

 circle. He had been unwilling to share his work with the world (he told Harriot),

 but Harriot's own encouragement had led him to consider publication and to that

 end, he presented Harriot with a fair copy of the treatise. Even Harriot's patronage,

 however, he knew would not save him from all criticism. Archimedes had encouraged

 the mathematician Conon, who had nevertheless become the subject of envy and

 dissent; and Socrates was lampooned by Aristophanes, despite enjoying the patronage

 of Apollo! With these witty and flattering comparisons, Bulkeley urged Harriot to
 remain a staunch defender of his quadrature; should it ever come under attack, Harriot

 himself would be to blame, since it was only published with his encouragement.1

 This is the only letter extant in what must have been a much more extensive corre

 spondence between the two men. Harriot, notoriously, kept very few of his personal

 papers. And this aspiring Welsh mathematician left very little mark on history beyond

 this single sheet of paper, barely registering even among those modern researchers

 who have investigated Harriot's biography and intellectual connections.2 It is possi

 ble, nevertheless, to identify him with some assurance. The Bulkeley family, formerly

 of Cheshire but by the time of this letter long settled on the Welsh island of Anglesey,

 had rapidly risen to prominence in the sixteenth century. In 1534, Richard, the head of

 ' The original letter is extant, together with the quadrature, in a manuscript formerly held in Sion College

 with shelfmark Arc. L.40.2/L.40, now on deposit in Lambeth Palace Library. The letter is at fol. 280. Both
 this and two other manuscripts from Sion College (Arc. L.40.2/E.IO and Arc. L.40.2/E.6) belonged to

 Harriot's literary executor Nathanael Torporley. and include Torporley's own commentaries on Harriot's

 mathematics, as well as some notes (mostly alchemical) by Harriot himself. Bulkeley's letter to Harriot was

 edited in Halliwell-Phillipps (1841, 34). There are several mistranscriptions in this edition, most notably
 the valediction "ex aulula Mona" (front Anglesey Hall), which should read "ex insula Mona" (from the

 island of Anglesey).

 2 Bulkeley is not mentioned at all as a friend or associate of Harriot in Shirley (1983). Nor does he appear

 in the two major collections of studies on Harriot's life and work (Fox 2000. 2012). The only references

 to him in the literature on Harriot are both brief allusions to this manuscript letter and treatise, in Pepper
 (1967, 20). and Tanner (1977, 406-407).

 2 The Dictionary of Welsh biography down to 1940 (1959. 57-58).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 139

 the family, was knighted and was succeeded by his son and grandson, each also named

 Richard and each also knighted (the family was ennobled early in the seventeenth cen

 tury). The "John Bulkeley" who wrote to Harriot in 1591 was almost certainly a son

 of the second Sir Richard and his first wife Margaret Savage, styled John Bulkeley

 "of Cremlyn" (a house in Beaumaris, the seat in Anglesey of the Bulkeley family).4

 He was a younger brother of the most famous member of the family in this period,

 the third Sir Richard Bulkeley, who through land speculation and commerce became

 "the wealthiest gentleman in North Wales," to the extent that he was able to cast off

 the patronage of the Earl of Leicester and challenge directly the Earl's influence in the

 region.5 John Bulkeley's oldest brother was born around 1540, so that John himself

 was most likely born in the first half of the 1540s.6

 John Bulkeley was thus fifteen years older than Harriot, or more, when he sent him
 his letter and treatise. It is curious that the older man maintained such a deferential

 tone toward his addressee, particularly since Harriot, as the hired mathematician to

 a gentleman and the offspring of an obscure family, was hardly of the same social

 class. Bulkeley, however, recognized Harriot's learned status, comparing him to the

 princes of mathematicians and philosophers; he must have had some misgivings about

 presenting his work to such an educated man, particularly since there is no clear

 evidence that Bulkeley matriculated at either English university, even in an age in

 which ample records were maintained.7

 It is quite likely that Bulkeley hoped to ingratiate himself to Raleigh, through

 Harriot's good offices. Yet, even taking that into account, there seems to have been

 a real intellectual connection between the two men; for in the closing years of the

 sixteenth century, Harriot (by now an employee of Henry Percy, the ninth Earl of

 Northumberland),8 devoted considerable attention to an optical problem that Bulkeley

 had apparently posed to him and recorded his calculations in a small bundle of papers

 4 Griffith (2014,42).

 5 Powell (2008). John Bulkeley is mentioned as part of this eminent family in Williams (1968,108), where
 he and his brother Rowland, both brothers of the third Sir Richard, stand as trustees in the land settlement

 on the 1578 marriage of their sister Elizabeth to Owen Holland.

 6 One can assume that children in this family were born almost yearly. Besides John, his parents Richard

 Bulkeley and Margaret had ten children; by his second wife Agnes, Richard fathered a further ten (Burke
 1866,86).

 7 There is no reference to a John Bulkeley in this period, in Foster (1891) nor in Clark and Boase (1885).

 Likewise, he does not appear to have attended Cambridge (Venn and Venn 1922). These same lists attest,

 however, to the attendance of many other members of the Bulkeley family throughout the sixteenth century,

 and into the seventeenth. There is an intriguing possibility, however, that Bulkeley is to be identified with

 a "John Bowekeley" or Buckley, or Bulkeley of New Inn Hall who, in 1570, was arraigned and sent to the

 Tower under suspicion of debasing the coinage by alchemical means. A travelling stationer, William Bedo,

 had contacted him under the apprehension that Bulkeley could recover lost money by supernatural means;

 in the course of their acquaintance, Bulkeley read to Bedo a métallurgie experiment from della Porta's

 Magiu naturalis, which led to a plan to dissolve and recover minute amounts of silver from silver coinage,

 while leaving the coins apparently unaffected; by this means Bedo accumulated 2 oz of silver. See Hart

 (1867, 391-394) and Ryrie (2008, 119). 1 am very grateful to Neil Ap Jones (editor of the website Greats

 of Wales) for sharing this information with me.

 8 For the origin and nature of their relationship (Harriot was classified as a "pensioner," not a "servant"),
 see Batho (2000).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 140 R. Goulding

 C-- ¥ " |f //

 'Mr

 d$. '<£****• ?'■*'"■ "'"' ,s^v •
 J$. 4>f ■<¥**&■ r
 id. *.4 J**0' H *$#. y t..
 id. %.4 If **-$$ *-*&> r *■.

 It m ^. -.. *?■
 t," tp *#* 00 * ■f,&-i&
 i • •• i> <• . • .r .J o /> r O *■ 1 ? J £i.f. ^— :

 * t M ^ . * ;
 «#«... j&*-}{. -f *■'

 > ' . * :f: \ / . -." ; / - '*/.■<

 sc

 ft

 —" ~ ' --y(—?/■ »
 yr « «... - 7T*: iL
 mr>- "typ '"'"* '/%'„*

 Hi. „>t mr ""

 f

 'MilfZ ' ■
 iWiW*Z- ' ... * F
 ^ # "(/i'.i... ' :
 —y/* f 4 # 4f * /■.
 h/l*7 "
 #/?»" f ■■■. - -îÂrr/y

 2 % *1? 4 § A & & ®

 Fig. 1 Detail from BL MS Add. 6789. fol 135: parameters of glass

 labeled "Of Mr Bulkeley his Glasse."9 These papers, the principal focus of this paper,
 occupy an important place in the development of Harriot's optics, in which he made
 a significant break from medieval "Perspectivist" optics and employed, it seems, his

 newly discovered law of refraction for the first time.

 We have no letter or record of a conversation in which Bulkeley posed his problem;

 yet, we can reconstruct it from Harriot's manuscript, beginning with the concise math
 ematical sketch of the apparatus that he made on a single page, a detail of which is
 reproduced in Fig. I. His correspondent's question concerned a circular glass lens,10

 concave on one side. Hat on the other. Harriot's description of the lens stated that it was

 to be 48 feet in diameter (de, in Harriot's diagram) and 4 in. thick at its thickest section

 (be). Harriot's sketch of the lens (on the right side of Fig. 1) greatly exaggerated the

 bulge of the glass; drawn to scale, the lens would be virtually indistinguishable from a

 Hat piece of glass. From these parameters, he calculated that the radius of curvature of

 the lens was 10,370 in., or 864 2/12 feet (ca; see calculation of semidiameter sphaerae
 in the detail reproduced in Fig. 2), and that the lens subtended 3° 10'58" when viewed
 from its center of curvature.11

 Bulkeley had suggested to his friend a lens with a diameter of 48 feet and 4 in.
 thickness—nice round numbers—and Harriot had gone on to calculate the other
 dimensions of the glass. Why did Bulkeley suggest Harriot explore the properties

 9 British Library. MS Additional 6789, fols. 132-141. The papers are misarranged (see "Appendix 1" for
 the likely correct arrangement, and for a short description of all the papers in this bundle); the title to the
 whole bundle, as cited, is on fol. 135.

 10 That the lens was made of glass, and not crystal (which would have had quite different refractive
 properties) is clear both from Harriot's rough calculation on fol. 141, which explicitly state "a vitro ad
 aerem" ("from glass to air"), and his use of Witelo's tables for refraction through glass, as detailed below.

 ' ' The lower third of the page (not reproduced) consists a series of long divisions to calculate "de" (by which
 Harriot means /.due in his diagram) as 3° I0'58" (which Harriot continues with meaningless precision to
 25 thirds (sixtieths of a second of arc) and 9 fourths (sixtieths of thirds), as can be seen in the lower right
 corner of Fig. 2).

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 141

 r

 "fl m ~7Pr"

 —-n 7n VjY. cj' ~v'* ■
 *■ i»S- Hi *

 1 ■

 ,;.y£ , J>

 x I ç# ry**#€,■ [*-e7J * rK «

 J "I* "f * :*P* ; Jf
 ;S: ^ f
 >>^* *>

 jXfR-. &&
 c* ■ i«*—- *
 iny*^
 tfA&M 17 r+*? • r
 . -ag^-T ' " ' *"7^TX^—SLi»

 I 7 • i ' 'à

 (0

 A^' ... ts **' *'* 0~a0'
 htf* *' Ï- * ,>
 ft4 , * ' :f"s
 iT\

 f4- I"#"/ W~f^^ ' » ; «« ft.»

 r^*-4 .

 g^».d*. §• >»■ ft- 4. ,r
 !>■#»

 Fig. 2 Detail from BL MS Add. 6789. fol 135: calculation of center of curvature

 of this lens, and what did he want to know about it? That question is answered in sub
 sequent sheets in this bundle. Another, more immediate question may have occurred
 to the reader by this point, however: did Bulkeley possess such a glass? It would be
 easy to assume that "Mr Bulkeley his Glasse" was a real optical instrument that Har
 riot was examining, like "Mr W. Copes Cristall," sketched and described elsewhere in
 Harriot's papers: an imperfect, long triangular prism with which he conducted some

 experiments on refractive colors.12 Harriot certainly did borrow, or commission, real
 glasses from friends and instrument makers, both in London, and in his own retinue in

 the Earl's house.13 But this glass, without a shadow of a doubt, existed only in Bulke
 ley's imagination (and perhaps Harriot's too). Quite apart from the fantastic precision

 needed to grind a large lens with such a huge radius of curvature, which was far beyond

 the technology of Harriot's or any age, such a lens could not even have supported its
 own weight.14 Lens craft reached that barrier with glasses that were a fraction of the

 size of Bulkeley's. The objective lens in the great 1895 refractor at Yerkes Observatory

 Ibid., fol. 148. These experiments perhaps formed part of the series of investigations of prismatic colors
 that Harriot conducted (and dated) in 1605 (fols 190-200). There is a discussion of Cope's crystal, and a
 full-page reproduction of this manuscript folio, in Gage (2000, 131-132). For the possible appearance of
 [Sir Walter?] Cope's prism, in a newly discovered masque by Ben Jonson, see Reeves (2010, 181).

 13 From around 1605 until his death, Harriot employed the spectacle maker Christopher Tooke to grind
 lenses and other optical devices for him on site (Shirley 1983, 382-383).

 14 Assuming that the lens was made of a substance similar to crown glass, which has a specific gravity of
 2.54, one can calculate that Bulkeley's lens would have weighed 2919 lb; clearly a glass that was only 4
 in. thick at its center, and only a fraction of an inch thick at the edges, would have shattered under its own
 weight.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 142 R. Goulding

 • . i>/v *~1 ■

 >* vt/w ■ 'Mf/ {>< f •

 tsi; *&, -
 y- i.t>. a./: i!t: "irrtprr. 4*». _ ,
 If- t o } y f , y . ~Z. y $&?. ■ V. tt. t

 ■ i&f-v-&***$ ■%•*&:£t*«f.
 % p'. xi. Iff? ?T7- *"• ~ '
 y _ "2-v- l/.o-t

 i -^- . x*tng4&k. ,
 t ~v>~ • \y**M *-*- & ^
 a f'?' ,,. // . /// " ' *
 a- f f' .. ■'•' • ' ,, ' „-/A, £■_>*: -,
 ■ Urft-** ~ 1r~&'

 ; v ( «*—<*-• ' ' • „ > , ^ « •* ♦

 -x.,yog-4^z~ . lyyyyfJJ V o ? , «-/•"/"tr~&'i

 y~t>) wj.r . <-^V. 5SC 5 I } 5V, lZT~ * ^tw^'r -

 , . f V <h«fa ^ ^ ■* »/ ~^ , •/
 H U/tr-i- ^

 ?" r» ' ,f/ 3T / £,001,1811. tZZ

 J 7 f 4 147~~~ '
 ^ J f £ * ^
 £J-*4vi?
 T^rrrj'TiT^H- **

 Fig. 3 Detail from I32r: calculation of burning point
 Fig. 3 Detail from 132r: calculation of burning point

 .<. JU-J OH»«^ -<■?/•

 • <. jj. juf,

 » „#,»< » •

 }#" «',»< » - ;«£«%*•,
 "<■>•*?• J?
 *2? ■ % g • %$ ■

 m i
 krt; /// f
 .,t tf' a f" , u-fif-i» <■•-*"' «'■«-<—/V
 1 '•:II in ., , .
 car:,, , x*y*'xr,iL_: , -±t
 F'** ^rV/Wi. W*',*rr*U. ,w
 *.rZyt4>Z4±- '
 pgjterM*- — X, y^9 ~fyt»*o.

 * # «J ### #»* y tifv - " • - x.

 ?fp~7 ■ . 9.1

 '~?i. . miW(,^Ti35T~v*

 J- f-' -4iS?.7i **,1 *6? 'J, 'JJ ' * pf'M'

 fr^' M^/'TS ——-~—,

 Fig. 4 Detail from fol. 133r: calculation of burning point
 Fig. 4 Detail from fol. 133r: calculation of burning point

 (the largest refractor in the world) had a diameter of 40 in. and represents to this day
 the upper limit of lens size: larger glasses sagged and cracked under gravity, and even
 the Yerkes objective proved to be maddeningly difficult to manufacture and mount.15

 In the second part of this paper. I will attempt to answer why Bulkeley and Harriot
 were interested in a vast, imaginary lens. But first, the question of what they wanted

 to know about the lens. This question has a quite simple answer: Bulkeley wanted to
 know how far such a lens would be able to burn things, and this is the question that
 Harriot considered on fols. 132 and 133 of this bundle. He determined that the focal

 point of the lens would be found at a distance of 18,664.8 in. (on fol. 132; see Fig. 3)
 or 24,189.3 in. (on fol. 133, Fig. 4). (The fact that there were two different answers
 is crucial to understanding the place of these papers in Harriot's development and it
 will be examined below.) To put it another way, he found that the lens would ignite
 objects placed between 500 and 670 yards away—the upper limit a little more than a

 third of a mile distant. Harriot determined the burning point of the lens by considering
 the passage of a ray through the glass very close to its central axis, and at its very

 edge, tracing how it bent through the glass, and then following its route back to the

 15 Van Helden (1984,51).

 4y Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass

 Mirror
 Mirror

 Fig. 5 Angles of incidence and reflection or refraction

 axis.16 He was able to do so because, at some point between 1597 and 1602, Harriot

 had discovered the long sought-after law that governed the refraction of light.

 2 The problem of refraction: a digression

 Since antiquity—indeed, before a science of "optics" had even been formulated—it
 was well known that a ray of light (or rather, for most ancients, a ray of vision) striking

 a mirror at a particular angle of incidence was reflected from the angle at exactly the

 same angle.17 Refraction, the bending of light as it passes between different transpar

 ent substances, had also been observed since antiquity; it was a truism of the ancient
 skeptical school, for instance, that the apparent bending of rowers' oars in the water

 was a sign that the sense of sight could not be trusted.18 Ancient and medieval theo

 rists of light assumed that there was some regularity in the size of refractive angles,
 just as simple as that observed in reflective angles; yet, they found themselves quite
 unable to formulate it (Fig. 5). The greatest physical scientist of the Roman Empire,

 16 See "Appendix 2" for a detailed account of Harriot's ray-tracing through the lens.

 17 One of the most sensitive and comprehensive accounts of the early history of the law of reflection can
 be found in Takahashi (1992).

 18 For ancient optics as an attempted defense of sight against skeptical attacks, see Berryman (1998).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 144 R. Goulding

 Claudius Ptolemy, carefully measured angles of refraction as light passed between air

 and water, air and glass, and glass and water, but could not enunciate a relationship

 between the angles; he included his tables of measurements in his Optics, however.19

 Some later theorists attempted to formulate a relationship that would emphasize the

 kinship between reflection and refraction: Damianos in late antiquity, for instance,

 asserted that, for any angle of incidence on any transparent medium, the light would

 be refracted at an angle precisely half the size. This rule was so evidently incorrect that

 it attracted hardly a single supporter; nevertheless, the later optical tradition remained

 convinced that some rule of this order of simplicity would eventually be discovered.20

 The most acute optical theorist before Kepler, the Egyptian ibn al-Haytham (Alha

 cen), described even more elaborate and sophisticated experiments than Ptolemy's to

 measure refraction, but came no closer to stating a rule, beyond what he took to be

 safe (but, as it turned out, not universally true) statements about the relative sizes of

 incident and refracted rays.21 In Western Europe, among the late thirteenth-century

 optical theorists known collectively as the "Perspectivists," Roger Bacon and John

 Pecham contented themselves with a merely qualitative description of refraction (that

 light bends toward the perpendicular when passing from a less dense to more dense

 substance, for instance), while Witelo, after adding even further refinements to Alha

 cen's experimental designs, passed off Ptolemy's refraction tables as his own. It was

 through Witelo's presentation of the tables (into which he introduced some significant

 errors) that opticians of Renaissance Europe knew of Ptolemy's experimental results,

 which they continued to rely on well into the seventeenth century, even after Descartes

 had published the modern law of refraction.22

 The most important development before Harriot came with Giambattista della

 Porta's De refractione, of 1593 (della Porta 1593). Delia Porta was famous through

 out Europe for his encyclopedia of "natural magic," which included a very influential

 chapter on the marvelous properties of lenses, mirrors, and the camera obscuraP His

 work devoted to the refraction of light was altogether more obsure. As Kepler wrote a

 decade after its publication in his great work on optics, Ad Vitellionem paralipomena

 19 For Ptolemy's original text, including his tables, see Smith (1996,229-238). It is clear that Ptolemy did

 think he had discovered a mathematical relationship, and fudged his observations so that the relationship

 constant second-order differences would hold; he did not state the relationship explicitly, because such an

 arithmetic rule could not be expressed using Greek geometrical language, and only such relationships could

 be considered "laws." For this argument, see especially (Smith 1982).

 20 Robert Grosseteste, in the early thirteenth century, independently formulated the same rule. See Eastwood
 (1970), and Eastwood (1967).

 21 Smith (2010a, lxiii—lxvii). The slightly earlier Baghdad theorist, ibn Sahl, formulated a construction for

 refraction that implied the modern sine law; see Rashed (1990); and, for an edition and translation of all
 the relevant Arabic texts on refraction (Rashed 1993). Rashed's thesis, that ibn Sahl's work influenced al

 Haytham and the subsequent tradition of Arabic optics, has been convincingly challenged in Smith (2010a,

 Ixv-lxvii, lxxxii-lxxxiv); he argues, in effect, that ibn Sahl's treatise seems to have remained unread or

 unnoticed by all later Arabic writers, and had no effect on the future development of optics.

 22 For Witelo's maladroit versions of Ptolemy's tables (which were already of suspect value), and the

 unwarranted authority they held for some four hundred years, see Lohne ( 1968).

 22 This is in book 17 of the longer recension of the work, first published as della Porta (1589) and subse

 quently reissued in dozens of editions, and translated into every major European language. On della Porta
 and the "secrets" tradition, see Eamon (1994).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 145

 ( 1604), he had long searched for a copy and had never been able to locate one.24 It was

 perhaps to the benefit of della Porta's reputation that the work was known more by

 repute than by acquaintance; for, although it contains moments of insight, the work as

 a whole is one of the most bizarre and misguided attempts on the problem of refraction
 ever devised.25

 Delia Porta opened the main section of his De refractione with an analysis of the

 reflection of light in a spherical mirror. His work in this part of the treatise is a model

 of clarity and accuracy. In fact, he provided the first correct description of the focusing

 power of the mirror since antiquity, showing that rays close to the axis of the mirror

 are reflected near to a point halfway between the center of curvature of the mirror and

 its surface. He was correct both in his location of the focus and in his recognition that

 the spherical mirror focused only imperfectly, the phenomenon known as "spherical

 aberration." The ancient optician Diocles and Alhacen had both demonstrated the same

 fact, but in works that became known to Western Europe only in the modern period.

 The extant ancient and Arabic works on the spherical mirror that were known to the

 Perspectivists and Renaissance optics (including even Euclid's Catoptrica) provided

 confused and often self-contradictory information about the focal properties of the
 mirror.26

 Della Porta's treatment on the burning mirror was thus of great value, and Harriot

 recognized as much in his own work on the concave spherical mirror.27 But the only

 reason that della Porta was interested in the spherical mirror in a book on refraction

 was that he used the mirror to explain the passage of rays through a spherical glass ball

 and a concave lens-like glass. Figure 6 shows della Porta's construction for refraction

 in a glass ball (De refractione II.2), which della Porta claimed acted analogously to a

 spherical mirror. If a ray is incident from P, to the left of the ball, we are to imagine

 that there is a spherical mirror fitting around the right-hand half of the ball (at XWZ,

 sharing the center O of the glass ball). If the imaginary mirror would reflect the ray

 to point T on the axis, then (della Porta asserted, without a word of justification)

 the ball will refract the ray to the symmetrical point outside the ball (to point R, so

 that R and T are equally distant from W, the "back" of the ball). He made a similar

 statement for the concave shape in Fig. 7. We must imagine that a refracting glass

 ball (XYZW) is fitted into the cavity XYZ. If the glass ball (according to della Porta's

 24 As Zik (2003, 490) and Smith (2010a, ccxxiii) have argued, however, Kepler's summary in the Par
 alipomena of della Porta's theory of the eye was derived from the De refractione (of which he must have

 obtained a précis, if not the text itself), and not merely the easily available Magia naturalis.

 25 There is still little modern scholarship on della Porta's De refractione. Lindberg (1984) surveys della

 Porta's refractive theory, and comes to very critical conclusions about its value. Smith (2010a, xciii-xcvii)

 covers much the same ground, but concludes (a little perversely, I think) that della Porta's method was

 promising, and may have informed Kepler's approach to the analysis of lenses. Dupre (2005, 167-170),

 while acknowledging the "arbitrary geometry" used by della Porta in his optics, makes a convincing case

 that his account of the optics of lenses in De refractione belongs within the tradition of northern Italian

 optics associated with Ettore Ausonio, whose influence Dupré's various publications have done so much to
 illuminate.

 26 See Knorr( 1983).

 27 Harriot's calculation throughout his notes on the spherical mirror of the axis intercept of a ray incident

 at angle 8 as 1/2 sect? was derived directly from proposition II. 1 of the De refractione (pp. 36-41). His

 explicit statement of the rule at MS 6789, fol. 390, uses the same diagram as della Porta in II. 1.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 146 R. Goulding

 Incident Ray q / Imaginary Ray for Reflection

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 6 Deila Porta's construction for refraction in a glass sphere (after De refractione II.2, pp. 42-43)
 Fig. 6 Delia Porta's construction for refraction in a glass sphere (after De refractione II.2, pp. 42-43)

 Z

 Fig. 7 Delia Porta's model for refraction in concave glass (after De refractione II.4, pp. 43-45)
 Fig. 7 Delia Porta's model for refraction in concave glass (after De refractione II.4, pp. 43-45)

 method in the previous proposition) would refract along line QR, then (claimed della
 Porta, again without a word of justification) the concave instrument will refract along

 QL, the mirror image of QR in the continuation of the original incident ray, PQS.

 Della Porta's treatment of refraction has some obvious peculiarities. He gave no

 demonstration that rays were refracted in the way he claimed—he did not even attempt

 to justify his models, in particular the importation of the spherical mirror into the refrac

 tive constructions. Perhaps the long-held belief that refraction should be analogous to

 reflection seemed sufficient grounds for his assertions. What is more, his model was
 not particularly accurate in predicting what a real glass ball or concave lens would

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 147

 actually do;28 and took no account of the fact that refracting balls made of different

 substances (glass, lead crystal, water) would refract in an entirely different way, a fact

 known since antiquity.29

 There is something yet more puzzling about his constructions, however. Delia

 Porta's attention was directed entirely to finding the point at which the emergent

 ray cuts the axis of the instrument (in the case of the glass sphere). He entirely ignored

 what happened in between the point that the ray contacted the ball (at point Q in

 Fig. 6), and its final arrival at the axis (at R): note that the "path" of the ray, QR,

 passes out of the ball without being bent at the glass-air interface. By determining

 the final trajectory of the ray through an a priori analogy with a mirror, della Porta

 rejected the fundamental method of ancient and medieval (and even modern) optics:

 ray analysis, in which the theorist determines the effect of a glass by tracing the ray

 from interface to interface, whether reflective or refractive. Every optical treatise on
 mirrors and combinations of mirrors that della Porta could have read worked in this

 way. And refraction could be treated the same way, although with more difficulty, even

 without an adequate theory of refraction; Alhacen and Witelo both stated and proved

 theorems in which they ingeniously managed to trace quite accurately the path of light

 ray through a glass sphere, refraction by refraction, even though their understanding

 of refraction was qualitative and imprecise.30 Della Porta, on the other hand, treated

 his instruments as a kind of "black box:" light entered one side, something happened

 to it in the middle, and it exited the other to reach the point predicted by his model.

 An interesting question could be posed to della Porta, however: what mathematical

 relationship would have to hold between the angle of incidence (i) and refraction

 (r), such that a ray passing through these instruments would emerge at just the place

 predicted by his model? (The dotted line QMR in Fig. 6 shows such a ray). Or, to

 put it another way, what would happen if we insisted on using traditional ray analysis

 on della Porta's models? Della Porta never offered an answer—if the question even

 occurred to him—but it is in fact possible to derive a relationship. Light would travel

 through the glass ball to just the place that della Porta predicted if this relationship

 held between the angles of incidence and refraction:

 And if one analyzes the concave glass using the same method, the following relation

 ship is found to hold:

 . , sin2i
 sin 2 (i — r) =

 4 cosi — 1

 tan(r -i) =

 sin 2 i

 cos i + cos 2 i

 28 See Smith (2010a, cxxii) for a comparison between della Porta's predictions and actual refractions.

 29 Lindberg (1984,144). Smith has shown (2010a, cxxi-cxxii) that della Porta locates the focal point of the

 refracting sphere at just the right point for a sphere made of crown glass; but this is quite accidental, since

 della Porta actually specifies that the ball should be made of crystal, which has a much higher refractive
 index than glass!

 30 These important theorems have been examined in detail recently by Smith (2010b).

 ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 148 R. Goulding

 In other words, della Porta's constructions would have implied two quite different laws
 of refraction.31

 3 Harriot, della Porta, and refraction

 Delia Porta never asked what law of refraction emerged from his peculiar models, but

 Harriot, one of the very few readers of De refractione, did. After asking this question,

 and examining the answers mathematically and experimentally, Harriot was led to

 discover the modern law of refraction. Yet, it is worth reflecting here on the peculiar

 nature of a scientific discovery that is never revealed; and how that permanently our

 approach to and understanding of the discoverer.

 Since Harriot's own time, it had been known that he had measured the refractive

 properties of various substances. In an exchange of letters with Johannes Kepler,

 Harriot even revealed some of his experimental data and promised (rashly, as we now

 know) that a full treatment of the problem would soon be ready for publication.32

 But modern interest in Harriot's work on refraction really began in 1951, when John

 Shirley published a short note in which he showed that Harriot was more than just

 a careful experimenter. After the death in 1640 of Walter Warner, Harriot's longtime
 collaborator, the mathematician John Pell made a record of conversations he had had

 with Warner on mathematical subjects.33 One recollection was particularly significant:

 Mr Warner says that he had of Mr Hariot this proportion: As the sine of one

 angle of incidence to the sine of its refracted angle, by experience; so the sine

 of any angle of incidence upon the superficies to the sine of its refracted angle,

 to be found by supputation.34

 That is, once experiment had established that some ray incident at angle t'i was

 refracted at angle r\, it was possible to find the angle of refraction n for any other ray

 incident at t'2 by the relation

 sin i 1 sin 12

 — = K

 sin r j sin ri

 where K is a constant for a particular pair of media. This was a spectacular discovery—

 both for Harriot and for Shirley, who would go on to write the standard biography of

 31 Lohne must have performed the same analysis of della Porta's constructions: in (1963, 158-159) he

 states these formulae (without demonstration) with the implication that they were della Porta's explicitly

 stated refraction laws. A complete derivation of the formulae will be found in "Appendix 3" to this article.

 32 Goulding (2012).

 33 British Library, MS Birch 4407.

 34 Shirley ( 1951,507). The passage went on to describe an experimental demonstration of this relationship

 which he (Warner) had performed. Shirley assumed this was a description of Harriot's method. However, it

 seems to be identical to the method described in one of Warner's manuscripts (British Library, MS Additional

 4395), where it is stated that this experiment was performed by Warner and Sir Thomas Aylesbury (another

 one of Harriot's associates) only after Harriot's death.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 149

 Harriot.35 This was a solution to the millenia-long search for a simple mathematical

 relationship that would govern refraction. Moreover, it was identical to the modern

 law of refraction, supposedly discovered by Willebrord Snell around 1621, and first

 published by Descartes in 1637; here was apparent proof that Harriot, who died in

 1621, had discovered the law first. The evidence, however, was questionable. The report

 was at third hand, based on the testimony of one of Harriot's most loyal supporters.

 In addition, it was written twenty years after Harriot's death, when the Cartesian

 Dioptrique, and hence the law of refraction itself, were already well known. Pell

 himself even observed (later in the same reported conversation) that this proportion

 was the same as that used by Descartes. Shirley, who was little inclined even in his

 biography of Harriot to tackle the "eight great folio volumes" of Harriot's notes,

 concluded that, if there were in fact any refraction experiments or determinations of a

 law, the original records had probably perished.

 Harriot's priority in the field of refraction was independently rediscovered by

 Johannes Lohne in 1959.36 Lohne was researching the history of refraction and

 found in the Oslo University Library a copiously annotated printed copy of Witelo's

 Optics. In the back of the volume, the reader had constructed comparative table of
 refractions. The writer summarized the results of Witelo and had also transformed

 Giambattista della Porta's second model into a mathematical law of refraction, and

 tabulated the predicted refractions alongside Witelo's.37 Finally, he included his own

 observations of refractions from air to glass and water, experiments which he dated

 August 1597 and February 1598, and noted had been performed at "Sion." Elsewhere

 in the book, next to Witelo's description of a peculiar optical phenomenon (seeing

 one's own image approach when walking in the fog), the reader noted in the mar
 gin: 'T. H. Ego talem vidi, an. 158(?) august. 29 in aedibus regiis otelands" ("I, T.
 H., saw such a thing on August 29, 158? at the royal estate at Otelands"). From this
 annotation, and the reference to "Sion," Lohne identified the annotator as Harriot,
 mathematician to the Earl of Northumberland, whose London residence was Sion
 House.38

 Lohne's curiosity about Harriot was piqued, and he turned his attention to his

 optical papers in the British Library.39 On the very first sheets, he found tables of

 refractions for various media, for every degree between 0° and 90°; the sines of angles

 of incidence and refraction were in the same proportion in each table, which had

 35 Shirley (1983).

 36 Lohne (1959).

 37 That is, he derived and applied the tangent formula on p. 15 above. This is the only known instance of a

 reader of the De refractione extracting the formula implied for ray analysis. Curiously, in none of Lohne's

 articles on Harriot or refraction does he mention that Harriot applied this formula—despite the fact that

 Lohne seems to be the only modern scholar who has derived the formula from della Porta's constructions.

 See further in "Appendix 3" below.

 38 Oslo University Library Lib. rar. 790f (of which there is a photocopy in folder 75 of John Shirley's

 papers, in the University of Delaware library. A copy is also available online at http://ub-prod01-imgs.uio.

 no/minuskel/11 g 136514).

 39 The second half of Additional MS 6789.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 150 R. Goulding

 obviously been calculated.40 Elsewhere in the volume, he found tables of observed

 refractions dated 1602; they were far more accurate than the 1597 observations, and

 each table now had an extra column for the refraction per calculum ("by calculation").

 These calculated values were, of course, found by the same sine law of refraction,

 which (Lohne concluded) Harriot must have discovered in the period 1597-1602.

 In his first article on Harriot and many subsequent studies of Harriot's optics, Lohne

 demonstrated beyond any doubt Harriot's priority in discovering the sine law and went

 a long way to explain how he discovered it.41 He also explicated some of Harriot's most

 important applications of that law, such as his analysis of the nature of the rainbow.42

 This brief account of modern scholarship's rediscovery of Harriot's engagement

 with refraction reveals some important characteristics both of Harriot as a problem in

 the history of science and of Harriot's development as an optical scientist. It is, perhaps,

 surprising that the matter of fact of something so momentous as the discovery of a

 fundamental physical law needed to be established, by following up on the rumors of

 Harriot's achievements. We could not imagine wrangling over whether Newton, for

 instance, had actually formulated a law of universal gravity, or whether that was only

 a story circulated by sentimental friends after his death. But Newton, of course, was a

 public figure and public scientist; for all his many quirks of personality, he published

 his Principia and Opticks, and (to say the least) was prepared to acknowledge them

 in the face of criticism. With Harriot, we are dealing with an altogether more private

 person, all of whose work remained in obscurity, while yet generating (as one scholar

 memorably put it) a "legacy of hearsay."43

 Lohne's brilliant detective work, on the trail of Thomas Harriot, also illuminates

 the path by which Harriot made his way to refraction: through the intensive study of
 Witelo's ancient results on refraction, and through the deconstruction of della Porta's

 refraction models in order to discover the universal mathematical regularity between

 angles of incidence and refraction that lay behind them. Harriot seems to have been the

 only person to attempt the latter task (he was, in any case, one of the very few readers

 at all of the De refractione). It is very likely significant that Harriot discovered that
 a trigonometric law was implied by della Porta's constructions—but one of almost

 absurd complexity; his own law would propose a radically more simple, yet still

 trigonometric relationship. Finally, in the blank pages of the Oslo Witelo, we see him

 comparing the results of Witelo and della Porta, and also (again, in this, probably

 one of the very few who had ever done so) making his own precise measurements of

 refraction—through which he discovered that both Witelo and della Porta were quite
 far off the mark.

 40 MS 6789, fol. 88r. Taking a random line, the angle of refraction corresponding to an angle of incidence
 of 31° is 19° I9'59". The ratio of the sines of these angles (and of all the pairs of angles in the table) is
 0.642785 = sin 40°. The value of sin 40° (or, rather, its reciprocal) is what we would now call the refractive

 index of the glass. (Harriot's glass thus had a refractive index of approximately 1.55, well within the range
 of indices for crown glass).

 41 In Lohne (1959); and especially Lohne ( 1973, 1979).

 42 Lohne (1965).

 44 Tanner (1967).

 0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 151

 One other thing should be noted from this survey: as exemplary as Lohne's schol

 arship was in almost every way, he was interested almost exclusively in the question

 of the law of refraction and in other problems of great subtlety that coincided with

 modern scientific interests (the nature of the rainbow, for instance). An apparently

 absurd problem like Mr Bulkeley's fantastic glass did not attract his attention, nor

 that of any other scholar. But by focusing on the high points of the papers—the tabu

 lated law, the careful measurements—and ignoring the hundreds of pages of scribbled

 problems and calculations, Lohne and other scholars missed both the context in which

 Harriot proposed his law and, ironically, one of the important turning points in the

 development of the law.

 For, in fact, the papers on Bulkeley's glass are very odd, and not just because of

 the imaginary subject matter. Harriot, as noted above, worked through the problem

 twice and obtained two quite different answers. In one set of pages,44 he calculated the

 focal point of the glass using his sine law of refraction. In the other set of pages,45 he

 performed the same calculations, but, in order to find the refraction at each interface,

 instead of using the sine law, he derived his refraction values from Witelo's tables of

 refraction, using simple linear interpolation.46 His use of this method suggests, for

 several reasons, that the Bulkeley's glass papers represent an early stage of his optical

 work. First, there is only one other place in any of his extant papers that Harriot used the

 same method: in some papers that concern a similarly huge, flattened cone of a glass,

 a problem which he seems to have picked up as a simple approximation to Bulkeley's

 spherical glass.47 As it happens, it is possible to say with certainty that these papers

 on the refractive cone were written earlier than most of the other optical papers. In one

 corner of fol. 353, Harriot calculated the value of versin 16'—that is, ( 1 - cos 16'). The

 correct value should be .0000108308; we can observe Harriot making a carrying error,

 however, which leads him to the incorrect answer of .0000118308 (see the upper left of

 the detail reproduced in Fig. 8). This parameter is fundamental to Harriot's analysis of

 burning glasses and is copied from this page into dozens of what must be subsequent

 bundles of papers.

 The peculiar versin expression leads us to the final part of Harriot's analysis of

 Bulkeley's glass. At the bottom of the two pages, he neatly wrote calculations about

 the "angle of a cone" (angulus coni), involving the erroneous value of versin 16'

 (details from both reproduced in Fig. 9).48 It would take us too far afield to explain in

 detail what is going on here; but very briefly, 16' is the angular measure of the radius

 of the sun, and his calculation at the bottom of the page was his attempt to quantify

 the burning power of the instrument in multiples of the sun. In the equally early flat

 44 Fol. 132, and the associated working papers, as listed in "Appendix 1".

 45 Fol. 133, and others as listed in "Appendix 1".

 46 Thus, on these pages he states that a 1° ray is refracted at an angle of 42'. Witelo's table says that a 10°

 ray is refracted at 7°; 42' is one tenth of 7°. Full details of Harriot's calculations are in "Appendix 2" below.

 47 MS Add. 6789, fols 348-361. One of the glasses, considered on fol. 352r, has very similar dimensions

 to Bulkeley's glass: a radius of 25 feet (compared to Bulkeley's 24), and a thickness at the center of 3 in.
 (compared to Bulkeley's 4).

 48 The little "u" without a tail is Harriot's usual symbol for "sine"; so that "u versus" means versin, or
 1-cosine.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 152 R. Goulding

 ' M - Mi J

 mSlJïâ&TZr. S"*
 © f,l> H I / c a a
 r.& <£>.. H r „,
 yb $ ' £ W- / xtlH'vs ^'/

 „ fD ■// x «• — ***r /1 * *** *

 ,; ; ®'. ^,»r tI

 „..z%s*»y S<f*¥S*" * / j (jr £?'«S* *> V f?

 a «*

 ,f *3 "3 - 4 {} & 6 & &

 <r t
 & #' *» « *■' ::" „ :"' ,

 2-xCJ} v<*

 Fig. 8 Detail from fol. 353r: Harriot's error in calculating versin 16'
 Fig. 8 Detail from fol. 353r: Harriot's error in calculating versin 16'

 f0,

 , / //

 YiJ$0

 ; v. iMiH ■ n;" •
 « * 8,*$ o#' v - fasf-i - * £> f t* L

 | 4 P J 4 v J ' V ' ' ' T J > 10 , J y^-t^ -r
 ' v*

 f K
 r :
 r^x-v—

 IC —

 I

 /

 *5

 I t g J C g r 1' , t(f 1 7 ' Sj
 l * $ J c %' V ,

 Fig. 9 Details from 132r and 133r: calculation of burning power, using the two methods of refraction
 Fig. 9 Details front 132r and 133r: calculation of burning power, using the two methods of refraction

 conical glass pages, he gave this parameter the title "so many sonnes doe burne" (see
 Fig. 8), a concept that he would elsewhere in the manuscripts express with the more
 concise Latin phrase "tot soles." He concluded here that the glass, by the sine law,
 burns with the power of 10 suns, but only 6 suns using Witelo's numbers.49

 The very fact that he did not use the otherwise ubiquitous term "tot soles," and
 referred to the "angle of the cone" (of radiation from the surface of the glass), as
 if to explain to himself what he was calculating, again suggests that there are early
 sheets. Elsewhere in the manuscripts, he scrawled tot soles calculations almost by

 rote, sometimes several times on a single page. But far more significant for the dating
 is the fact that he labored through all the calculations using both the sine law and
 interpolation from Witelo's time-hallowed tables. His double calculation is a second

 indicator (after the connection to the early conical glass papers) that the notes on

 Bulkeley's glass were written early—in fact, very likely soon after his discovery of
 the sine law. Harriot would go on to write out degree-by-degree tables of refraction
 calculated according to the sine law. having discovered that the results obtained in
 experiment after experiment tallied, with stunning accuracy, with his calculations of

 sines; once he had become confident with his law, it would be hard to imagine him
 bothering to turn back to Witelo's tables, which squared so poorly with his experimental

 49 The calculation of tot soles, ubiquitous in Harriot's optical papers, and its central significance in Harriot's
 optical researches, is one of the main topics treated in my forthcoming work on Harriot's optics.

 0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 153

 data, and repeat a series of onerous calculations. The pages on Bulkeley's glass look
 like the work of someone with a new law, who nevertheless still half-relied on the old.

 His work on Bulkeley's glass (and the closely related work on the flattened conical

 glass) very likely represent his first application of the sine law, after its discovery; and

 his use of both methods in a "real" problem provided an opportunity for him to test

 out the difference that his new law would make. His efforts, we must imagine, paid

 off; for, as we have seen, the sine law predicted a significantly different result for the

 burning position of the lens.

 There is a great deal of surmise and triangulation involved in placing these papers

 in relation to the rest of Harriot's optical work. But several independent lines of

 argument point to the strong possibility that we are seeing in these pages the first

 outing of a fundamental physical law: paradoxically enough applied not to a real

 experimental instrument, but to a vast, imaginary flight of fancy he shared with his

 circle-squaring correspondent! The question "why," raised at the beginning of this

 paper, now intrudes itself with even more urgency than before. Why did he choose

 to apply his new discovery to this imaginary, even ridiculous problem? In the rest of

 the paper, I will take two approaches to answering this question. In the first, I will

 sketch out what might be called a cultural context for Bulkeley's glass: what could

 such a huge glass "mean," to Bulkeley, or to Harriot? In the second, I will consider a

 mathematical context: what outstanding problems in mathematical optics could have

 inspired Harriot to investigate this glass so thoroughly? Was there some mathematical

 or scientific reward to working through this problem, beyond satisfying the curiosity

 of his correspondent?

 4 The cultural context

 In a letter revealing glimpses of "the secrets of art and nature," the thirteenth-century
 English Franciscan Roger Bacon, founder of the Perspectivist school of medieval

 optics, promised great marvels from lenses and mirrors:

 Perspective glasses can be constructed in such a way that things located far away

 can appear very close, and vice versa; so that we are able to read the tiniest letter

 from an incredible distance, and we can count things however small, and we can

 make the stars appear wherever we want. It is believed that this is how Julius

 Caesar, from the coast of Gaul, was able with the aid of huge mirrors to discern

 the arrangement and location of the forts and cities of Great Britain.50

 And in his Opus maius, the work he wrote in part to inform the Pope of the tech

 nological precautions that would need to be taken for the end times, he wrote that

 "[the parabolic] mirror would burn fiercely everything on which it could be focused.

 We are to believe that Antichrist will use these mirrors to burn up cities and camps

 50 Roger Bacon, Epistola de secrelis operibus artis et naturae, et de militate magiae 5 (Bacon 1859,

 534): "Possunt enim sic figurari perspicua ut longissime posita appareant propinquissima, et e converso;

 ita quod ex incredibili distantia legeremus minutissimas literas, et numetaremus res quascunque parvas, et

 Stellas faceremus apparere quo vellemus. Sic enim aestimatur Julius Caesar super littus maris in Galliis,

 deprehendisse per ingentia specula dispositionem et situm castrorum et civitatum Britanniae maioris."

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 154 R. Goulding

 and armies."51 We can see that Bacon's fantasies of technological magic were just

 that: imaginative extrapolations from the technology and natural philosophy of antiq

 uity and his own age, sometimes uncannily prescient, as when (in the same letter on

 Secrets) he imagined flying machines and underwater ships. Earlier readers, however,

 were less certain whether they were reading fact or fiction, and in England, a myth

 of Bacon as a superhuman magus quickly developed, which culminated in popular

 printed literature of the late sixteenth century such as the anonymous Famous Historie

 of Fryer Bacon, and Robert Greene's Honorable Historie of Frier Bacon, and Frier
 Bongay?'

 Even the learned took some account of Bacon's supposed marvelous feats. While

 they tended to ignore the wild claims of lévitation and enchanted talking heads, they

 seemed to find the claims about mirrors quite plausible. As early as 1385, the Francis

 can chronicler Peter of Trau recorded that Bacon had two glasses, one that could ignite

 candles by sun or moonlight, and another that would reveal misfortune anywhere in

 the kingdom:

 He was so complete a master of optics that from love of experiment he neglected

 teaching and writing and made two mirrors in the University of Oxford: by one

 of them you could light a candle at any hour, day or night; in the other you could

 see what people were doing in any part of the world. By experimenting with

 the first, students spent more time in lighting candles than studying books; and

 seeing, in the second, their relatives dying or ill or otherwise in trouble, they got

 into the habit of going down, to the ruin of the University, so by common council

 of the University both mirrors were broken.55

 Robert Recorde, the pioneer of mathematical education in Tudor England, had to

 devote some energy to persuading his superstitious countrymen that there was nothing

 diabolical in mathematical diagrams or geometrically inspired technology.54 The myth

 of Bacon seemed to him an ideal example of purely natural "magic." As he wrote in

 his Pathway to Knowledge, the first English vernacular textbook of geometry and its

 applications:

 Great talke there is of a glasse that [Bacon] made in Oxforde, in whiche men

 myght see thynges that were doon in other places, and that was iudged to be

 done by power of euyll spirites. But I knowe the reason of it to bee good and

 51 Opus mains IV.2.2: "Nam hoc speculum potenter combureret omne quod posset objici. Et credendum

 est quod Antichristus his utetur, ut civitates et castra et exercitus comburat." Latin text from Bacon (1987,
 116); translation from Bacon (1928. 135).

 52 On these two texts and their sources, see Molland ( 1974).

 53 Power (2006,660). For the original Latin text, see Molland ( 1974,446—447). For the English interest in
 Bacon's account of marvelous mirrors, see Reeves (2008, 15-30 and 58-70) on the legend of Bacon, Dee's

 great mirror and Digges's telescopic claims (discussed below); passim on parallel myths from antiquity to

 the middle ages of mirrors that warned of danger.

 •S4 On Recorde's role in combating a popular association of mathematics (including optics) with demonic

 magic, and his defense of Roger Bacon, see Zetterberg (1980. 86-90). On Recorde's mathematical and
 medical career in general (Williams 2011 ).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 155

 naturall, and to be wrought by geometrie (sythe perspectiue is a parte of it) and

 to stände as well with reason as to see your face in common glasse.55

 In Oxford itself, the young mathematician Henry Savile bolstered the credibility of

 the legend by including it in his famous 1570 lectures on the history of mathematics.

 Bacon, and optics in general, fitted into the patriotic English cast he attempted to give

 to his history:

 It was first from this country that John Pecham, Archbishop of Canterbury,

 published his Perspectiva communis, preoccupied though he was by the affairs

 of state. In almost the same century, Roger Bacon imitated his industry. After

 he had exhibited that marvelous mirror of his—an image, one might say, of his

 genius and learning—to his fellow Oxonians, he inspired the whole world with

 enthusiasm for studying optics, so demonstrating that things could be achieved

 very easily by the optical philosophy that to others seemed very difficult, or even

 impossible.56

 A little later, Reginald Scot, in his Discoverie ofWitchcrafi (published in 1584), intro

 duced into the English optico-magical discourse the specular illusions of della Porta's

 De magia naturali (in its shorter, first edition), to which he added a deeply felt moral
 purpose lacking in its model. Scot wrote his book, he explained, because he was

 appalled to see unfortunate wretches persecuted as witches. But where, he asked, was
 the evidence for witchcraft? As far as he could determine, these so-called witches

 were not in league with the devil, but had been singled out because they were poor, or

 resented by others, or led odd, solitary lives, or—in some cases—actually had inex

 plicable powers. But these powers were not obtained through demonic intercession;

 rather, they were examples of natural magic. Scot devoted himself to showing how

 almost anything that these reputed witches were accused of could be explained either

 through the action of wholly natural causes, or through some deception or sleight of

 hand—they were dishonest, perhaps, but not diabolical. In the process of compiling

 his treatise, Scot gathered everything he could learn not only from books like della

 Porta's, but also from performers he saw in the marketplace, until his work became

 a veritable encyclopedia of illusion and trickery. It is unlikely that any hustlers were

 threatened with the stake for performing the three-card monte; but, in case they were,

 detailed instructions revealing how that scam worked could be found here as well.57

 55 Recorde (1551, sig. t3r (Preface)). Cited by Baxandall (1923, 305).

 56 Bodleian Library, MS Savile 29, fol. 15v: "hinc primum tot reip[ublicae] districtus occupationibus

 Joannes Peccham cantuariensis archiepiscopus perspectivam communem aedidit. cuius industriam eodem

 ferme seculo imitatus Rogerius deinde Bacho postquam suum illud mirificum speculum, tamquam ingenii et

 doctrinae specimen suis oxoniensibus proposuisset, totam orbem perspectivae discendae incendit[,] Optica

 philosophia facillimum illud esse demonstrans, quod aliis arduum negotium imo plane adunaton videretur."

 57 Scot's book was, in fact, the Urtext for the entire English tradition of conjuring books. Samuel Ryd

 plagiarized parts of the Discoverie of Witchcraft in his Art of Jugling of 1612, the first English book devoted

 entirely to stage magic. This in tum was subsumed into the anonymous Hocus Pocus Junior of 1634, which

 subsequently appeared in dozens of editions through to the eighteenth century. See Hall (1972) 47-62 (on
 the Discoverie), and 120-132 (on the tradition of Hocus Pocus Junior). See also Toole-Stott (1976, 125)

 for the reliance of Hocus Pocus Junior on Scot. On Scot, and the reception of the book in larger English
 society, see Almond (2011).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 156 R. Goulding

 Scot's greatest interest, and certainly his expertise, was in sleight of hand. But there

 was also a brief chapter on "divers woonderfull experiments, and of strange conclusions

 in glasses, of the art perspective &c."58 The chapter is bizarre in places, reflecting the

 mish-mash of natural and (as we would see them) magical experiments that comprised

 most medieval works on illusion, as well as della Porta's Renaissance compilation.59

 For instance, Scot borrowed from della Porta some methods of making an animal's

 head appear on a man's body—a trick with its roots in early Greek antiquity, if not

 earlier. One recipe involved burning the animal's semen, and using it as an ointment:

 "and any bodies face therewithall annointed," Scot assured his reader, "he shall seeme

 to have the like face as the beast had," an effect that Scot insisted proceeded from
 natural causes. To make the trick more effective for the audience, one could throw in

 some of the comical incantations usually associated with a "witch or papist."

 But, astonishing as such tricks might be, Scot was far more interested in the wonders

 mirrors and other glasses could perform. His long catalogue of these optical illusions

 was, in almost every case, taken from della Porta's work on natural magic. "Some

 glasses are so framed," he began, "as therein one may see what others doo in places far

 distant; others, whereby you shall see men hanging in the aire; others, whereby you

 may perceive men flieng in the air," and so forth (Scot 1584, 316). He concluded this

 chapter by referring the curious reader to Witelo and della Porta, but added that these

 illusions were not merely bookish fantasies: "These I have for the most part seene,

 and have the receipt how to make them: which, if desire of brevitie had not forbidden
 me, I would here have set downe" (Scot 1584, 317).

 Scot's claim to have witnessed such illusions and marvels of telescopic vision

 sounds like a bluff; but a group of contemporary English mathematicians may have

 provided at least two opportunities for him to see mirrors and lenses in action. Thomas

 Digges, in a passage that has become notorious in modern scholarship, claimed that

 his father Leonard had built some sort of optical device for seeing at a distance, which

 could also be adapted to concentrate the sun's rays and ignite gunpowder at a great
 distance:

 But to leave these celestiall causes and things doone of antiquitie long ago, my

 father by his continual painfull practises, assisted with demonstrations Mathe

 maticall, was able, and sundrie times hath by proportionall Glasses duely situate

 in convenient angles, not onely discovered things farre off, read letters, numbred

 peeces of money with the very coyne and superscription thereof, cast by some of

 his freends of purpose uppon Downes in open fieldes, but also seven myles of[f]

 declared wat hath been doon at that instante in private places. He hath also sun

 drie times by the Sunne beames fired powder, and dischargde Ordinaunce hälfe

 a myle and more distant, whiche things I am boulder to reporte, for that there are

 yet living diverse (of these his dooings) Oculati testes [i.e., eyewitnesses], and

 58 Scot (1584,315-317) (book 13, ch. 19).

 the categories of "magical" and "natural."

 59 See Goulding (2006) for the text and translation of a medieval compilation of illusion experiments, and

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 157

 many other matters farre more straunge and rare which I omitte as impertinente

 to this place.60

 Digges makes, we note, two principal claims in this passage: that his father's appa

 ratus was able to see minute details of things at seven miles' distance, and that it could

 ignite a fire from half a mile. We must assume that the latter claim concerned one glass

 in isolation, because of the difference between the power of the his instrument to see

 versus the much smaller distance of ignition (one fourteenth as far). The "telescope,"

 on the other hand, must have been (imagined to be)61 compounded of two or more

 glasses, the most powerful of which individually had a half-mile focal distance.

 Such an distinction between the individual glass (for burning) and the compound

 glass (for telescopy at much greater range) is supported by William Bourne's man

 uscript on "the properties and qualities of glasses," a research proposal and plea for

 patronage that he wrote to William Cecil, Lord Burghley in around 1585.62 Bourne

 wrote at length of the focal qualities of converging mirrors and lenses and, in the final

 chapter, suggested how such glasses might be used to accomplish "those things that

 Mr Thomas Digges hathe written that his father hathe done." The experimenter was

 to take several concave mirrors and convex lenses, and arrange them so that the first

 mirror or lens sent its beam into the second, the second into the third, "and so reseaved

 from one glasse into another, beeynge so placed at suche a distance, that every glasse

 dothe make his largest beame." In other words, Bourne imagined (as perhaps did

 Digges, père et fils) that the power of the individual concave mirror or convex lens

 (glasses which actually do magnify small things close at hand)63 could be doubled and

 redoubled by combining the glasses in series, each sending its image to the next for

 further magnification until one could see small things at a very great distance64—an

 arrangement which makes rational and imaginative sense, but is unfortunately optical

 nonsense. In any case, Bourne had not been able to attempt such experiments himself,

 because unlike "Mr Dee, and allso Mr Thomas Digges," he lacked "liability of the

 purse, for to seeke thorowly what may bee done with these two sortes of Glasses."

 60 Van Helden (1977, 29-30). This passage is from Digges's completion of his father's Pantometria,
 published (London, 1571): sig. A3v.

 61 There is a quite extensive bibliography about the so-called "Elizabethan telescope," with scholars still

 divided as to its reality. The strongest argument in favor of its existence is found in Ronan (1993), Van
 Helden (1977) argued that the Elizabethan telescope had no basis in fact, but was nevertheless a crucial
 part of the legend of telescopic seeing that allowed the actual telescope to be recognized as a valuable

 instrument, once it was actually invented; in his preface to the second printing of his work (in 2008), he

 allowed that Elizabethan experimenters might have been aware of telescopic combinations of lenses and

 mirrors, even if they could not actually obtain the results they claimed with them. Eileen Reeves (in the

 passage noted in n. 53) surveys this literature comprehensively.

 62 The most accessible edition is Van Helden (1977, 30-34). On Bourne's telescopic claims and its rela

 tionship to the Elizabethan telescope, see now (Dupré 2010).

 63 They also slightly extend the range of hypermetropic sight, a fact that may have contributed to the idea

 of using such glasses for telescopy.

 64 It is perhaps worthy of note that Digges gives precisely examples of things that one might examine with

 a magnifying glass (writing, and the markings on a coin), extended to a great distance just as Roger Bacon

 had done in his entirely imaginary account of marvelous glasses.

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 158 R. Goulding

 He closed with a plea for financial support for an invention that would be of obvious
 service to the state.

 Bourne's mention of Dr. John Dee brings us to the second place that Scot and, for

 that matter, Harriot may have had a chance to experience optical marvels. Dee is best

 known as the great Elizabethan magus, who summoned angels and spirits at will to

 his house in Mortlake. He was also a talented mathematician, one of Thomas Digges's

 teachers, in fact, whose greatest work was a monumental edition in English of Euclid's

 Elements, published in 1570.65 To this work, he prepended a remarkable "Mathemati

 cal! Praeface," intently studied as much by his contemporaries as by modern historians

 of science, in which he laid out a "Groundplatt" of the whole of the mathematical arts.

 Optics was of particular interest to him, not least because of the promise it held of

 understanding astrological influences, carried from the planets to the earth with their

 light. But it also could provide uncommon entertainment:

 if you, being (alone) nere a certaine glasse, and proffer, with dagger or sword,

 to foyne at the glasse, you shall suddenly be moued to giue back (in maner) by

 reason of an Image, appearing in the ayre, betwene you & the glasse, with like

 hand, sword or dagger, & with like quicknes, foyning at your very eye, likewise

 as you do at the Glasse. Straunge, this is, to heare of: but more meruailous to

 behold, then these my wordes can signifie.66

 For once, we can be certai n that Dee was not describing a mere fantasy of an instrument.

 The "certaine glass" was a large concave mirror of a fairly short focal length, which, at

 the time that Dee wrote this, belonged to Sir William Pickering, a gentleman whom Dee

 had taught while at the University of Leuven.67 Shortly thereafter, Pickering gave it to

 Dee, who astonished Queen Elizabeth with its illusions, and later he took it with him in

 his wanderings through Europe in the mid- 1580s. Dee's spiritual amanuensis, Edward

 Kelley, was by that time receiving almost daily visits from angels, who imparted to

 the Englishmen urgent, apocalyptic messages that they demanded should be relayed
 to the Emperor in Prague. One would think that that would guarantee an imperial

 audience, but the two men (and their legions of angels) were refused for months.
 The fame of Dee's mirror had preceded him, however. Eventually he was granted

 a meeting with Rudolph II, who wanted to hear nothing of the angels' increasingly

 unhinged warnings; he would meet Dee only if he could see the curved mirror with its

 marvelous floating images, of which he heard so much. Clearly a well-made concave

 mirror was more of a rarity in sixteenth-century Europe than an apocalyptic prophet.

 The demonstration must have gone well, for, some years later, Dee wrote in his diary: "I

 gave to Mr Edward Kelley my Glass, so highly and long esteemed of ourQuene, and the

 Emperor Randolph (sic) the second, de quo in praefatione Euclidisfit mentio [which

 is mentioned in the preface to Euclid]." After his death, the mirror passed to Thomas

 65 On Dee's interests, magical and mathematical, see Clulee (1988).

 66 Henry Billingsley and John Dee, The Elements of Geometrie (London, 1570), sig. b4r. On this passage,

 and the optical trope of figures hanging in the air, see Dupré (2007). For Dee's interest in and contribution

 to the theory of mirrors, see Clulee (1977) and Clagett (1984).

 67 (Johnston 2006,69).

 <Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 159

 Allen, the mathematical "intelligencer" of Elizabethan Oxford, and eventually, in

 Allen's will, to Thomas Aylesbury, a friend of Harriot's.68

 Harriot and Bulkeley have left us not a word on the reason for their interest in

 a giant lens. But it is not at all unlikely that the persistent English traditions about

 the marvelous powers of great glasses contributed to its appeal. Even if they were

 somehow unaware of the Bacon's depiction in popular culture, Harriot would surely

 have heard of Bacon's Oxford mirrors while he was a student there, perhaps even

 from Henry Savile, or in Recorde's popular textbook. In any case, the Harriot and

 his associates were very interested in Bacon's perspectival and natural philosophical

 works, in which he could have read Bacon's extravagant claims in the original.69

 Dee's mirror was famous in England and Europe, all the more so since Dee himself
 had described it in his widely read Mathematical Praeface. And the mirror itself

 eventually ended up in the possession of his friend Thomas Allen, in whose Oxford

 rooms he may even have seen its amazing effects for himself.70 Finally, he could

 hardly have remained unaware of the telescopic glass supposedly used by Digges's

 father. Thomas Digges's various works were among the most sophisticated published

 in Elizabethan England, and he had acquired a great reputation as an expert in all things

 mathematical and natural philosophical.71 Bourne, writing to a politician, was able to

 assume that Cecil would already have heard of Leonard Digges' amazing instrument.
 Harriot could hardly have been less well informed about the English technology of

 mirrors than the Lord High Treasurer.

 All of these marvels may have contributed to Harriot and Bulkeley's interest in

 a large glass. But the Diggesian glass is of particular significance here, since it is

 the only one about which specific, quantitative claims are made and, as such, may

 explain Harriot's own quantification of Bulkeley's glass, in particular the numerical

 conclusions that Harriot drew from his calculations about Bulkeley's glass. The papers

 that used the sine law to analyze the glass's burning capacity showed that the lens

 would burn at a distance of about 500 yards; moreover, it would burn with the heat of

 a little more than 10 suns, according to Harriot's idiosyncratic tot soles calculation.

 Digges, on the other hand, claimed that one of his father's glasses—a component
 of his telescopic apparatus—could set fire to gunpowder and discharge ordinance a

 whole half-mile distant. The much shorter focal distance of Harriot's absurdly ideal

 glass, as well as the relatively modest heat it would generate,72 was perhaps meant as

 68 This is the character mentioned in n. 33 above; Alien, however, died after Harriot. On the history and
 reputation of Dee's great concave mirror, see Feingold (1984, 157-158).

 69 On the interest of Harriot and his collaborators in Roger Bacon, see Clucas (2000,109) and the references
 cited in n. 68 there.

 70 In his will, Harriot directed his executors to return the twelve or fourteen manuscripts he had borrowed

 from Allen. The fact that he states he cannot remember which manuscripts precisely belonged to Allen, and

 that he had no list of them, suggests that a long-lasting friendship, during which he had borrowed manuscripts

 on several occasions. See Tanner ( 1967,246) The fact that Aylesbury was Allen's executor also suggests that

 Allen would have known Harriot—as, indeed, he knew almost every working mathematician in England.

 71 Ash (2004).

 72 Elsewhere in the manuscripts, Harriot measures effective tot soles in the hundreds or thousands. One

 paper in the bundle on the concave spherical mirror, for instance, measures the burning power of one incident
 ray as 4647 tot soles (MS 6789, fol. 116r).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 a rebuke to Digges's inflated claims. For all we know, Bulkeley may originally have

 asked Harriot about the plausibility of Digges's burning instruments and to that end

 suggested that Harriot considers the burning power of an imaginary glass that must

 have been better than whatever Leonard Digges had at hand.

 160 R.Goulding

 5 The mathematical context

 The tangle of myth and reality that characterized sixteenth-century English thought

 about optics was surely a part of what inspired Bulkeley to ask about a gigantic lens,

 and the specific claims made by Thomas Digges enabled Harriot to put the stories to the

 test. But, in addition to this factor, there is a mathematical and optical problem to which

 Bulkeley's glass offered a solution—a problem that Harriot was indeed thinking about

 in his early optical work. This problem provided a plausible "mathematical context"

 for Harriot, an intellectual stimulus to see through to the end his laborious calculations

 about Bulkeley's imaginary lens.

 It has often been noted that Perspectivist optics paid no attention to lenses, even

 though many of its protagonists must have had a pair of spectacles pinched onto the

 bridge of their noses.73 The multiply formed refractive surfaces seemed to defeat their

 qualitative grasp of refraction. Both John Pecham and Roger Bacon instead attempted

 to trace the path of light rays through a glass ball—the "burning sphere"—but, due to

 an error in the diagram tradition of Alhacen (ultimately the source of the Perspectivist

 tradition), they imagined that all parallel rays incident on the ball, however distant

 from the axis, would coincide at a single spot beyond the ball. They were unaware, in

 other words, of the spherical aberration of the refracting sphere: its focal point, like

 that of the concave mirror, is imprecisely defined. Alhacen himself had been aware of

 aberration; although he did not state it explicitly in his Optics, it was implied in two

 important theorems—theorems that Pecham and Bacon ignored, no doubt because of

 their technical complexity.74

 In contrast to his two Perspectivist predecessors, Witelo set himself the task of

 subsuming and reworking the entirety of Alhacen, proposition by proposition, and

 incorporating into the structure the work of the ancient Greek opticians, as well as
 Pecham and Bacon.75 By necessity, then, he became aware that Alhacen's two theo

 rems rendered the Perspectivist analysis of the burning sphere false. He thus faced a

 quandary: for completeness' sake, he needed to produce a theorem that covered the

 same ground as that of the other Perspectivists, but, while he could see that their results

 were false, he had no conclusive theorem with which to replace them.

 His attempt at the problem, in X.48, fell into two parts. First, he considered the

 parallel rays incident on the glass ball in concentric circles around the axis of the

 sphere. Each of these families of rays, he showed correctly, would be refracted to a

 single point beyond the ball. He said nothing about whether each family would be

 73 See Smith (2010a, Ixxxvii-lxxxix) for a survey of some of the reasons put forward for their silence.

 74 This thesis on Alhacen's knowledge of aberration and the origin of the error in the analysis of the ball

 in the diagram tradition is argued by Smith (2010b).

 75 For the relations and influences among the thirteenth-century Perspectivists, see Lindberg (1971).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 161

 Fig. 10 "Focus" of spherical segment (after Witelo X.48)

 directed to the same point (they would not, because of spherical aberration), but, at the

 same time, he did not assert that all rays would be directed to a single point, as the other

 Perspectivists had done. This statement about families of rays represented the most
 that could be salvaged from the earlier Perspectivist analysis of the burning sphere.

 But was there, in fact, a single focal point of the refracting sphere? In the second part

 of the proposition, Witelo hit upon an ingenious idea: if the ball were to be bombarded

 not with parallel rays, but with rays each perpendicular to the surface of the ball, then

 they would all pass unrefracted through the surface of the ball and meet in the center.
 So, after all, he was able to provide a sort of answer to the standard Perspectivist

 question: where is the burning point of the refracting sphere?

 But even Witelo recognized that his answer was unsatisfactory. The purpose of the

 problem was to find a burning point that could be put to use. The burning point he
 had discovered, however, was locked away fast inside the ball itself. Thus, Witelo

 concluded by suggesting that one might slice the ball just behind its center point and

 thereby reveal a usable burning point (see Fig. 10). This was a momentous suggestion,
 since Witelo had, for the very first time in the history of optics, suggested a method of

 analyzing not the glass ball, but the lens: the shape that remained after cutting through
 the ball was, in fact, a very thick, plano-convex lens.

 In his De refractione, della Porta singled out Witelo's treatment of the focal point of

 the glass sphere as one of the principal flaws in the perspectivist treatment of refraction.
 He wrote:

 Witelo is greatly in error, where he thinks that the rays of the sun, incident at

 right angles to the surface of the ball, are refracted to its center; and, because
 it seems impossible to make a test there, he wants there to be a portion of
 the sphere less than a semicircle, so that he can see whether fire is kindled in

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 162 R. Goulding

 its center—which is completely false. In fact, in the whole of Witelo's work,

 whatever he comes up with himself (beyond what is from Alhacen) is almost

 always false. A semicircular or smaller portion of the sphere reaches almost to

 the end of the diameter; and because of the second refraction, [the rays will be

 found] not in the center of the sphere, but a little closer, the reason being drawn

 from what we have already said.76

 Delia Porta was, in a sense, quite right. The second refraction at the flat interface—

 where the sphere has been cut—would bend the rays away from the perpendicular

 and thus cause them to reach the axis before the center. But that was not the most

 significant problem with Witelo's theorem. In his construction, he required all of the

 rays to be incident perpendicular to the surface of the ball and that is not how light falls

 from the sun or from any artificial light. Delia Porta was aware that non-parallel rays

 were not to be used in the analysis of burning glasses; indeed, it was a first principle of

 his own optics.77 In the paragraph before his criticism of Witelo, he had rebuked John

 Pecham for stipulating that rays proceeded from the center of the sun; "fire is kindled

 by perpendicular rays from the sun."78 In other words, his own insistence on the use of

 parallel solar rays should have alerted him to a problem in Witelo as much as it did in

 Pecham. One can only think that della Porta missed this difficulty in Witelo's theorem

 because of his own tendency to confuse "parallel" with "perpendicular," evident in the

 phrase quoted above, against Pecham. (In fact, on only the previous page, della Porta

 had drawn a diagram of light falling in "perpendicular" rays on a ball,79 in which the

 rays were clearly drawn (and described) to be parallel.)

 We can be sure that Harriot considered this proposition with some care, since it is

 one of the very few he annotated in the Oslo Witelo. In theorem X.48, he underlined

 (only) the sentence in which Witelo suggested that the sphere be cut a little short of

 a hemisphere. In the margin, he wrote, "This passage is criticized by della Porta in

 11.22, but poorly."80

 One should note that Harriot did not charge della Porta with criticizing Witelo

 incorrectly, only poorly or maladroitly (male); it is perhaps worth stepping back for a

 moment and considering how Harriot might have approached all of this material on the

 76 Deila Porta ( 1593,64) (11.22): "Maxime errat Vitellio, qui putat Solis radios superficiem pilae invadentes

 perpendiculariter, refrangi ad centrum, et quia ibi experimentum videri nequit.optat sphaerae portionem

 semicirculo minorem, ut videret an in centra illius ignis excitetur, quod est falsissimum. In universo enim

 opere suo quidquid ex se supra illud Alhazeni est, falsum fere est[.] Semicircularis sphaerae portio, vel

 minor accedit loco prope finem diametri, et ex secunda refractione paulo propinquius, non autem in centra,

 ratio ex his quae prius diximus, deducitur."

 77 In the proem to book II, on p. 35, he laid down some postulates taken from ancient optics, among them

 "Solis radios aliquos ab eo emergentes sibi invicem parallelos esse" ("that any rays that emerge from the

 Sun are parallel to each other"). Harriot, it is worth noting, regularly used a geometrical model of a sunbeam

 using non-parallel rays as 1 shall explain in my longer treatment of his optics.

 78 Delia Porta (1593,63): "putat enim radios a Solis centra progredientes supra pilam igne[m] accendere,
 quod est falsum[.] Nam a Solis perpendicularibus ignis excitatur."

 79 Ibid., 63: "Radii perpendiculares supremam extimam pilae superficiem invadentes ...".

 80 Oslo University Library Lib. rar. 790f, p. 444. Harriot underlined "Forte tarnen portio sphaerae crys

 tallinae ...inflammabili; quoniam omnes radii". His annotation reads: "Hie locus reprehenditur a Baptista

 Porta lib. 2 p. 22 sed male."

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 163

 refractive properties of "lenses." Delia Porta had come up with a treatment of lens-like

 objects that did in fact explain some of the broad characteristics of lenses (aberration

 and the shape of the caustic, in particular),81 but at the expense of treating the entire

 glass as a black box that somehow sends the rays to just the right place. That must have

 been unsatisfactory to someone like Harriot, an expert at ray analysis, who was also

 of a naturally analytic, rather than synthetic cast of mind. Witelo, on the other hand,

 indicated a way that one might get to the focal point of the lens by ray analysis, but

 at the expense of requiring the apparently absurd condition that all of the rays should

 be incident perpendicularly to the glass. Delia Porta had drawn Harriot's attention

 to that proposition, but had identified the fundamental flaw in the wrong place: the

 absence of a second refraction, rather than impossible configuration of the incident

 rays. This was, perhaps, what Harriot meant in saying that della Porta criticized Witelo

 "male." The question that may have presented itself to Harriot, then, is this: how can

 we explore the quantitative features of the lens that della Porta described for the first

 time (the place of the burning point, aberration, and so forth), while somehow using

 Witelo's orthodox ray analysis, appropriately corrected?

 If one begins with Witelo's ray analysis, the task is somehow to satisfy Witelo's

 requirement of perpendicularity. Bulkeley's glass may have offered Harriot a way to

 satisfy this requirement. For, in order for light to be incident at right angles, either one

 can somehow arrange light sources around the lens so that they all impinge onto it at

 right angles (which would be a most peculiar situation), or one could use an extremely

 large lens. As we have seen, Bulkeley's vast lens would have been indistinguishable

 from a sheet of plane glass at close quarters, so that all natural, parallel beams of light

 would have been almost perpendicular to it. The greatest deviation from perpendicu

 larity was at the very edges of the lens, and even then the incident rays deviate by only

 1°35'29" from the perpendicular. Thus, the huge lens gave Harriot an opportunity to

 test out (on paper) Witelo's claim, in the first ever theorem proposed about a lens, that

 its focal point would be at the center of curvature of the convex surface. In fact, as

 Harriot discovered, light was refracted to about twice that distance.

 6 Conclusion

 It has taken us quite far afield to make sense of a small bundle of Harriot's papers, a

 mere ten sheets out of his eight thousand. But the papers themselves posed an intriguing

 conundrum. Several pieces of evidence within the papers and elsewhere in the Harriot

 manuscripts suggested that they were an early product of his optical explorations and

 perhaps even the very first problem to which he turned his newly discovered sine law.

 Why would he have devoted such effort to what was an apparently absurd problem,

 of a fantastically large lens? And what drew Bulkeley's interest to the problem in the

 first place? The rich tradition of English speculation on glasses and lenses, and the

 marvels that they could perform, was surely at the back of both men's minds and was

 probably the reason the problem occurred to Bulkeley in the first place. In the course

 81 Harriot seems to make no allusion to della Porta's actual treatment of lenses in book VIII of the De

 refractione, perhaps because it was so flawed, even by della Porta's own principles. He often made refracted

 rays bend in the wrong direction, for instance. See Lindberg (1984,146).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 164 R. Goulding

 of working through the problem, Harriot delivered an implicit rebuke to one of the

 most marvelous claims of all: Leonard Digges's mysterious glasses that could spy out

 coins and writing many miles distant, and set fires half a mile away. But the problem

 possessed another facet that Harriot, the careful student of Witelo and his critic della

 Porta, must have perceived: it allowed one to test out, even only on paper, Witelo's

 valiant but flawed attempt to analyze the focal properties of a lens. Harriot succeeded

 where Witelo had failed—and this first success was, I believe, the impetus for all his

 future optical researches.

 Acknowledgments Earlier versions of parts of this article were presented at the Temper of Evidence

 conference at Caltech, and at the Durham Thomas Harriot Seminar, and also at the History and Philosophy

 of Science Seminar at Indiana University, Bloomington, and the Fellows' Seminar at the Newberry Library,

 Chicago; suggestions and criticisms at all of those venues have improved this article. I am grateful to the

 National Endowment for the Humanities and the American Council of Learned Societies for funding the

 research leave during which this article was completed, and to the Newberry Library as the host of my NEH

 residential Fellowship. The British Library and the Oslo University Library generously allowed the images

 in this article to be reproduced.

 Appendix 1: Papers in the "Bulkeley's glass" bundle

 The following folios of MS London, British Library, Additional 6789 contain Harriot's

 treatment of "Bulkeley's Glass." I have rearranged them in the order that they should

 probably be read. The phrases in italics are the actual headings on the sheets.

 135 Of Mr Butkeley his niasse. Description of Bulkeley'sglass and calculation of its various dimensions.
 132 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentant sphaerae vitreae. Pro concursu radiorum centralium.

 ("On refractions through a segment of a glass sphere. To find the meeting point of the central rays").

 Uses the sine law of refraction to calculate the axis intercepts of rays incident at I ', 10 and 1 °35'29"

 (the very edge of the glass). Convex surface of lens is directed toward the sun.

 134 Bulkeleys glasse. On recto and verso, calculations for fol. 132.
 140 [No heading] Summary of some of the calculations for fol. 132.
 133 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentant sphaerae vitreae. Ex observationibus Vitellonis. Pro

 concursu radiorum centralium. ("On refractions through a segment of a glass sphere. From the

 observations of Witelo. To find the meeting point of the central rays"). Uses linear interpolation

 from Witelo's refraction tables to calculate the axis intercepts of rays incident at same angles as on
 132.

 136 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentum sphaerae vitreae. Ex observationibus Vitellonis. Pro

 concursu radiorum centralium. On recto and verso, calculations for fol. 133. Also on verso, a large

 long division to calculate the tot soles.

 137 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentum sphaerae vitreae. Pro concursu radiorum centralium.

 On the recto, calculations for fol. 132. On the verso, calculations related to tot soles.

 138 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentum sphaerae vitreae, et plana superßcie ad solem. Pro

 concursu radiorum centralium. ("On refractions through a segment of a glass sphere, with its plane

 face turned toward the sun. To find the meeting point of the central rays") Apart from the heading,

 this page is blank. The verso contains a careful sketch of the refraction of rays through a flat, conical
 glass.

 139 Bulkeley. De refractionibus per segmentum sphaerae vitreae, et plana superficie ad solem. Pro

 concursu radiorum centralium. Calculations, using sine law of refraction, for Bulkeley's glass with
 its flat side directed toward the sun (i.e., reversed from above).

 141 A vitroadaerem. ("From glass to air"). Scribbled refraction calculations, using sine law of refraction.

 Based on the values that appear, it seems that Harriot is noting that the action of the lens in the two

 possible orientations with respect to the sun is quite different.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 165

 ' P? /*-*"■' f" "~t"'—i*~~ laA'Jt' '-;

 Jt^Jh "<***■■■ r gsgr"-***

 «*]

 ■ i- *? ,. >

 ** ''***" —! tXf^. . T ■} c x ~ < l i / -£- •
 Je% I Ma< yi , ,
 —~~- -5^.".. .
 f>w ~t * *-/ . ~z 7" r —~—-■—
 " SS'^f:" *j.y
 r-f1-—*""*■ f$ rJ" *.:>

 ***¥>?., ?. ,. / (K. ^y sfjjyj*

 V ■U*0lgf1r

 C ST71
 C ffff, f, S *y ?*:
 >rb~*4*f. , 3 s y/. '
 - ^^ I* I &, ê f£'
 i ——-f— „_ —_—_ — ^
 •••# - — .——— **"■
 •»♦,#<*€£&■. H)W*V i 1*s, at

 - ^Mrs// #w

 i- »'■ %*". *?' itr>- .-v? *"• -- '
 «■»'• *•'• W- Ufr 4-r*. __ «
 ,-■"' v. I' jniy, ' firt. • f'«. t
 «#».«>. JOSE* %<ltf*4i&k,. .
 j^,^. Ar* . *-* ***
 fe*vy„ //, /// :?.-r * *
 fcVi& "" ' -«r*** ^ ^
 r.jj. *■" ':

 ^ysdtt- .7,5'I7.rnz£4 ?• *<?
 J J $ C f * ** *
 j ,y f_§1 **■> 7~
 , ~+r >'~ "CJ~t'0.

 ,,rVf- H vetr-i- *• « <■•"""-12,
 ■jtt Tf'ff Ig ffj> £ • 3£r: | j f <? <f t, j # g tit • * /<* * *%'««■,

 Fig. 11 Upper half of 132r: calculation of 1' ray by sine law

 Appendix 2: Calculation of axis intercept

 General geometrical method

 Harriot provided no guide nor diagram (beyond the rudimentary sketch at 135r, in
 Fig. 1 ) to explain how he calculated the place at which an incident ray cut the axis. All

 we have are calculations with brief labels; a typical example is from fol. 132r, where

 he calculates the path of a single ray incident at an angle of 1' (reproduced in Fig. I 1).
 Thus, it is necessary to reconstruct the geometrical reasoning that led to Harriot's
 calculations—and that is the purpose of this appendix. In Fig. 12,1 have added some
 construction lines that will allow us to make sense of (and are implicit in) Harriot's
 calculations. And in Fig. 13, I have excerpted part of Fig. 12, in order to clarify the

 relationships that hold among the four angles 0i_4, formed between the light and the

 perpendiculars to the glass in the course of its passage, regardless of the method used
 to calculate refraction.

 In general, then, the light is incident on the lens at X with angle 0\; and the angle
 at the center of curvature LXAB is also equal to 0] (it will be useful here to consult
 Fig. 13). The light is refracted along XY, making an angle of refraction 02 = LYXA.
 Now, all of the angles of AXYT are known: LYXT = 62, XTY = 90° — 6\, and so
 LTYX = 180° - 02 - (90° - 0,) = 90° + (0i - 02)- But LTYX is the angle that the
 light makes with the plane interface; so the actual angle of incidence XYW, measured

 from the perpendicular to this interface, will be this angle less the 90-degree angle

 XYT: or, 03 = 6\ — 0o. Finally, the angle at which the light arrives at its axis intercept
 Z will be equal to the final angle of refraction: 04 = LYZB.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 166 R. Goulding

 82

 Since ZC = ZB + BC, and ZA = ZB - AB = ZB - (AC - BC).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 12 Reconstructed diagram corresponding to Harriot's ray-tracing method

 With these simplifying angular relationships in mind, we turn to reconstructing

 Harriot's method for calculating the effect of the lens. In what follows, I will first set

 out the geometrical and trigonometrical steps that (I claim) Harriot followed in order

 to solve the problem of the lens. Then, I will show that all of those steps are set out in

 the calculation in Fig. 11, which, moreover, uses the sine law to calculate refractions.
 I will then compare another calculation for the same ray, using precisely the same
 method but calculating refraction through interpolation from Witelo's tables.

 Harriot has set himself the problem of discovering where on the axis point Z is,

 which he will express in several ways: as length ZB (longitudo lineae concursus), ZC
 (distantia a superficie illuminata) or ZA (distantia a centro). Since the distances BC
 (the thickness of the lens: 4 in.) and AC (the radius of curvature: calculated as 10,370

 in.) arc known, the problem amounts to discovering just distance ZB,S2 which could

 be determined if the right-angled triangle BZY were solved (referring now to Fig. 12).

 And, in order to solve that triangle, one would need to know two independent elements,
 such as the side YB and the angle at Y, LBYZ. And that is in fact what Harriot will

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 167

 Fig. 13 General angular
 Fig. 13 General angular x
 \
 \
 properties in piano-spherical \
 properties in piano-spherical
 \
 lens
 lens \
 \
 \

 \

 \

 \

 V"

 \

 \

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 do, determining YB (which he calls the tinea egressionis, or "line of emergence") and
 LYZB, which, as noted above, is equal to 84.

 Discovering YB, the tinea egressionis takes a little work. We note that YB = WV =

 XV — XW. Now, XA is a radius of the circle, which we will take as unity for all
 trigonometric calculations. Thus, observing AXAV, we see that XV = sin0| (using
 one of the angular relationships determined above); so that YB = sinöi — XW. The
 problem of finding the tinea egressionis now amounts to determining XW.

 168 R. Goulding

 We can find XW by solving AWXY. Now, WY = VB = AV — AB. AV — cos0|,

 and AB = cos LBAE. This last angle LBAE = LBAD is one of the parameters of
 the lens that Harriot calculated at the very beginning of his analysis (on p. 135r):

 dimidium latitudinis vitri, "half the width of the glass," which he determined to be
 1°35'29"12'"34.5"". Thus, WY = cos0, - cos LBAD. Moreover, LWYX is nothing

 other than the angle of incidence at the glass-air interface, or 03 = 9\ — 6i. So,

 tan LWYX = tan (0| — (h) = , or

 WY

 XW = (cos$i — cos LBAD). tan (6\ - 62) ■

 XW

 Putting this all together, we have thus found that:

 linea egressionis = sin 6\ — (cos0| — cos LBAD). tan (0\ — 62) ■

 It is very easy now to obtain the required burning distance; since we have the linea

 egressionis, we now possess enough information to find ZB, or the longitudo lineae

 concursus, by solving ABZY, the task we set ourselves above:

 tan fti

 BY linea egressionis

 ZB longitudo lineae concursus

 To reiterate: this method of determining the burning distance of the lens may be

 followed regardless of the theory of refraction. Whether Harriot (or anyone else) uses

 the sine law of refraction or any other rule, the sequence of steps will be the same.
 But in order to obtain the value of two of the angles required for the method—62 and

 04—some rule for determining refraction will have to be applied.

 Analysis of calculation on 132r

 The calculation reproduced in Fig. 11 concerns the behavior of a ray with an angle

 of incidence 0\ = 1 '(Incidens aereus Öl'O"). Harriot begins by calculating the linea

 egressionis which, we recall, was determined as:

 linea egressionis = sin 0j - (cos0| — cos LBAD). tan {0\ — O2)

 The first calculation on the sheet, above the line drawn across the full width of the

 page, determines cos0| — cos LBAD. LBAD is "half the width of the glass" (dimidium
 latitudinis vitri)\ Harriot calculates its cosine (or, as he terms is, Eius complementi
 v, where u is Harriot's usual character for sine) as 9996142720.Beneath this, he
 calculates the cosine of 1 ' and then takes their difference: 3856857.

 83 Harriot, like his contemporaries, expressed the values of trigonometric functions not as decimal fractions,

 but as whole numbers, taking the radius of a circle of reference as some arbitrarily large number (the sinus

 tutus, here equal to I010). His trigonometric functions are very accurate: a modem electronic calculator

 returns a value for the cosine of this angle of 0.99961427194. Very likely he was using Georg Rheticus's

 ten-figure trigonometric tables. Opus puhtimtm de triangulis (1596).

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 169

 In the next step, Harriot solves the following proportion for x:

 sinus totus : tan (6\ — 62) (cos /.BAD — cos0i) : x

 a rearrangement of the formula above, where x = sin 9\ — linea egressionis. The

 first and third elements of the proportion need no explanation and can be clearly seen

 in Harriot's proportion beneath the full-width line: 10000000000 and 3856857. The

 second element of the proportion demands further examination, however.

 We note that he labels the angle 0°0'21"26'" as refradio, vel vitreus incidens. This

 is an accurate description of the angle 0] —62'- it is either the refractio which, we recall,

 for Harriot and his contemporaries meant the deviation in a refracted ray, or angle of

 incidence—angle of refraction; or it is the angle of "incidence onto the glass[-air

 interface]," that is, #3. Harriot finds the tangent of this angle, using his customary

 symbol Ö for tangent.

 But how has Harriot discovered 9\ — 62 — 0°0'21"26'"; or, more precisely, how

 has he found 02, which, given that 0\ — V, must be equal to 1' — 0°0'21"26"' =
 38"34"'? In his air-to-glass refraction table on fol. 88r, as noted above (in n. 40),

 Harriot determined the angle of refraction r such that, for any given angle of incidence

 i, sin r/sin i — sin 40°, so that, if Harriot was using the same method, we should find
 that sin38"34"' = sin40°. sin 1'. And, in fact, sin38"34"' = 0.000186976, while

 sin 40°. sin 1 ' = 0.000186979, which shows very convincingly that Harriot did indeed

 use the sine law of refraction on this page of his working.

 Harriot solves the proportion above, obtaining x = 400. He then subtracts this

 value from sin 0° 1', to find the linea egressionis of 2908482. Now, in order to find the

 longitudo lineae concursus, he must solve the proportion

 tan 04 : sinus totus :: linea egressionis : longitudo lineae concursus

 which he sets out very clearly next on the page. To use his numbers,

 tan 33"20"' : 10000000000 :: 2908482 : y

 with the result that the longitudo lineae concursus y — 17997531009, ZB on our

 diagram.

 Once again, Harriot has had to obtain the angle of a refracted ray, O4. And, again,

 he has used the same sine law. For, recalling that the angle of incidence on the glass
 03 = 21"26'", we find that sin33"20'" = sin 21 "26"'/sin 40° = 0.0001616 (correct

 to 4 significant figures). These numbers are recorded also in the left margin of the paper:

 Eius refractio 11"54"', and Agg[regatio] 33"20"',with the sine 1616045 written below.

 The refractio is, again, the amount of deviation, or 04 — 03, while the aggregatio is

 the sum of this number and 03 (to which we note that Harriot draws a connecting line)

 or, in other words, simply 04.

 In the remaining calculations, Harriot calculates the distance from the center of

 curvature (ZA) and from the "illuminated [i.e., convex] surface of the glass" (ZC). The

 latter is 18001338289 parts of a 10000000000 part radius. Since Harriot has already

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 +*->.<s-Ti- j) %4,i*;jk. *-x?? *~jrr:tU
 4-£'3-^7î' il *■*><? r-ê.- ^x?3

 Fig. 14 Upper half of 133r: calculation of 1' ray by interpolation from Witelo

 calculated the radius of curvature as 10370 in. he can convert the burning distance into

 standard units: 18667.4 in, or 311 paces, 7.4 in., where a pace is equal to 5 feet.

 That eoncludes Harriot's calculations for the 1' ray; his calculations on this page

 for other angles of incidence proceed identically.

 Analysis of calculation on fol. 133r

 Even a cursory examination of fol. 133r (Fig. 14) should be enough to show that the

 geometrical method for finding the burning point is precisely the same as that used on

 132r. The question, however, is the method that he used for calculating the angles of
 refraction, and Q4. He records the refractio (i.e., deviation after refraction) of the 1'

 ray as 18", so that 6b = 1 ' — 18" = 42"—a different value from that obtained by the
 sine law above.

 170 R. Goulding

 '<Uh4■ /r ^^ ^
 I ~ * AA-v. "kind^-P ' £Jes~K.Z.Âk^~'.
 u'S-H Ajsf-t ■ 7 t. >,. m
 -W^'- 'V^ ,„ *
 f / n tfi " ' s
 ihjUoit&iiJf y . •■3>t(T. __ '
 kàai9# âtf& &9* . ^ Û<C7. ' J? $ ^ ' *~~ a
 I# - />* ^^ - ~~~ frS "2" & - & - $ '

 V r*V ~— ' O. y*/ o-e i -

 ~Q- v f$ ' ' —'—~
 ~ir- 87\Hl- ^ •w/$'*-:f ■
 tr. gyx ëôf. ^
 «$?*■'■ HI ■ jiff ' J
 $7 ' 1 f "

 "• <"?££* • -t-'/'ïlié.- i,}'j7~9 +?0£>-£.■ "-ST" 2^'

 d% »•"*■ 1»'<S,/,««««• «JV»-*
 f*"J' a 4q <7, i4
 Uv.i«•• i=_ J,.
 Y^ zzX ^ rgr^"» "

 4?*/. *-»éf*é. f;..„^_y ^ ♦//
 £ > ._ ? ■? x ~\"} $1 c $ ' t%~ s/^P ■* * '

 According to the heading on this page, these calculations were made ex obser
 vationibus Vitellonis, "following the observations of Witelo." Harriot could only be
 referring to the tables of refractions Witelo took from Ptolemy and included (with
 some errors) in his optical treatise.84 In that table, Witelo recorded that a 10° ray is

 refracted at an angle of 7°. Harriot was considering a ray incident at an angle 1/600 of
 10°—and his value for its refraction was 42" = 7°/600. This one example suggests

 that he used very simple interpolation from Witelo's tables to obtain the refractions

 on this page.

 To confirm this hypothesis, let us consider his value for 64 = 25"43" (labeled, as
 before, as aggregatio), corresponding to an incident angle to the glass of 63 = 18".
 Our hypothesis would be that he again used Witelo's table, but now in the opposite

 direction, because the ray is moving from glass to air: an incident ray of 7° refracts to
 10°. And, indeed, 63/64 = 7°/10°, or very nearly (a calculator puts the value of the
 ratio at 0.699935. very close indeed to 0.7). And in all the other rays Harriot analyzed

 84 See discussion al n. 22 above.

 <£) Spri  nger

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 171

 on this page (not depicted in Fig. 14), he determined the refractive angles so that they

 are in a 7/10 ratio with their angles of incidence.

 Appendix 3: The refraction expressions implied by della Porta's models

 It is relatively simple to extract an expression for the laws of refraction implied by della

 Porta's models, because of certain symmetries that obtain in these models whatever law

 of refraction is employed. In this appendix, I will take the two refractive apparatuses

 (the glass sphere and the plano-concave glass) separately. In each case, I first consider

 what relationships must hold among the various angles of incidence and refraction as

 one traces a ray through the glass, regardless of the law used to calculate the amount

 of refraction at each interface. Then, I introduce della Porta's prediction of where the

 ray must finally cross the axis of the instrument; combining this black box result with

 the observations made on the ray-traced model, it is possible in each case to extract

 a trigonometric expression for refraction in just a few steps. These two formulae are

 identical to those presented by Lohne as the relationships implied by della Porta's

 constructions "im modernen Sinne." Lohne gives no indication of how, or where, he

 found these formulae, and one can only presume he followed precisely the steps I

 lay out below.85 Finally, I will show that, in a table of refractions in the Oslo Witelo,

 Harriot used the trigonometric formula derived from della Porta's plano-concave glass.

 The glass sphere (De refractione, II.2)

 Suppose a ray of light AB is incident on the glass ball at B, making an angle of YBA =

 9\. We draw the axis OX through the center of the sphere, parallel to this incident

 ray. The ray will refract and will form some angle 62 with the perpendicular BO. The

 ray will then traverse the interior of the sphere to C, where the ray will form angle 63

 with the perpendicular CO. Now, since the radii of the sphere BO — CO, ABOC is

 isosceles, so that 62 = 83. Finally, the ray is refracted out of the sphere, making an

 angle 84 with the perpendicular CZ, and meets the axis at point D.

 Now, refraction is reversible,86 so that a ray incident at 82 within the glass would

 refract into the air at angle 6\. But 82 = 83, so that a ray incident on the glass-air

 interface at angle 83 will refract into the air at angle 8\ or, in other words, 84 — 81.

 To review, then, given any law of refraction, in the glass sphere, we will always

 find that 84 = 8\ and 82 — 83. These simple angular relationships are what permit us

 85 Lohne(1963,158-159) Lohne clai ms (on p. 159) that Harriot, Schickard and Huygens knew dellaPorta's

 De refractione, but Harriot and Schickard came up with a different expression (from the first formula) for

 the refraction relationship. He says that yet another formula could be derived, if, following della Porta's lead

 in some diagrams, one did not refract the ray at the spherical interface. In that case, one would derive the

 second formula I give below. But this is all very confused; as I show, the second formula was derived from

 della Porta's plano-concave glass, not from the spherical model, and, as I also show, this second formula

 was the one that Harriot himself derived. It seems that Lohne may have been relying imprecisely on a

 secondary source that I have not as yet identified.

 86 That is, if a ray at angle a refracts to angle b when passing from medium A to medium B, a ray going

 in the opposite direction, from medium B to medium A, incident at angle b will refract to angle a. This is

 an ancient principle of refraction; see Smith (1999, 133) for an example from Ptolemy's Optics.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 172 R. Goulding

 D X\

 O

 Fig. 15 Angle relationships in the general refractive sphere

 to transform della Porta's prediction of an intercept point into a "law of refraction."

 For, if we wish to know in general what is the relationship between angle i of a ray

 incident on glass, and the corresponding refraction angle r, we have only to determine
 the relationship between i = 04 = 0\ and r — 62 = S3. Since only two angles are in
 fact involved, henceforth I shall refer to them simply as i and r.

 So, where does della Porta predict the ray will be refracted to? We recall (see Fig. 6)
 that he wishes us to imagine that the ray passes unrefracted to the concave surface

 of the sphere and is there reflected to a point on the axis within the sphere; the real

 refracted ray will meet the axis at a point symmetrical about point W (or point X in

 Fig. 15) with this notional point. Now. della Porta had shown that a ray incident on a
 spherical mirror at some angle S was reflected to a point on the axis 1 /2sec 0 distant
 from the center of the mirror, or I — I /2 sec S from its vertex, so that, in della Porta's

 model of the refracting sphere, XD =1 — 1 /2 sec i (and, to give another length we
 shall need in a moment, DO = I + XD — 2 — 1/2 sec /).

 Now, consider ADCO. All of its angles are known. Since LBOP = i, and LBOC =

 180° - 2 r, /.COD = 180° - (LBOP + LBOC) = 2 r- i. LOCD = 180° - LZCD =
 180° - i, and finally LCDO = 180° - (LCOD + LOCD) = 2 (i - r). We now solve
 LDCO using the sine rule:

 sin OCD sin CDO sin (180°—/) sin 2 (i — r)
 DO ~ CO ' °r 2-1/2 sec i ~ i

 so that

 â Springer

 sin 2 (t — r) =

 sin /

 2—1/2 sec i

 sin i

 2^7 (4 cos i - 1)

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 173

 2 sin / cos /

 4 cos / — 1

 sin 2/

 4 cos/ — 1

 This equation thus expresses i—r: the amount of deviation of the light from its incident

 path, a value used very often by medieval Renaissance opticians87 (including Harriot

 himself, as noted in the previous Appendix) instead of r—as a trigonometric ratio

 involving only i. Lohne gives precisely this expression on p. 158 of "Zur Geschichte
 der Brechungsgesetzes."

 The plano-concave glass (De refractione, II.4)

 As can be seen in Fig. 7, della Porta's plano-concave glass is made simpler by the fact

 that there is only one refraction involved: the ray from P passes perpendicularly and

 unrefracted through the plane side at P', and undergoes a single refraction at Q. Thus,

 we need to find a relationship between the angle of incidence / = LQ'QP = LQOY,

 and the angle of refraction r = LLQO. (We note that, in this case, the refraction takes

 place from glass to air, rather than from air to glass

 By analogy to the previous case, we shall in fact find an expression not for r directly,

 but for the deviation of light, r — i = LLQS = LSQR:88

 tan LSQR =

 GR

 QG

 QF

 QS + SG
 QF

 FT + SG

 sin/

 2 cos i + (QG — QS)
 sin/

 2 cos / + (FR - QS)

 sin /

 2 cos / + {(FO + OR) — QS)

 sin /

 2 cos Z + cos / + (2 — 1/2 sec /) — 2 cos /

 sin /

 2 + cos / - 1 /2 sec /

 87 Witelo (in his tables in proposition X.8, for instance) uses the term angulus refractus for r, and
 angulus refractionis for (i - r)—a usage that Harriot also employs frequently in his manuscripts.

 88 r - i, rather than i — r, because of the direction of the refraction, according to which r > i.

 £j Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The step-by-step derivation above should be quite self-explanatory; note, in the

 second to last line, the introduction of the expression for reflection in a spherical

 mirror. OR in this model is analogous to DO in the previous model.

 It is possible to use trigonometric identities to simplify this expression a little

 174 R. Goulding

 further:

 tan (r — / ) =

 2 + cos i — 1/2 sec i

 sin i

 2 sin i

 4 + 2 cos i — sec i

 2 sin i cos /

 4 cos i + 2 cos2 i - 1

 sin 2 i

 4 cos i + cos 2 i

 and it is this final version that Lohne provides on p. 159 of his article.

 Harriot's use of a formula derived from della Porta

 On p. 475 of his copy of Witelo, Harriot compiled two sets of tables of refractions,

 based both on observation and upon his two principal texts on refraction, della Porta's

 De refractione and Witelo's Optica. The first detail observations made on August

 11-12, 1597, of refraction from air to water, measured using observation of a staff.89

 The set of tables written beneath this first table reports measurements of refraction

 between air and crystal, conducted on February 23, 1598 (reproduced in Fig. 16).90

 Despite the heading "From air to crystal," the tables actually record refraction from

 crystal to air: the table headed "Vitellio" is the column of anguli refractionis (i.e.,

 r - i) from glass to air, from X.8 of his optical treatise. The observations on the left

 thus record observed refractions from crystal to air and the right-hand column, headed

 "Baptista Porta" must tabulate refractions according to della Porta's model. Of course,
 della Porta himself had no such table in his text, and Harriot affirms as much when

 he explains, next to the numbers, "Ex theoria Baptistae haec colligimus," that is, "I

 gathered these from the theory of Baptista."91

 It can easily be confirmed that these numbers were calculated using the second

 expression above, based on the plano-concave glass, which (we recall) provided an

 89 The original observational record on which this table is based can be found at MS 6789, fol. 406r (for

 August 11), and 407v (for August 12). See Lohne (1973, 192-193), where the tables are transcribed.

 90 I have not found the original records of this experiment among Harriot's papers. Harriot describes the

 glass here: "Cristallum oblongum fuit, unum latus VA une., alterum 2'/2 une." ("The crystal was rectangular,

 with one side 3'/2 inches long, the other 2Vi inches")

 91 Not fere colliffimus, as Lohne transcribed these words in Lohne (1973, 192). In his transcription of the
 table, Lohne footnotes the numbers in this column as taken from delta Porta's De refractione, pp. 42-43,

 that is, proposition 11.2 on the glass sphere. On p. 194. Lohne explains this column quite vaguely: "Porta

 gab für Glas ein Faustregel an, aus der Harriot wohl die . . .angeführten Winkel berechnet haben mag."

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 175

 M 'tut**

 nMJ; i

 *^**.jk5ïx i•

 - I/—

 - ' ' J X.

 *v

 MWS?7~
 J.
 ?• *•
 <Tt»
 fi»'
 J« J»
 ÎSJO

 »r»
 if • #•

 f**
 i£
 *.«.

 rl"

 %*.<»•

 If';
 fedifcfc
 fr#*
 7».
 X~43l-3<>
 [i» -lit- g.
 9°.  ?* "•

 J?i
 F* f
 ,x '£i
 U tr.% .
 UTlh

 0UU
 SL*.. «.»•

 J* ' 0 *
 4/t«..
 4£~r*»
 »V ri
 »v rj

 i

 jE*
 &*
 V+t+1^
 'JfojrfO#*!

 i : ,

 «

 Mis *
 f 1 ,
 rl

 C ^i^vV.*-*-.
 rM##
 yLkr* frt*
 ^J&^i.i. ■ i* *

 Fig. 16 Detail from Oslo University Library, 1572 edition of Alhacen and Witelo belonging to Harriot
 (shelfmark Lib.rar. 790f), p. 475

 expression for refraction from glass to air, precisely the situation here. Below, I tabulate

 the results of calculating the refractio r — i using this expression, against the numbers
 Harriot attributes to della Porta.

 I tan"' 4cosT+co.2/ Harriot

 10°

 o

 o

 <N

 30°

 O  o

 50°

 O o  o

 o

 O

 oc o  o

 4°0'36"

 8°5'7"

 12° 19'25"

 16°55'3"

 22° 19'5l"

 O

 O r^,

 46°52'30"

 125°37'34"

 The numbers calculated from the della Porta formula match Harriot's tabulated

 values perfectly (with the exception of the very last line, which must contain a calcu
 lational error). There can be no doubt that Harriot derived a trigonometric expression

 similar to the one that we extracted from the plano-concave glass and used it to cal
 culate refraction values according to the theoria of della Porta. (Values calculated
 from the first formula, derived from the glass sphere, bear no resemblance to Harriot's
 results).

 References

 IBTauris: London & New York.

 versity Press.

 Almond, Philip C. 2011. England's first demimologist: Reginald Scat & "The Discoverie of Witchcraft".

 Ash, Eric. 2004. Power, knowledge and expertise in Elizabethan England. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni

 4°l'

 8°5'

 12°19'

 16°55'

 22c>20'

 O

 O

 46°52'

 125°53'

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 176 R. Goulding

 Bacon, Roger. 1859. Opera quaedam hactenus inedita. In Rerum Britannicarum medii aevi scriptures 15,

 ed. J.S. Brewer. London: Longman, Green, Longman, and Roberts.

 Bacon, Roger. 1897. The "Opus Majus " of Roger Bacon. 2 vols, ed. John Henry Bridges. Oxford: Clarendon

 Bacon, Roger. 1928. The Opus majus of Roger Bacon, 2 vols (trans: Robert Belle Burke). Philadelphia:

 press.

 University of Philadelphia Press.

 Batho, Gordon R. 2000. Thomas Harriot and the Northumberland household. In Thomas Harriot: An

 Elizabethan man of science, ed. Robert Fox, 28-47. Aldershot: Ashgate.

 Baxandall. David. 1923. Early telescopes in the science museum, from an historical standpoint. Transactions

 Berryman, Sylvia. 1998. Euclid and the sceptic: A paper on vision, doubt, geometry, light and drunkenness.

 Burke. Bernard. 1866. A genealogical history of the dormant, abeyant, forfeited, and extinct peerages of

 of the Optical Society 24(5): 304-320.

 Phronesis 43(2): 176-196.

 the British Empire. London: Harrison.

 Clagett, Marshall. 1984. The Inventa of John Dee concerning the parabola. In Archimedes in the middle

 ages, vol. 5.1-4,489-576. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.

 Clark, Andrew, and Charles William Boase. 1885. Register of the University of Oxford, 5 vols. Oxford

 Historical Society Publications I. 10-12, 14. Oxford: Oxford Historical Society.

 Clucas, Stephen. 2000. Thomas Harriot and the field of knowledge in the English renaissance. In Thomas

 Harriot: An Elizabethan man of science, ed. Robert Fox, 93-136. Aldershot: Ashgate.

 Clulee, Nicholas H. 1977. Astrology, magic, and optics: Facets of John Dee's early natural philosophy.

 Renaissance Quarterly 30(4): 632-680.

 Clulee, Nicholas H. 1988. John Dee 's natural philosophy: Between science and religion. London and New

 York: Routledge.

 della Porta, Giambattista. 1589. Magiae naturalis libri XX. Naples.

 della Porta, Giambattista. 1593. De refractione optices parte libri novem. Naples.
 Dupré, Sven. 2005. Ausonio's mirrors and Galileo's lenses: The telescope and sixteenth-century practical

 optical knowledge. Galilaeana 2: 145.

 Dupré, Sven. 2007. Images in the air: Optical games, magic and imagination. In Spirits unseen: The

 representation of subtle bodies in early modern European culture, ed. Christine Göttler and Wolfgang
 Neuber, vol. 9, 71-92. Intersections. Leiden; Boston: Brill.

 Dupré. Sven. 2010. William Bourne's invention: Projecting a telescope and optical speculation in Eliza

 bethan England. In The origins of the telescope, ed. Albert Van Helden, 129-145. Amsterdam: KNAW
 Press.

 Eamon, William. 1994. Science and the secrets of nature: Books of secrets in medieval and early modern

 culture. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Eastwood, Bruce S. 1967. Grosseteste's 'quantitative' law of refraction: A chapter in the history of non

 experimental science. Journal of the History of Ideas 28(3): 403-414.

 Eastwood, Bruce S. 1970. Metaphysical derivations of a law of refraction: Damianos and grosseteste.

 Archive for History of Exact Sciences 6(3): 224-236.

 Feingold, Mordechai. 1984. The mathematician's apprenticeship: Science, universities and society in Eng

 land. 1560-1640. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Foster, Joseph. 1891. Alumni oxonienses: The members of the University of Oxford, 1500-1714: Their

 parentage, birthplace, and year of birth, with a record of their degrees. Oxford and London: Parker and
 Co.

 Fox, Robert (ed.). 2000. Thomas Harriot: An Elizabethan man of science. Aldershot: Ashgate.

 Fox, Robert (ed.). 2012. Thomas Harriot and his world: Mathematics, exploration, and natural philosophy

 in early modern England. Farnham, Surrey, England & Burlington. VT: Ashgate.

 Gage, John. 2000. Color and meaning. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

 Goulding, Robert. 2006. Deceiving the senses in the thirteenth century: Trickery and illusion in the secretum

 philosophorum. In Magic and the classical tradition, ed. William F. Ryan, and Charles S.F. Burnett,
 135-162. London: Warburg Institute-Nino Aragno Editore.

 Goulding, Robert. 2012. Chymicorum in morem: Refraction, matter theory, and secrecy in the Harriot

 Kepler correspondence. In Thomas Harriot and his world: Mathematics, exploration, and natural
 philosophy in early modern England, ed. Robert Fox, 27-51. Farnham, Surrey, England & Burling
 ton, VT: Ashgate

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Griffith, John Edwards. 1914. Pedigrees of Anglesey and Carnarvonshire families: With their collateral

 branches in Denbigshire, Merionethshire and other parts. Horncastle.

 Hall, Trevor H. 1972. Old conjuring books: A bibliographical and historical study with a supplementary

 The case of Mr Bulkeley's glass 177

 check-list. London: Duckworth.

 Halliwell-Phillipps, James Orchard. 1841. A collection of letters illustrative of the progress of science in
 England from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to that of Charles the Second. London: Historical Society
 of Science.

 Hart, W.H. 1867. Observations on some documents relating to magic in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

 Archaeologia 40(2): 389-397.

 Johnston, S. 2006. Like father, like son? John Dee, Thomas Digges, and the identity of the mathematician.

 In John Dee: Interdisciplinary studies in English renaissance thought, ed. Stephen Clucas, 65-84. Inter

 national Archives of the History of Ideas/Archives internationales d'histoire des idées 193. Dordrecht:

 Knorr, Wilbur. 1983. The geometry of burning-mirrors in antiquity. Isis 74(1): 53-73.

 Lindberg, David C. 1971. Lines of influence in thirteenth-century optics: Bacon, Witelo, and Pecham.

 Springer.

 Speculum 46(1): 66-83.

 Lindberg, David C. 1984. Optics in sixteenth-century Italy. In Novità celesti e crisi del sapere: Atti del
 Convegno intemazionale di studi galileiani, ed. Paolo Galluzzi, 131-148. Firenze: Giunti Barbèra.
 Lohne, J.A. 1959. Thomas Harriott (1560-1621): The Tycho Brahe of optics. Centaurus 6(2): 113-121.
 Lohne, J. 1963. Zur Geschichte des Brechungsgesetzes. Sudhoffs Archiv fir Geschichte der Medizin und

 der Naturwissenschaften 47(2): 152-172.

 Lohne, J. 1965. Regenbogen und Brechzahl. Sudhoffs Archiv 44: 401-415.

 Lohne, J. 1968. Der eigenartige Einfluß Witelos auf die Entwicklung der Dioptrik. Archive for History of

 Exact Sciences 4(5): 414—426.

 Lohne, J. 1973. Kepler und Harriot: ihre Wege zum Brechungsgesetz. In Internationales Kepler-symposium,

 Weil der Stadt, 1971, ed. Fritz Krafft, Karl Meyer, and Bernhard Sticker, vol. 1, 187-214. Arbor scien

 tiarum, Reihe A: Abhandlungen. Hildesheim: Gerstenberg.

 Lohne, J. 1979. Essays on Thomas Harriot. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 20(3): 189-312.
 Molland, A.G. 1974. Roger Bacon as magician. Traditio 30:445-460.

 Pepper, Jon V. 1967. The study of Thomas Harriot's manuscripts II: Harriot's unpublished papers. History

 Powell, Nia M.W. 2008. Bulkeley, Sir Richard (c. 1540-1621 ). In Oxford Dictionary of national biography,

 ed. Lawrence Goldman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Power, A. 2006. A mirror for every age: The reputation of Roger Bacon. The English Historical Review

 Rashed, Roshdi. 1990. A pioneer in anaclastics: Ibn Sahl on burning mirrors and lenses. Isis 81 (3): 464-491.
 Rashed, Roshdi. 1993. Géométrie et dioptrique au Xe siècle: Ibn Sahl, al-Qûhî et Ibn al-Haytham. Paris:

 ofScience 6: 17-40.

 121(492): 657-692.

 Les Belles Lettres.

 Recorde, Robert. 1551. The Pathway to Knowledg Containing the First Principles of Geometrie, as They

 May Moste Aptly Be Applied Vnto Practise, Bothe for Vre of Instrumentes GeometricalI, and Astronom

 icall and Also for Proiection of Plattes in Euerye Kinde, and Therefore Much Necessary for All Sortes
 of Men. London.

 Reeves, Eileen. 2008. Galileo's glassworks: The telescope and the mirror. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni

 versity Press.

 Reeves, Eileen. 2010. Complete Inventions: The mirror and the telescope. In The origins of the telescope,

 ed. Albert Van Helden, 167-182. Amsterdam: KNAW Press.

 Ronan, Colin. 1993. The invention of the reflecting telescope. Yearbook of Astronomy, 129-140.

 Ryrie, Alec. 2008. The sorcerer's tale: Faith and fraud in Tudor England. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Scot, Reginald. 1584. The Discouerie of Witchcraft Vvherein the Lewde Dealing of Witches and Witchmon

 Shirley, John W. 1951. An early experimental determination of Snell's law. American Journal of Physics

 gers Is Notablie Detected... London.

 19(9): 507-508.

 Shirley, John W. 1983. Thomas Harriot, a biography. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Smith, A. Mark. 1982. Ptolemy's search for a law of refraction: A case-study in the classical methodology

 of 'saving the appearances' and its limitations. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 26: 221-240.

 Smith, A. Mark. 1996. Ptolemy's theory of visual perception: An English translation of the 'optics' with

 introduction and commentary. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 86(2): iii-300.

 "ö Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 178 R. Goulding

 Smith, A. Mark. 1999. Ptolemy and the foundations of ancient mathematical optics: A source based guided

 study. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 89(3): 1-172 (New Series).

 Smith, A. Mark. 2010a. Alhacen on refraction: A critical edition, with English translation, of Book 7 of
 Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitâb al-Manâzir, vol. 1.
 Introduction and Latin text. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 100(3): i-211.

 Smith. A. Mark. 2010b. Alhacen and Kepler and the origins of modern lens-theory. In The origins of the

 telescope, ed. Albert Van Helden, 147-165. Amsterdam: KNAW Press.

 Takahashi, Ken'ichi. 1992. The law of reflection in Its historical perspective. In The medieval Latin traditions

 of Euclid's Catoptrica : A critical edition of De Speculis with an introduction, English translation, and

 commentary, ed. Ken'ichi Takahashi, 13-37. Kyushu: Kyushu University Press.

 Tanner, Rosalind C.H. 1967. Thomas Harriot as mathematician: A legacy of Hearsay. Physis 9(235-47):

 257-292.

 Tanner. Rosalind C.H. 1977. Nathaniel Torporley's 'Congestor analyticus' and Thomas Harriot's 'De tri

 angulis laterum rationalium'. Annals of Science 34(4): 393-428.

 The Dictionary of Welsh biogruphy down to 1940. 1959. London: Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion.

 Toole-Stott, Raymond. 1976. A bibliography of English conjuring, 2 vols. Derby: Harpur and Sons.
 Van Helden, Albert. 1977. The invention of the telescope. Transactions of the American Philosophical

 Van Helden, Albert. 1984. Telescope building, 1850-1900. In Astrophysics and twentieth-century astronomy

 to 1950: Part A. The general history of astronomy, ed. Owen Gingerich, vol. IV.A, 40-58. Cambridge:

 Society 67(4): 1-67.

 Cambridge University Press.

 Venn, John, and John Archibald Venn. 1922. Alumni cantabrigienses; a biographical list of all known
 students, graduates and holders of office at the University of Cambridge, from the earliest times to,

 1900, 6 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Williams, John. 1868. Berw and the Hollands. Archaeologia Cambrensis, 3rd ser., 54: 97-130.

 Williams, Jack. 2011. Robert Recorde: Tudor polymath, expositor and practitioner of computation. Berlin:

 Springer.

 Zetterberg, J.Peter. 1980. The mistaking of 'the Mathematicks' for magic in Tudor and Stuart England. The

 Sixteenth Century Journal 11(1): 83-97.

 Zik, Yaakov. 2003. Kepler and the telescope. Nuncius 18: 481-514.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:00:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

