 

 

 

 

Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise "on the sizes and distances of the sun and moon"
Author(s): Christián C. Carman
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 1 (January 2014), pp. 35-65
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569612
Accessed: 19-05-2020 10:02 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2014) 68:35-65
 DO I 10.1007/s00407-013-0123-3

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise on the sizes
 and distances of the sun and moon

 Christian C. Carman

 Received: 15 April 2013 / Published online: 14 July 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract The book of Aristarchus of Samos, On the distances and sizes of the sun

 and moon, is one of the few pre-Ptolemaic astronomical works that have come down

 to us in complete or nearly complete form. The simplicity and cleverness of the basic

 ideas behind the calculations are often obscured in the reading of the treatise by

 the complexity of the calculations and reasoning. Part of the complexity could be

 explained by the lack of trigonometry and part by the fact that Aristarchus appears

 unwilling to make some simplifications that could be simply taken for granted. But

 an important part of the complexities is due to some unnecessary inconsistencies, as

 recently discovered by Berggren and Sidoli (Arch Hist Exact Sci 61:213-254, 2007).

 In the first part of this paper, I will try to show that some of these inconsistencies

 are just apparent. But the complexity of the calculations and reasoning is not the

 only reason that could disturb a reader of the treatise. The great inaccuracy—even
 for the measurement methods and instruments available at those times—of one of the

 three input values of the treatise is really astonishing. In the sixth and last hypothesis,

 Aristarchus states that the moon's apparent size is equal to 2°, while the correct value

 is one-fourth of that. Some attempts have been made in order to explain such a big

 value, but all of them have problems. In the second part of this paper, I will propose a

 new speculative but plausible explanation of the origin of this value.

 1 Introduction

 The book of Aristarchus of Samos, On the distances and sizes of the sun and moon,

 is one of the few pre-Ptolemaic astronomical works that have come down to us in

 Communicated by: Len Berggren.

 C. C. Carman (Ê3)

 Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, Pontificia Universidad Catôlica Argentina, CONICET, Buenos
 Aires, Argentina
 e-mail: ccarman@gmail.com

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 36

 C. C. Carman

 complete or nearly complete form. Undoubtedly, part of this fortune is due to the

 fact that it was included in the Little Astronomy, a list of works that had usually been

 studied before the Almagest (see Heath 1913,317-321 ).

 As it is clear from the title of the book, the purpose of the treatise is to obtain values

 for the sizes and distances of the sun and moon. The work consists of 18 propositions

 and could be divided into two parts. In the first one, Aristarchus compares the distances

 and sizes of the sun and moon (propositions 1-10). In the second one, he compares

 the sizes of both sun and moon with the earth (propositions 11-18).'

 The ideas behind the calculations of these two parts are very simple and powerful.

 For calculating the proportion between the distances of the sun and moon, Aristarchus

 invites us to imagine the sun, moon, and earth at the exact moment of a quadrature

 forming a right triangle with its right angle at the moon. Calculating the elongation of

 the moon at the very same moment, we will have two angles of the triangle. Aristarchus

 asserted in hypothesis 4 that the elongation is "less than a quadrant by one-thirtieth of

 a quadrant" (Heath 1913, 353), i.e., 87°. Therefore, we could calculate the ratio of its

 sides, i.e., the proportion between the distances.

 For calculating the proportion of the sizes of the moon, sun and earth, Aristarchus

 applied, again, a very simple and powerful idea: it is possible to know the size of an

 object by analyzing the size of its shadow and the distances between the illuminated

 object, the light source and the screen in which the shadow is projected. But we know

 that in a lunar eclipse, the earth's shadow produced by the sun's light is projected on

 the moon's surface, so it is possible to calculate the sizes.

 The simplicity and cleverness of the basic ideas are often obscured in the reading of

 the treatise by the complexity of the calculations and reasoning. Part of the complexity

 could be explained, on one hand, by the lack of trigonometry. What can be solved in
 just one operation applying trigonometric functions, requires, in Aristarchus's case

 complex reasoning that often implies the analysis of new triangles, sides and angles.

 On the other hand, part of the complexity could also be explained by the fact that

 Aristarchus appears unwilling to make some simplifications that could be simply

 taken for granted.

 But an important part of the complexities is due to some unnecessary inconsistencies

 in this treatise, as recently discovered by Berggren and Sidoli (2007). In the first part

 of this paper, we will try to show that some of these inconsistencies are just apparent.

 But the complexity of the calculations and reasoning is not the only reason that

 could disturb a reader of the treatise. The great inaccuracy—even for the measurement

 methods and instruments available at those times—of one of the three input values

 of the treatise is really astonishing. As we said before, in the first part of the work,

 Aristarchus used 87° as the value of the moon elongation at a quadrature. This value

 is not too accurate, but the difficulties in measuring it—particularly in determining the

 exact moment of the quadrature—could excuse Aristarchus. On the second part of the

 work, he uses two other values. On hypothesis 5, he asserts that the earth shadow at

 the distance of the moon is equal to two moons. This value is accurate enough. But, in

 ' See also Heath (1913) for the only complete English translation, he also offers a long introduction at pp.

 299-350. See also Neugebauer (1975, 634-643). But the most updated and serious study is Berggren and
 Sidoli (2007). For more references, see the note 1 of this work.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 37

 the sixth and last hypothesis, Aristarchus states that the moon's apparent size is equal
 to 2°, while the correct value is one-fourth of that. Some attempts have been made in

 order to explain such a big value, but all of them have problems. In the second part of

 this paper, we will propose a new speculative but plausible explanation of the origin
 of this value.

 2 First part: the problem with proposition 13

 2.1 The problem

 Hypothesis 5 of Aristarchus's treatise states "that the breadth of the (earth's) shadow
 is (that) of two moons (To της σκιάς πλάτος σεληνών είναι δύο) (Heath
 1913, 352-353). For Ptolemy, this value is a bit bigger: 2;36° (Toomer 1998, 254),
 and he interpreted this by asserting that line EF which shows the size of the shadow
 when crossing the moon's center (M) is 2;36 times line GH, which represents the
 moon's diameter (Fig. 1).

 But Aristarchus has a very peculiar way of interpreting this statement that implies,

 according to a recent study of Berggren and Sidoli (2007) and Sidoli (2007), some
 inconsistencies.

 As we said before, in order to calculate the ratios between the sizes of both sun and

 moon with the size of the earth, Aristarchus had to know the ratio of the sizes of sun

 and moon with respect to the earth's shadow. The aim of proposition 13 is to obtain

 these proportions. To accomplish this, Aristarchus invites us to represent the sun, earth
 and moon in a lunar eclipse, "when the eclipse first becomes total through the moon
 having fallen wholly within the earth's shadow" (τελείας οΰσης της έκλείψεως
 και πρώτως όλης έμπεπτωκυίας εις τό της γης σκίασμα (Heath 1913,
 392).

 In Fig. 2, we omitted the sun in order to zoom in to the relevant zone, but it would

 be located at the left of the figure, with its center on line ΒΛ. Β is the earth's center,
 and Γ is the moon's center. Lines KN and Η Ξ show the limits of the earth's shadow

 cone. AN is the dividing line. Arc ΝΞ, centered at B, is the arc in which the endpoints
 of the dividing line—i.e., points Λ and Ν—move as the eclipse progresses; and line
 Ν Ξ is the chord of the arc that we will call the endpoint arc. Line BN joins the center

 of the earth with N, the endpoint of the dividing line that is also in the shadow limits
 line KN. Finally, ΛΟ represents the moon's diameter, passing through its center, Γ.

 Fig. 1 Sun, earth and moon at a lunar eclipse: the size of the earth's shadow is equal to two moons

 ft Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 38

 C. C. Carman

 to sun

 1ΞJI

 r tM

 Fig. 2 The endpoint arc (ΞΛΝ) carries the dividing line (ΛΝ) around B, the center of the earth

 Let us add to Aristarchus's figure two points, Π and P. These points are the inter
 section of line Γ Λ with lines ΗΞ and KN, respectively. Therefore, line ΠΡ shows the
 diameter of the earth's shadow at the distance of the moon's center (Γ). So, accord
 ing to Ptolemy, line ΠΡ is 2;36 times bigger than the moon, i.e., than line AO. But
 Aristarchusdoes not assert that line ΠΡ is twice as large as the moon, nor does he claim

 that chord Ν Ξ is twice as large as the moon. For Aristarchus, to say that the breadth
 of the shadow is that of two moons means that two and only two dividing lines fit in

 the endpoint arc, which is limited by the shadow cone. This is, undoubtedly, a very
 odd way of interpreting the hypothesis. But, before analyzing the possible reasons for
 this particular interpretation, let us enumerate some inconsistencies involved in the

 construction of the figure that Sidoli (2007, 235-236) has recently brought to light.

 1. The first inconsistency is related to the orientation of the dividing line. Because
 lines AB and NB are tangents to the moon's circle, the dividing line AN is per
 pendicular to the line joining the earth's center and the moon's center. However,
 the dividing line should be always perpendicular to the line joining the moon's
 center and the sun's—not the earth's—center. It is perpendicular also to the line
 to the earth's center when the three bodies are aligned, i.e., when the moon is in

 the middle of an eclipse, not in its beginning. Thus, while the dividing line should
 be perpendicular to the line to the sun's center, actually it is perpendicular to the
 line to the earth's center.

 2. The second inconsistency is related to the position of the dividing line. Aristarchus

 proved in proposition 2 that, because the moon is smaller than the sun, the portion

 illuminated in the moon will be greater than half its surface. This implies, obviously,

 that the dividing line should always be farther away from the sun than the center
 of the moon, i.e., that the center of the moon should be between the sun and the

 dividing line. But, in the figure, Aristarchus located the dividing line between the

 sun and the center of the moon, i.e., he located the dividing line at the wrong place.
 Thus, while the dividing line should be farther away to the sun than the moon's

 center, actually it is closer.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 39

 3. Aristarchus asserts that the endpoints of the dividing line are carried by a circle

 centered in the earth. But, actually, while it is true that the center of the dividing

 line is carried by a circle centered at the earth, this is not true for the endpoints

 because the dividing line is always perpendicular to the line to the sun and not to

 the line to the earth. This can only be true if the dividing line is always facing the

 earth and not the sun. Thus, while the endpoints of the dividing line could not be

 carried by a single circle centered on the earth unless the dividing line is always

 facing the earth, they are actually carried by such a circle.

 4. Fourth, Aristarchus requires at the same time two things that are incompatible: on

 the one hand, he asks "that the eclipse first becomes total through the moon having

 fallen wholly within the earth's shadow", but, on the other hand, he also asks that

 the lower endpoint of the dividing line, point B, be at the shadow limit line KN.

 Nevertheless, as is clear looking at the figure, it is impossible to have at the same

 time point Ν at line KN and the moon totally eclipsed: a small portion of the moon

 necessarily will protrude. Thus, Aristarchus asks that the moon be totally and not

 totally eclipsed at the same time.

 5. Finally, a detail could be added, which even if it could not be considered an

 inconsistency, is clearly at least an oddity in Aristarchus's style. In proposition
 4, Aristarchus had shown that even in the worst case, i.e., when the difference

 between the moon's diameter and the dividing line reaches its maximum, the dif

 ference is still imperceptible to an observer on the earth. This is very helpful in

 the analysis of the first part, for Aristarchus can suppose that the dividing line is

 passing through the center of the moon at quadrature, making it possible to build

 the right-angled triangle. In the second part of the treatise, Aristarchus will need

 the proportion between the dividing line and the moon diameter. However, this

 time, he doesn't treat them as equal. Rather, in proposition 12, he will calculate the

 proportion, again, in the worst scenario, when sun, moon and earth are aligned in

 that order. He obtains that the proportion between the dividing line and the lunar

 diameter is greater than 89/90 but less than one. Because it has been measured in

 the worst scenario, the limits are still true in any other possible situation.

 In the figure of proposition 13, in which Aristarchus will use the limits obtained

 in proposition 12, the moon is close to the best scenario, i.e., in which the difference

 between the dividing line and the moon diameter reaches its minimum, because, now,
 the moon is at the other side of the earth, i.e., close to its maximum distance to the

 sun.

 Therefore, the dividing line used in proposition 13 is greater than the dividing line of

 proposition 12, but, of course, it is still inside the limits obtained in this proposition. So,

 the use of the limits obtained in proposition 12 in the calculations of proposition 13

 is totally reasonable. But what constitutes an oddity is that, every time that a ratio

 originally calculated for some value is applied by Aristarchus to a lower or greater
 value that nevertheless is inside the same limits, no matter how small the difference

 between them is, he makes the move explicitly using the formulas "πολλφ έλάσσων"

 (a fortiori smaller) or "πολλφ μείζων" (a fortiori greater), letting us know that even

 if the value is not exactly the same for which the proportion has been calculated, the

 ■£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 3 Detail of the diagram for Proposition 13 in the Kraus Ms of Thâbit's revision (from Sidoli 2007.
 540)

 proportion is still valid. In this case, however, Aristarchus doesn't use this expression,

 inviting the reader to think that the dividing line has the same size in both propositions.

 The first four problems lead Sidoli (2007,534) to assert that "none of these assump

 tions are strictly true, and it is not actually possible to draw a mathematically coherent
 diagram of the configuration the proposition demands". Sidoli doesn't propose any

 explanation for these inconsistencies, but shows in a very clever way, that, analyzing the

 different configurations that the figure of proposition 13 took on in the various medieval

 manuscripts and modern editions, it is possible to realize that many of medieval and
 modern scholars were aware of these inconsistencies and tried to solve them. As one

 example, in the Kraus Ms of Thâbit's revision, it was decided to introduce the entire
 moon within the shadow, but then the line BN does not touch the limit of the shadow

 cone. See Fig. 3.

 The fourth problem is by far the most notorious and, probably, the most disturbing,

 because it can be easily detected as an inconsistency between the text and the figure.
 This inconsistency not only can be found in the clever analysis of the figures in man

 uscripts and earlier editions that Berggren and Sidoli propose, but it is also present in

 one scholion. In a thirteenth-century manuscript, there can be read close to the figure:
 "The figure is falsified, because the whole circle ΛΜΝ should be inside the cone"
 ("Εσφαλται ή καταγραφή ' όλος γαρ ό ΛΜΝ κύκλος έντος τοΰ κώνου
 οφείλει είναι) (Noack 1992, 368) (Fig. 4).

 The first thing to be said in defense of Aristarchus is that these inconsistencies do

 not alter the results significantly. In fact, in Proposition 4, Aristarchus has proved that

 the difference between the diameter of the moon and the dividing line is perceptually
 indistinguishable, so to locate it at one side or at the other of the moon would not
 make any difference, because it would always remain imperceptibly indistinguishable
 from the diameter. For the same reason, to be perpendicular to the line to the center

 of the sun or to the line to the center of the earth, when they are almost aligned, does

 not imply any significant difference in values. However, the inconsistencies have to

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 41

 Fig. 4 Diagram for Proposition 13 at Ms. Vat.Gr. 202. The scholion is at the upper right corner

 Fig. 5 With dashed lines, the dividing line ΛΝ according to the figure of proposition 13. In this case, line
 Λ Ν is facing the center of the earth; with dotted Unes, the dividing line MO as it should be if it were facing
 the center of the sun

 have some reason. Why would Aristarchus incorporate them, if there were no strong
 reason?

 Undoubtedly, the most natural reason would be that incorporating these inconsis

 tencies would significantly simplify the calculations, as has happened when, in propo
 sition 4, he asserted that the difference between the dividing line and the diameter of

 the moon is imperceptible. But even if this was the reason, an explicit enunciation
 would still have been legitimately expected from Aristarchus of the simplifications

 that he was making. After all, to justify just one simplification in the first part of the

 treatise, i.e., the line that divides the dark and bright portions of the moon is not exactly

 the same as but sensibly equal to the moon diameter, he spends three propositions.
 But let us see if, indeed, the calculations are simpler with these assumptions.

 To do this, let us introduce the situation without any simplification. In Figs. 5 and

 6, we have superimposed to the actual figure of Proposition 13—in which the dividing
 line ΛΝ (with dashed lines) is facing the center of the earth—the correct situation—in

 which the dividing line MO (with dotted lines) is facing the center of the sun. First,
 take a look to the dashed triangle (BAN). Since the angle at Β is 2° (the apparent
 size of the moon) and the triangle is isosceles, the other two angles each measure
 89°. Therefore, the dividing line AN is tilted with respect to the perpendicular line

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 42

 C. C. Carman

 Fig. 6 A detail of Fig. 5. In this figure, I decided to locate the entire moon in the shadow cone, just as in
 Thâbit's interpretation, in order to avoid drawinf· two different moons, one for each triangle, but this does
 not affect the analysis

 ΛΟ by just 1°, i.e., angle ΝΛΟ is one degree. Of course, Line AO is the diameter of

 the moon passing through the moon center, and so, it is the line used by Ptolemy for
 comparing the moon and shadow sizes. This is the difference between Aristarchus's

 and Ptolemy's approach. So this degree is the reason that justifies all the efforts made
 in propositions 11, 12, 13 and 14.

 Now, take a look at the dotted triangle (AMO), which corresponds to the non
 simplified proposal. We will calculate the equal angles at M and O. Suppose that,
 accepting proposition 4, the base of both triangles is the same, i.e., MO is equal to
 AN. We know that the equal sides of the dotted triangle are approximately 20 times

 larger than the equal sides of the dashed triangle BAN, since the sun is approximately
 19 times farther than the moon, but in this case, the moon is on the other side of the

 earth, and so we have to add one earth-moon distance. So, line AM is 20 times line

 BM. In proposition I I, Aristarchus calculated the ratio between the diameter of the

 moon and the earth-moon distance, asserting that it is greater than 1/30 but less than
 2/45. Averaging, we could say that the moon is 26 moon diameters from the earth. If,

 again, assuming proposition 4, we accept that the dividing lines are equal to the moon

 diameter, we can say that side BA is 26 times AN, the base of the triangle. But the equal

 sides of the dotted triangle are 20 times greater, and so they will be 520 times greater

 than their base, i.e., AM is 520 times MO. With these side proportions, the equal angles

 of the dotted triangle measure 89.94°. Therefore, the difference with the perpendicular

 line AO is only a little bit more than 3min, i.e., angle AOM measures just 3'.

 Now, If Aristarchus wants to make some approximation to simplify the calculations,
 it would certainly be more justified to treat MO as identical to the lunar diameter
 perpendicular to the axis of the cone, i.e., line AO and not treat MO as equal to
 AN. First, because MO is much closer to AO than to AN: 3min versus around 1°.

 But, second and more important, the first equality would surely greatly simplify the

 calculations, for the new configuration would virtually be the same as Ptolemy's. In
 this case, Aristarchus could have avoided propositions 11-14, dispensing with around
 a third of the treatise. Of course, in this case—and also if he had decided to work

 directly with MO without any simplification—there would not be any portion of the

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 43

 moon protruding, because point Ο is in the limiting shadow line. In contrast, there is

 no simplification at all in equating MO to AN, and, as we have shown, many problems.

 Thus, there seems to be no reason to justify either the inconsistencies or the curious

 interpretation given to hypothesis 5. Aristarchus, without any apparent reason, says
 that the hypothesis according to which the earth's shadow is equal to two moons
 should be interpreted as saying that two and only two misplaced, misdirected and
 perhaps wrongly sized dividing lines inserted in a badly built arc fit with the cone
 of earth's shadow when the moon is wholly immersed in the cone, even if the moon
 actually could not be wholly immersed. Definitely, proposition 13 tarnishes the genius
 of Aristarchus.

 2.2 Possible solution

 However, we think there is a way to justify the curious interpretation of hypothesis 5
 that also removes all the five inconsistencies that we have enumerated.

 Let us take a look again at proposition 4, in which Aristarchus wants to show that

 the difference between the dividing line and the lunar diameter is imperceptible to the

 human eye. The only value used in this calculation is the apparent size of the moon that,

 according to hypothesis 6, is equal to 2°. See Fig. 7. For Aristarchus, this means that
 angle ΔΑΓ and not angle ZAE measures 2°. In turn, ΔΓ, the base of ΔΑΓ triangle, is

 the dividing line. However, the light of the moon depends on the position of the sun and

 the proportion between the moon's and sun's sizes, but the eye's position doesn't play

 any role. On the other hand, the apparent size of the moon depends on the observer's

 position, not the sun's position. What is the link between the apparent size of the moon
 and the dividing line that allows us to assert that the base of the triangle having the

 apparent size of the moon as the unequal angle is the dividing line? The link is very

 clear: the same cone comprehending both the sun and the moon has its vertex at our eye.

 This means that the dividing line is not only dividing the dark and the bright portions

 in the moon, but also the visible and the invisible portions of the moon from the earth.
 But of course, these two divisions do not always coincide on the same line. So,

 from now on, we will stop using the ambiguous name dividing line for the line that
 divides the dark and bright portions of the moon and we will call it the light line.
 On the other hand, the line that divides the visible and the invisible portions of the

 Fig. 7 The dividing line when
 the vertex of the cone

 comprehending the sun and
 moon is at our eye

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 44

 C. C. Carman

 moon from the earth will be called the visibility line. Now, the light line depends only

 on the relative position of the moon and the sun, and the earth's position plays no role at

 all in it. Its orientation, therefore, is always perpendicular to the line joining the centers
 of the sun and the moon. Besides, because the sun-moon distance varies, the size of

 the light line varies reaching its maximum difference with a lunar diameter—and so,

 its minimum size—when sun, moon and earth are aligned, in that order. On the other

 hand, the visibility line depends only on the relative position of the moon and earth,

 being always perpendicular to the line connecting the center of the moon to the center

 of the earth. Besides, because the distance between them does not change (because the

 moon rotates in a circular orbit around the earth), the visibility line always has the same

 size. The size of the visibility line is the same as that of the light line when the light

 line reaches its maximum difference with a lunar diameter, that is, in the configuration

 of a total eclipse of the sun, described in proposition 12. In this configuration, the

 orientation of both dividing lines coincides. But, for example, in a quadrature, their

 sizes are different and their orientations perpendicular between each other.

 Cleomedes distinguished two circles in The Heavens for explaining moon phases,

 and he asserted that both circles are smaller than a great circle even if, of course, the

 difference is not perceivable for us. He talks about circles and not lines, because he is

 thinking in three-dimensions. Our dividing lines are the two-dimensional expression

 of these circles, because the circles are always perpendicular to the plane of the figures.

 He also asserts that they change their position (generating the phases). The only detail

 that Cleomedes seems to have overlooked is that the light line changes its size, for he
 asserts that both have the same size.

 Two circles are conceived of in the moon: A, the one by which its dark part is sep

 arated from its illuminated part (εις μέν, φ διακρίνεται τό σκιερόν αύτής
 άπό του πεφωτισμένου); Β, the one by which the part visible to us is
 separated from the part that is in-visible (ετερος δέ, φ χωρίζεται τό
 όρώμενον ύφ' ήμών αύτής [άπό] του μή όρωμένου). Each of these cir
 cles is smaller than C, the circle that can divide the moon into two equal parts,

 that is, its great circle. Because the sun is larger than the moon, it illuminates

 more than half of it, and thus A (the circle that separates the dark from the

 illuminated part) is smaller than C (the great circle of the moon). Β (the circle

 in our line of sight) is, by the same token, necessarily smaller than C (its great
 circle), since we see less than half of the moon. (...) So since Β divides the

 moon not into equal, but into unequal, parts, it too is smaller than C, the great

 circle. Both A and B, however, appear as great circles relative to our perception,

 and while they always have the same size, they still do not maintain the same

 fixed position, but cause numerous interchanges and configurations relative to
 one another...(Cleomedes II.5., Bowen and Todd 2004, 147)

 Now, once we have conceptually distinguished between both dividing lines, if we turn

 back to the figure of proposition 13 (see again Fig. 2), we will see that line ΛΝ, which

 is called by Aristarchus the line which divides the dark and the bright portions of the

 moon is actually not the light line, but the visibility line. Indeed, the line connects

 the two endpoints of the lines that starting at the center of the earth are tangent to the

 "S Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fig. 8 Three different ways of interpreting that the earth shadow visible in a lunar eclipse is equal to two
 moons. In A, the line that measures the size of the shadow crosses through the center of the moon, in Β
 coincides with two visibility lines parallel to each other; in C, the two visibility lines are facing the same
 center, A

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 45

 A B C
 A Β C

 moon circle. So, while in Fig. 6, line MO is the light line, line ΛΝ is the visibility line.

 It is true that if line ΛΝ is interpreted as the light line, it is misplaced, misdirected and

 perhaps with the wrong size. But if we consider that line ΛΝ is the visibility line, then,

 it is well located, well orientated and has the appropriate size. Indeed, the visibility line

 is perpendicular to the line joining the earth's center with the moon's center, because

 the visibility line always faces the earth (and so, inconsistency 1 disappears); it is also
 between the center of the moon and the earth, because we see less than a half moon

 (and so inconsistency 2 disappears); therefore, the circle carrying the endpoints of the
 visibility line is a circle centered at the earth (and so, inconsistency 3 disappears); and,

 finally, the visibility line has the same size that the light line has in the configuration of

 proposition 12, having therefore, the correct size (and so, inconsistency 5 disappears).
 Besides, if we consider that Aristarchus had in mind the visibility line, the oddity

 of his way in interpreting hypothesis 5 turns into a subtlety worthy of a mathematical
 genius. As noted above, the simplest interpretation of hypothesis 5 would say that
 the diameter of the shadow is equal to two lunar diameters, as Ptolemy did. This is
 represented in Fig. 8a.

 But this is not Aristarchus's choice. Aristarchus could have reasoned in this way:

 since we do not see half the moon, but only the portion covered by the visibility line
 (which is smaller than the moon's diameter) when we see that the earth's shadow is

 equal to two moons, what we see is that the earth's shadow is equal to two visibility

 lines, as shown in Fig. 8b, where A is the center of the earth.

 However, Fig. 8b is not entirely correct, because the center of the earth (point A) is

 duplicated. If we join both points A, the figure turns into Fig. 8c, which is the figure

 that Aristarchus finally adopted.

 Thus, when Aristarchus asserted in hypothesis 5 that the breadth of the shadow is

 equal to two moons, he is always referring to angles measuring apparent sizes: indeed,

 it is true in his figure that the apparent size of the shadow seen from the center of the

 earth is equal to the apparent size of two moons, also seen from the center of the earth.

 Finally, this interpretation is also supported by the way it naturally dissolves the
 most disturbing of the inconsistencies: i.e., the fact that Aristarchus's configuration

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 46

 C. C. Carman

 assumes that the moon is totally immersed in the earth shadow, and at the same time,

 the same configuration implies the opposite, as the figure of proposition 13 shows. The

 solution is simple. We must ask ourselves which is the first moment of a total eclipse:
 is it when the entire moon is immersed in the earth shadow or when the entire visible

 portion of the moon is immersed in the earth shadow? Obviously, the second option

 is the correct one: we will see the entire moon eclipsed when the entire moon that we

 see is immersed in the shadow. This is the first instant of the total eclipse. Therefore,

 the portion of the moon that, in the figures, protrudes from the shadow cone does

 not affect the totality of the eclipse because, actually, that portion of the moon is not
 visible from the earth.

 2.3 Textual evidence

 It still remains unexplained why Aristarchus did not use two different expressions for

 distinguishing the two dividing lines. But maybe he did. The expression "the circle

 dividing the dark and the bright portions in the moon" (or similar expressions) is

 mentioned in the formulation of hypothesis 3 (once), in proposition 3 (four times),

 in proposition 4 (seven times), in proposition 12 (twice), in proposition 13 (seven

 times) and in proposition 14 (three times). According to our proposal, until proposi

 tion 12, when Aristarchus talks about the circle corresponding to the dividing line, he

 is thinking of the circle corresponding to the light line; in proposition 12, he would be

 demonstrating that the visibility line is equal to the light line when the light line is the

 smallest possible, and in propositions 13 and 14, every time Aristarchus mentions the

 dividing circle he is thinking of the circle corresponding to the visibility line. Every

 time Aristarchus mentions the circle in propositions 3 and 4, he talks about the cir

 cle itself, i.e., he uses the expression: the circle in the moon which divides the dark
 and the bright portions (Ό διορίζων κύκλος έν τη σελήνη τό τε σκιερόν
 και τό λαμπρόν) or a very similar expression, while, every time he mentions the

 circle from proposition 12 onwards, he talks about the diameter of that circle, but

 never about the circle itself. He uses expressions like: the diameter of the circle which
 divides in the moon the dark and the bright portions (ή διάμετρος του κύκλου
 του διορίζοντος έν τη σελήνη τό σκιερόν και τό λαμπρόν). He never
 says, for example that the circle drawn around these diameters is the circle that divides

 the dark and the bright portions in the moon. That is to say, he affirms that the diame

 ter is the diameter of the circle that divides, but he does not say that this is the circle

 that divides. Because the two dividing lines are equal (in the condition established in

 proposition 12), it is not wrong to say that this line is (equal to) the diameter of the

 circle that divides, even if the circle is not the light circle, but the visibility circle.

 There might be some textual evidence that Aristarchus had this distinction in mind.

 Against this idea, however, one could argue that the reason for talking about the circle

 first and about the diameter later is that, while the subject of propositions 3 and 4 is the

 circle itself, the subject of propositions 13 and 14 is the diameter, because Aristarchus

 wants to establish some numerical relationships between the sizes of the circles.

 Nevertheless, there could be some other textual indication that Aristarchus was

 aware of the distinction between the dividing lines. The word ή διάμετρος is used

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 47

 107 times in Aristarchus's treatise. It is mainly used, of course, to refer to the diameters

 of the moon, sun and earth. If we leave aside the ten instances in which it refers to the

 diameter of the circle that divides the dark from the illuminated part in the moon in

 propositions 13 and 14, we have 97 instances. In all of them, except in three instances,

 the word διάμετρος is accompanied by the definite article. The three cases in which

 the word is alone appear in the first paragraph of propositions 16, 17 and 18, where

 Aristarchus is identifying the lines of the figures with the diameters of the moon,

 sun and earth in order to cube them and obtain the proportion between the sizes of

 the bodies. In all three cases, the figures are only lines, with no circles around them.

 It seems clear that Aristarchus is not using the definite article because he does not

 mean that these lines are actually the diameter of the circles, which is not necessary.

 He simply means that they have the same magnitude as the diameters and, therefore,

 that they represent any possible diameter of the bodies, as opposed to a particular

 diameter in a particular diagram. Thus, for example, at the beginning of proposition

 16, Aristarchus says that line A is (equal to) one diameter of the sun and not that line

 A is the diameter of the sun. The three times that διάμετρος is used in proposition 14,

 it is not accompanied by the definite article. In two of these cases, Aristarchus says

 that the line MO is (equal to) one diameter of the circle that divides. In the third one,

 he says that both lines MO and ΞΛ are (equal to) one diameter of the dividing circle.

 Had Aristarchus meant that MO is the diameter of the dividing circle, he would have

 introduced the definitive article, because line MO would have represented a particular

 diameter in a particular diagram. Therefore, its absence could be considered as textual

 evidence that Aristarchus had the distinction between the two dividing lines in mind.

 Unfortunately, the case is not so clear in proposition 13 in which the word is not

 accompanied by the definitive article only once. There is, however, at least one case
 in which it does not need the article, but it is there.

 Suppose, then, that we cannot affirm that there is any strong textual evidence for

 the conceptual distinction between the two lines. Does this mean that the conceptual

 distinction does not exist? certainly not. There is at least one case in which Aristarchus

 uses exactly the same expression referring to two different concepts. In the treatise,

 Aristarchus talks about the moon, sun and earth as spheres, and so he talks about the

 sphere of the moon, the sphere of the sun and the sphere of the earth. But he also

 talks about the orbit of the moon and the sun, which for Aristarchus is also a sphere.

 Sometimes he uses the more accurate expression: "the sphere on which the center of

 the [sun or moon] moves", but in the case of the moon, he often calls it "the sphere of

 the moon". This is the case, among others, of the formulation of hypothesis 2, in which

 Aristarchus says that "the earth is in the relation of a point and center to the sphere of

 the moon". The expression is so confusing and the meaning so clear by context that

 heath decided to translate "the sphere in which the moon moves". We have, then, the

 same expression: the sphere of the moon, referring to two clearly different objects: the

 moon as a sphere and the orbit of the moon.

 In the case of the two meanings of sphere, the context is so clear, and the two refer

 to things which are so different, that the confusion is almost impossible. Nevertheless,

 we cannot say the same about the two dividing lines. How can a reader distinguish

 between them if Aristarchus uses the same expression? We must remember, as Reviel

 Netz has shown, that diagrams play a crucial role in Greek mathematics, in particular

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 48

 C. C. Carman

 Fig. 9 Figure of proposition 14. A is the center of the sun: B. the center of the earth and Γ is the center of

 the moon. The moon is in the middle of a lunar eclipse. The lower figure is a detail of the upper one

 for fixing the reference of expressions that the text leaves unspecified. Netz talks
 specifically of letters, but we see no reason not to extend this idea to some kind of

 expressions which are so repeated in the same way, that they constitute formulae. As

 Netz pointed out, "very often—most often—letters are not completely specified. So,

 how do we know what they stand for? Very simple: we see this in the diagram" (Netz

 2004, 23). In the diagram of proposition 13, it is evident that the dividing line could
 not be the light line but the visibility line, for it is located between the center of the

 moon and the sun, what is impossible for the light line, given that the sun is bigger
 than the moon, as Aristarchus explicitly asserts in proposition 2. This is even clearer
 in the figure of proposition 14 (see Fig. 9).

 Of course, this proposal does not solve all the problems present in the treatise.
 For example, the problematic implications of the second hypothesis still remain
 unexplained. Aristarchus asserts in this hypothesis that "the earth is in the relation
 of a point and center to the sphere in which the moon moves" (Heath 1913, 353).

 2.4 Other problems

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 49

 Fig. 10 Figure of proposition 14 in Mss.Vat.Gr.204

 This implies, however, as Berggren and Sidoli (2007, 216-127) have emphasized,
 that the fact that the earth is taken as having no radius, "denies the possibility of relat

 ing the lunar distance to the radius of the earth, and establishing terrestrial distances of

 the luminaries". In addition, "it implies that no extended terrestrial shadow will fall on

 the orbit of the moon", contradicting hypothesis 5 and all the propositions based on it.

 This contradiction is not solved by assuming the two dividing lines. And we do not
 pretend to solve it. It is worth mentioning, however, that the illustrator's awareness

 of this contradiction could explain some odd features of the figure of proposition 14.

 In this proposition, Aristarchus invites us to draw the same figure of proposition 13
 but, now, he asks that the moon be placed so "that its center is on the axis of the cone

 comprehending both the sun and the earth", i.e., in this ease, we are in the middle and

 not at the beginning of the eclipse. So, the figure would be like Fig. 9.

 The figures in the manuscripts are shown in Fig. 10, reproduced from the oldest

 surviving manuscript.

 The first thing to note is that the three bodies have the same size, making a cylinder

 rather than a cone. It is an oddity which could probably be explained by the necessity of

 having a big moon in order to make the lines clear. There is, however, another oddity,
 even more difficult to explain: the earth shape (centered at B) is not a circle, but

 some kind of lens-shape object. In figures of other texts, even in the same manuscript,
 this lens shape is used for drawing ellipses or circles in perspective, as in Eutocius's

 commentary on Apollonius's Conies I, where the drawings represent the various kinds
 of conic section (see Fig. 11).

 Therefore, the earth seems to be represented with an ellipse or a circle in perspective,

 as is shown in Fig. 12.

 This could be an ingenious way to try to solve the contradiction of supposing the

 earth to be a point that nevertheless casts some shadow. In effect, in this case, the
 earth would be considered a great circle, perpendicular to the plane of the cone's
 axis. In proposition 14, Aristarchus have to assume that the earth has the relation of
 a point and center to the moon's orbit, because the observer must be located at the
 center of the moon's orbit that coincides with the center of the earth and not with its

 surface. But, again, assuming that, there would be no shadow. The situation could be

 partially solved if the sphere of the earth is replaced by a great circle perpendicular
 to the axis of the cone because there would be no problem with having the eye at

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 50

 C. C. Carman

 ^O^S( oacr "ITOI Uyl^itcoi

 ^·ν«ΐ^··β\ββ>ρ MiAoj cWneriknt i,finrU 4^

 ff4»£oo<rUxu turret i.^niTtwJ

 Fig. 11 Figure of Eutocious's commentary on Apollonius Conies 1 in Mss.Vat.Gr.204

 Fig. 12 A possible representation of Fig. 14 of the treatise, in which the earth is represented just with a
 circle in perspective

 the center of the circle and the circle casting a shadow. It is hard to know whether
 this detail could be traced back up to the original figure drawn by Aristarchus. Nev

 ertheless, what can be asserted with certainty is that there are no traces of this detail
 in the text because Aristarchus is asking us to draw the same figure as in proposi
 tion 13 in which the earth is a sphere. Maybe, it was just a way the illustrator found
 to direct the attention of the reader to the problem. But the same situation is rep
 resented in the figure of proposition 13. Nevertheless, in this figure, the earth is a

 circle, not an ellipse. Therefore, why would the illustrator modify the figure of propo
 sition 14 and not the figure of proposition 13? Maybe, a reason for this could be that
 in proposition 14 (but not in 13), hypothesis 2 is explicitly mentioned: because the
 point Β is the center of the earth, and the earth has the relation of a point and cen
 ter to the sphere in which the moon moves (διά το τό Β σημεΐον κέντρον
 είναι της γης, και <τήν γήν> σημείου και κέντρου λόγον εχειν πρός
 την της σελήνης σφαΐραν) (Heath 1913, 403).

 There are still many unsolved questions in the treatise, but the distinction between

 the visibility and the light line at least solves the five inconsistencies that we have
 previously enumerated.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 51

 3 Second part: a possible explanation for the 2° of the moon's apparent

 size in Aristarchus

 3.1 Introduction

 As we said before, one of the most intriguing mysteries in Aristarchus's treatise is

 the value of the moon's apparent diameter. Aristarchus asserts in hypothesis 6 that

 the moon subtends one-fifteenth part of a zodiac sign, i.e., its apparent diameter is
 2°. The real value—which could be obtained by a very simple procedure—is around

 four times smaller. So, there seems to be no reason for so big a number. Moreover, in

 Sand-Reckoner, Archimedes says that Aristarchus discovered that the sun's apparent

 radius (which is equal to that of the moon) is 1/720 of the zodiac, i.e., 0.5° (Heath
 1897,223).

 Attempts have been made to justify this big value. Manitius (1909, 292) sug

 gested that it could be a transcription error, and that should be read it as 1/50
 (πεντηκοστόν μέρος) and not 1/15 (πεντεκαιδέκατον μέρος), so being around
 0.6°. But all the calculations of the treatise suppose the 2° value. Previously, Tannery

 ( 1883,241 ) proposed that Aristarchus deliberately chose a false value in order to show

 that "his treatise was mainly intended to give a specimen of calculations which require

 to be made on the basis of more exact experimental observations, and to show at the

 same time that, for the solution of the problem, one of the data could be chosen almost

 arbitrarily" (Tannery 1883, 241, translation taken from Heath 1913, 311-312).

 Actually, it is true that the modification of the moon's apparent size is almost

 irrelevant in the main results of the treatise.2 It is only involved in three propositions.

 In proposition four, it is used to show that, even if the light line does not exactly
 cross the center of the moon, the difference is imperceptible. As we already saw,

 Aristarchus needs to treat these two lines as equivalent in order to guarantee the

 geometrical construction of the quadrature that is the basis of the distance proportion
 calculation. Then, it is used in proposition 15 for calculating the upper limit of the

 proportion between the sun's and earth's diameters. And consequently, it is also used

 in proposition 17, for calculating the lower limit of the proportion between the earth's

 and moon's diameters.3 In both cases, nevertheless, its role is almost negligible. It is so

 irrelevant that Neugebauer ( 1975,643), who usually is moderate in his judgments, says

 that "it is pure mathematical pedantry". Actually, if the lunar diameter was absolutely

 0, the upper limit of the proportion between the earth's and sun's diameters would

 change from 7.16 to 7, and the lower limit of the proportion between the earth's and

 moon's diameters would go from 2.51 to 2.57. If, at the other extreme, the ridiculous

 value of 15° was adopted for the moon's apparent size, the values would be 8.51 and

 2.11, respectively. This clearly shows that Tannery is right when he says that "one of

 2 Wall (1975,208-209) mistakenly says that "the entire treatise is an attempt to fix the sizes and distances

 of the sun and moon within limits which are then completely falsified by changing this value".

 3 In both cases, it is also used for calculating the upper in the first case and the lower in the second case

 of the proportion between the volumes, for he simply cubes the diameter proportions in order to obtain the

 volume proportions.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 52

 C. C. Carman

 the data could be chosen almost arbitrarily". Maybe, as Heath (1913,311) suggested,

 Tannery's explanation is "perhaps too ingenious". Why would Aristarchus stop at 2° if

 he wants to introduce a clearly exaggerated value? Actually, 2° is not too exaggerated

 if we remember that, for example, Macrobius value was around 1.66°.

 James Evans ( 1998, 72) has proposed a very interesting and simple way to explain

 the origin of the other inaccurate value of Aristarchus's treatise: the 87° for the moon's

 elongation at a quadrature. Evans shows that the 87° could be understood as the result

 of assuming the largest imperceptible inequality between two parts of the lunar month:

 one that starts with the conjunction and ends with quadrature (or vice versa), and one

 that starts with quadrature and ends with the full moon (or vice versa). If the angle

 were smaller than 87°, we would necessarily perceive that these two parts of the month

 have a different length. But we do not perceive this difference, so this is the limit.

 3.2 A possible solution

 The hypothesis that we propose is in the line of Evans's proposal. It asserts that the

 moon's apparent size used by Aristarchus is the greatest possible value that still allows

 one to assert what proposition 4 asserts, i.e., the difference between the light line and

 the moon's diameter is imperceptible to the human eye.

 But, how could Aristarchus know what portion of the moon is just beyond human

 perception? Aristarchus surely was aware that only in the instant of the new moon is the

 illuminated part of the moon totally opposite to the earth, but, after a negligibly brief

 time, a small part of the illuminated portion would be facing the earth. Nevertheless,

 we do not see the illuminated part of the moon just after (or before) the opposition.

 Actually, we do not see the moon during at least two consecutive nights, though of

 course there must be an illuminated part facing the earth on at least one of those nights

 and probably both. This means that the human eye cannot perceive any angle smaller

 than the angle of the illuminated part of the moon during around 24 h after and before

 new moon.

 There is some textual evidence supporting the idea that Aristarchus wrote about

 this issue. In a difficult passage in a commentary written in the second century AD on

 book 20 of Homer's Odyssey, the anonymous author apparently quotes Aristarchus

 and says: "Aristarchus of Samos makes clear when he writes... Heraclitus (said that

 the moon) does not appear during (a period of) 3 consecutive days... [but] sometimes

 the moon changes sides in fewer days and sometimes in more" (Bowen and Goldstein

 1994, 693). This text is important for two reasons: first of all shows that Aristarchus

 explicitly analyzed the duration of the moon's occultation and, second, Aristarchus

 says that the occultation could take fewer or more than three days. In our case, of

 course, it is the lower limit that is relevant, so, we know from this passage that for

 Aristarchus, the lower limit is smaller than three days. Of course, the text doesn't

 exclude one day, but it is plausible to suppose that Aristarchus is thinking of two and

 not just one day of occultation.

 Of course, it could be objected that the reason for the invisibility of the moon is

 not just the size of the angle of the illuminated part facing the earth, but also—or even

 mainly—the proximity of the sun in apparent position: the moon would be so close to

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 53

 the sun after the conjunction that it will be lost in the glare of the sun.4 We are not sure

 that Aristarchus would take this objection too seriously, for as the style of the entire

 treatise shows, he is dealing with geometrical problems, not with real observations.

 But, even if he did take this objection into account, we think that he would also have

 noted that Venus is visible at an elongation smaller than 12°. Actually, according to

 Ptolemy, the first visibility of Venus as an evening star is at 5 2/3° (Toomer 1998,

 638), around half the elongation that the moon has to reach on a night after conjunction

 when it starts to be visible. So, the reason for the invisibility of the moon could not be

 the glare of the sun, but just the size of the illuminated part facing the earth.

 Therefore, if Aristarchus wants to guarantee that an angle in the moon is impercep

 tible, he has to show that this angle is equal to or smaller than the angle that reaches

 the illuminated part of the moon when it is located one day apart from the sun. But,

 this angle depends not just on the elongation of the moon, but also on its apparent

 size. Therefore, the problem for Aristarchus is to find a value for the apparent size so

 that the angle of the difference between the light line and the lunar diameter that is

 parallel to it (β from now on) is equal to or smaller than the angle of the illuminated

 part of the moon seen from the earth one day apart from the conjunction with the sun

 (a from now on).

 Let us first calculate this value using modern trigonometry. Refer to Fig. 13. S is
 the center of the sun; M, the center of the moon; and 0, the center of the earth; line IJ

 is the light line while line AB is the visibility line. Therefore, arc AJ is the illuminated

 portion of the moon visible from the earth. Let us call k the fraction of the apparent

 lunar diameter that is visible from the earth, i.e., arc AJ/arc AB. According to Meeus

 (1991, 315-316), the illuminated fraction k of the disk of the moon depends on the

 angle (SMO), centered at the moon, between the earth and the sun, according to this
 formula:

 1+cos (SMO)

 * = J ()

 „ SO sin η

 tan SMO = (2)

 SO — MO cos η

 4 I owe this objection to Dennis Duke.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 And the angle SMO depends on the geocentric elongation of moon (η), the earth-sun

 distance (SO) and the earth-moon distance (MO), according to the next formula:

 So, as we already said, k will give us the fraction of the apparent lunar diameter that is

 visible from the earth. Taking 19 as the proportion between the earth-sun and earth

 moon distances and keeping constant, the elongation of the moon at 12.2°, k will be

 0.0125, i.e., the illuminated portion of the moon would be around 1.25 % of the total

 disk. If, for example, the moon's apparent diameter is 2°, then k would be around one

 and a half minutes. So a, the angle of the apparent size of the illuminated part of the

 moon, is the angle of the apparent size of k, as seen from the earth. Then, of course,

 keeping k constant, a depends only on the apparent size of the moon.

 54 C. C. Carman

 Fig. 13 The moon ( M) is far
 enough from the sun (S) to be
 visible from earth (O)

 s s

 Now, we have to calculate β, i.e., the angle as seen from the earth of the difference

 between the light line and the lunar diameter parallel to it.

 Refer again to Fig. 13. Aristarchus proved that angle CMA is equal to p, the apparent
 radius of the moon. And. by construction, CMA is equal to LMN. So, we also know
 that LMN = p. Therefore:

 sin/i

 So, β depends only on the apparent size of the moon. In the following graph, therefore,
 we plot both a and β in relation to p. The graph shows that when ρ is smaller than
 1.4°, α > β, but around ρ — \Λ°,β > a. This means that, only when the moon
 radius is smaller than 1.4°, angle β will be unperceivable for the human eye (Fig. 14).

 Of course, Aristarchus couldn't perform the same kind of calculation, for it involves
 trigonometry, which was not available to him. Aristarchus would instead calculate an

 upper limit for the moon's apparent radius that still guarantees that β < a. So, he
 presumably found a value for ρ smaller than 1.4°.

 Actually, taking, when possible, the results obtained in the treatise and imitating
 his style when not, we can calculate the apparent radius of the moon that fulfills

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 55

 Fig. 14 Angles a and β as function of the moon's apparent radius

 p (moon apparent radius in degrees)
 ρ (moon apparent radius in degrees)

 this requirement, imitating as closely as possible Aristarchus's way of proceeding.
 The value calculated in this way should be smaller than 1.09° (if the elongation of
 the moon for one day is 12.20°) or 1.018° (if the elongation is 12.19°). We offer the
 calculation in the appendix. So, it is totally reasonable that Aristarchus took 1° as the
 radius.

 Consequently, according to this proposal, Aristarchus took the greatest value for
 the moon's apparent size that still guarantees that the difference between the dividing

 line and the diameter of the moon is imperceptible and so allows him the geometrical
 construction for the distance proportion calculations. If this is the case, it doesn't
 seem too odd that Aristarchus, probably later, discovered that the value is 0.5°, and so

 much smaller than the value used in the treatise, for here he is using the upper limit.
 (In "Appendix" we develop the calculation in detail).

 3.3 The role of the hypotheses

 Aristarchus's treatise constitutes the earliest surviving example of a work of empirical

 sciences applying mathematical method. This is the first example of a work in which

 the human mind used numerical data as input for obtaining, through the clever and

 rigorous application of geometry, accurate results related to facts as far from our daily
 experience as the solar and lunar distances or sizes. Therefore, it is very important to

 try to reveal which criteria and methods were used for selecting the input values.

 If my proposal is correct—and Evans's too—the selection of at least two of the
 three input values was not based purely on crude or naïve observations, but neither

 was it absolutely arbitrary. The selection of these particular values was the result of the

 complex interaction of some qualitative observations and theoretical considerations.

 The value of hypothesis 4 plays a central role in the determination of the ratio

 between the sun's and moon's distances from the earth. Presumably, Aristarchus

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 56

 C. C. Carman

 wanted to show that the sun is much farther away than usually asserted and, con

 sequently, to show that it is much bigger than it appears. In this way, Aristarchus could

 have intended to propose a new argument against of Epicurus's claims that the sun is

 "no bigger than it appears". Or perhaps, Aristarchus wanted to show that the moon

 is considerably closer to the earth than the sun. After all, Eudoxus model gives us no

 reason to suppose that there is any significant difference between the distances of the

 nearest and the farthest of the heavenly bodies from the earth, because the models

 assume no eccentricity. Remember that Archimedes asserts in The Sand-Reckoner

 that the distance to the sun was generally considered to be the radius of the Cosmos,

 which makes no sense unless the planets and stars are negligibly further from us than

 the sun. Before Aristarchus's argument, one might have said that the distance to the

 moon is effectively the radius of the Cosmos.5 In any case, the bigger the elongation,

 the bigger the proportion between the distances. So, it would have been reasonable

 for Aristarchus to choose the smallest possible elongation in order to make his case,

 even in the worst situation. If the elongation is too small, however, the time from

 first quarter to third quarter would be perceivably different than the time from third

 quarter to first quarter. Given that we do not perceive any difference, which a dif

 ference of one day would be perceivable, and that with values smaller than 87°, the

 difference would be bigger than one day, the value must be equal to or bigger than

 87°. Aristarchus was working with the smallest value. Thus, his value would be 87°.
 There is a theoretical consideration in the selection of the value (Aristarchus wants

 to show that the sun is farther away) that determines the direction of the limit of the

 value (it should be the smallest possible), and a very crude observation (that we do not

 perceive a difference between the time inter-quadratures) that constitutes the limit of
 this direction.

 The value in hypothesis 6 plays a central role on the determination of the distance

 between the center of the moon and the line subtending the arc of the earth shadow.

 As we already have shown, this distance, in turn, affects very little the upper limit

 of the proportion between the sun's and earth's diameters and the lower limit of the

 proportion between the earth's and moon's diameters. Presumably, Aristarchus wanted

 to show that the influence of this value is absolutely irrelevant for the final results.

 The bigger the value, the bigger its influence. Thus, it would be reasonable to choose

 the biggest possible apparent lunar diameter in order to make his case even in the

 worst situation. If the apparent diameter of the moon is too big, then the difference

 between the light line and the diameter of the moon would not be imperceptible. We

 do not perceive any difference between the light line and the diameter of the moon.

 If we are right, with values bigger than 2° for the moon's apparent diameter, the

 difference would start to be perceptible. Therefore, the value must be smaller than 2°.

 But Aristarchus was looking at the biggest one, so it would be exactly 2°. There is a

 theoretical consideration in the selection of the value (Aristarchus wants to show that
 the distance between the center of the moon and the line that subtends the earth shadow

 arc is irrelevant) that determines the direction of the limit of the value (it should be,

 therefore, the biggest possible) and a very crude observation (that we do not perceive

 5 I owe this proposal to Alexander Jones.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 57

 that the illuminated part of the moon at a quadrature is smaller than half moon) that
 constitutes the limit of this direction. In this case, however, there is also a theoretical

 limit. If the two lines could not be considered to be at the same plane, Aristarchus

 could not build the diagram needed for proposition 7. Therefore, the limit could arise

 from a crude observation, theoretical necessity, or both.

 The third empirical datum used in the hypotheses seems to be the exception. In

 fact, the value adopted by Aristarchus for the earth's shadow size seem not need any

 explanation, since it is a value close enough to the right one. One could guess that he

 obtained this value through some more or less simple observations. Of course, this

 could be the case. Nevertheless, if two of the three empirical values of the treatise have

 not been obtained only through observation, but also due to theoretical considerations,

 we can suspect that the third value was as well obtained through a similar process.

 The argument goes like this. The earth's shadow is observed in lunar eclipses. If the

 proportion between the earth's shadow and moon radius was 1, the earth's shadow

 and the moon would have had the same apparent size, just like the sun and the moon.

 This would imply that the moment of a total lunar eclipse would only be an instant,

 as happens with solar eclipses. However, unlike the case of solar eclipses, it is evident

 that the moon remains eclipsed for more than an instant. Thus, this could be considered

 a lower limit. The value could not be equal to or smaller than 1. At the other extreme,

 if the proportion was 3, the totality of the eclipse would last one entire night (12 h),
 since the earth's shadow would subtend 6° and it takes the moon 2 h to move 1°

 relative to the sun. This would mean that the moon could sometimes not be visible

 for an entire night at full moon. But we do not observe this. Thus, this could be an

 upper limit: the value could not be equal to or bigger than 3. Then, the value must

 be bigger than 1 and smaller than 3. Two seems to be a good candidate.6 We can see

 the same style of reasoning in proposition 8, but now applied to solar eclipses. In this

 proposition, Aristarchus shows that the moon's and sun's apparent sizes are equal,

 discarding either possible inequality on the basis of observation. Since, he asserts, the

 sun is sometimes totally eclipsed (which would not happen if the apparent size of the

 sun were bigger than that of the moon), but the sun never remains entirely eclipsed

 6 To have a proportion of exactly 2 is also very convenient for the geometrical construction. In proposition

 14, Aristarchus calculates the distance between the "straight line subtending the portion intercepted with the

 earth shadow of the arc of the circle in which the extremities of the diameter of the circle dividing the dark

 and the bright portions in the moon move" and the moon's center. Refer to Fig. 9. A fundamental step in

 the calculation is to establish the equivalence between Σ Ξ/MP and Σ Λ/ΡΓ, and for doing so, Aristarchus

 must assert that the triangles Λ Ξ Σ and ΜΡΓ are similar. In turn, for proving the triangles to be similar, ΞΛ

 must be perpendicular to BM. But this is true only in two cases: if Ξ Λ is equal to MO or if Ξ Λ is equal to

 ΜΓ. The first case would only take place if the earth's shadow is exactly two moons. The second, if the earth

 shadow is exactly one moon, and therefore, the two triangles Λ Ξ Σ and ΜΡΓ would not be simply similar

 but identical. If the proportion value were not 1 or 2, however, the distance between these two points could

 be calculated by another method, totally within Aristarchus's reach. Look at the triangle ΒΞΣ. One has a

 right angle at Σ and one knows the angle at B, since it is the apparent radius of the earth's shadow. One can

 then calculate ΒΣ as a function of the hypotenuse, ΒΞ, using the cosine. We know that Aristarchus could

 perform geometrical constructions for arriving at a cosine (for this is what he does in proposition 7 when
 he calculates the cosine of 87°). But he wants the proportion between ΒΣ and ΒΓ, not between ΒΣ and
 ΒΞ. The proportion between BP and ΒΞ, however, is easy to obtain. Aristarchus can calculate the relation

 between ΒΓ and ΓΡ using the similarity between triangles BMP and ΡΜΓ. ΛΓ is half of ΓΡ. so he knows
 ΛΓ in function of ΒΓ. ΒΞ is equal to ΛΓ—ΒΓ, so he can go from ΒΞ to ΒΓ.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 58

 C. C. Carman

 for more than an instant (which would happen if the apparent size of the sun were

 smaller than that of the moon). "It [the sun] is in fact totally eclipsed and does not

 remain eclipsed: for this is manifest from observation". Therefore, both apparent sizes

 are equal.

 Coming back to the analysis of the size of the earth's shadow at the distance of the
 moon, the size of the shadow reflects the size of the earth relative to those of the moon

 and sun: if the shadow is smaller, the earth's size would be closer to the moon's size;

 if bigger, it would be closer to the sun's size. We can guess that Aristarchus wanted

 to show that the sun is much bigger than the earth, in which case, again, he would

 have preferred the smallest value for making his case even in the worst situation. In

 this case, the limit would be the observation that the moon is totally eclipsed for a

 while and so the value should be the smallest possible value larger than one. If, on the

 contrary, Aristarchus wanted to show that the moon is not too small with respect to

 the earth, he would have preferred the biggest value, and in this case, the limit would

 be the observation that the moon is not occulted an entire night during an eclipse. Or

 maybe he was indifferent to any of these two possibilities, and he simply took the

 mean value between the upper and lower limits.

 Acknowledgments I am very grateful to Dennis Duke, Alexander Jones, Nathan Sidoli. Lennart Berggren

 for their comments on previous versions of this paper and to Rodolfo Buzon because these ideas came out

 in the context of our joint translation of Aristarchus's treatise. 1 would also like to thank Ignacio Silva who

 helped me to improve the English of some paragraphs.

 Appendix: The calculation

 In what follows, we reproduce the way Aristarchus could have calculated the value.

 In the Fig. 15, S is the center of the sun; O, the center of the earth; and M, the center

 of the moon. So, angle SOM is the elongation of the moon (η). Line CD is a diameter

 of the moon perpendicular to line MO, which is the line that joins the center of the

 earth with the center of the moon. BA is parallel to but smaller than CD and represents

 the line that divides the visible from the invisible portion of the moon, seen from the

 earth. Therefore, angle AOB is the moon's apparent diameter and AOM the moon's

 apparent radius (p).

 Line FG is a diameter of the moon perpendicular to the line MS, which is the line

 that joins the center of the sun with the center of the moon. IJ is parallel to but smaller

 than FG and represents the line that divides the illuminated from the obscure portion

 of the moon. Therefore, arc IFGJ is the illuminated portion of the moon, a portion a

 bit bigger than half the moon, facing the sun. And arc AJ is the illuminated portion

 of the moon that is also visible from the earth. Consequently, angle AOJ represents

 the apparent size of the illuminated part of the moon visible from the earth (a). If this

 angle a is perceptible for the human eye, then the moon would be visible, if not, not.

 Arc CA in the lunar sphere is the difference between the moon's visibility line (AB)

 and the moon's diameter (CD). In proposition 4, Aristarchus asks us to move this arc

 in order for it to be in front of the earth, i.e., to arc LN. So, by construction, arc CA

 is equal to arc LN. Aristarchus also shows that angle CMA is equal to angle MOA,

 i.e., to p, the moon's apparent radius. So, angle LMN also would be equal to moon's

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise 59

 Fig. 15 The moon (M) is far
 enough from the sun (S) to be
 visible from earth (O)

 s s

 apparent radius. Consequently, angle LON is the angle that represents the apparent
 size of the difference between the light line and the apparent diameter. Aristarchus
 shows that when the moon's diameter is 2°, this angle is smaller than 1/44 of a degree

 (or, as he says, 1/3,960 of a right angle). Let us call angle LON β.

 We know that the moon is not visible for at least two nights, i.e., at an elongation

 of at least 12.2° from conjunction. So, if the figure represents an elongation of 12.2°
 degrees (η — 12.2°), then angle β must be equal or smaller than angle a, in order to

 be sure that it is imperceptible to the human eye. Therefore, the limit of perceptibility
 for β is when a = β. But Aristarchus works with inequalities, so we have to find a ρ

 for which the greatest possible b is still smaller than the smallest possible a.

 We are looking for the greatest possible p. for which the difference between the

 light line and the diameter is still imperceptible, so we have to find the upper limit of

 p, i.e., a value smaller than the ρ for which the greatest possible β is still smaller than
 the smallest possible a.

 In the figure, line JQ is perpendicular to AO. So, we know (see Berggren and Sidoli

 2007, 224) that:

 OQ JAO
 ^ > (4)
 AQ a

 ζ) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 But, because is bigger than β and JA°QAQ is smaller than a, we may be sure

 60

 C. C. Carman

 We also know from Aristarchus (proposition 4), leaving ρ variable that:

 From (4), we know that:

 β < —^ (5)
 P (45 - ρ)

 JAO · AQ

 (6)

 a >

 JQ

 β < a (7)

 Now, we want that:

 that β ^ a if:

 Angle JAO

 > < (8)

 (45 -ρ)' OQ

 In what follows, we will first calculate angle JAO, then lines AQ and OQ.

 We know that angle MAO is right, for AO is tangent to the moon's circle. So:

 JAO = 90- MAJ (9)

 equal. Therefore:

 MAJ = 90 — (10)

 AMI

 Now, from (9) and (10), we have:

 JAO — —(II)

 AMJ = CMG (12)

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Now, let us look at triangle MAJ. Sides MA and MJ are equal and equal to the moon's

 radius (r, from now on). So, triangle MAJ is isosceles and angles MAJ and MJA are

 So, we have to calculate angle AMJ. But we also know that,

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise

 because CD and BA are parallel, as well as FG and IJ and the distance between the

 parallel lines is equal.7 So, let us produce line MC until line SO, and call Ε the point of

 intersection. Also, let us produce line MG again to meet line SO and call Η the point

 of intersection. Now, we look at triangle EMH. The angle at M is angle CMG, which
 is, of course:

 EMH = 180 - MEH - EHM

 Now, see triangle EMO. Angle MEO is MEH. But the angle at M is right (because

 ME and MO are perpendicular) and angle at Ο is the lunar elongation (η), so:

 MEH = MEO = 90 - η

 And something similar happens with angle SHM, regarding triangle OMH. Angle at

 M is right (because MH is perpendicular to MS) and angle at S (MSO) is the elongation
 of the moon from the earth seen from the sun. So:

 MHS = EHM = 90 - MSH

 But, because SM represents the sun-moon distance and MO the earth-moon distance,

 we can establish a relationship between SM and MO. We know that if the moon were

 at line OS (at conjunction), then the proportion would be smaller than 19 but bigger

 than 17 (Because SM = SO — OM). Now, the closer the sun, the bigger the angle AMJ

 and, therefore, the bigger the angle a. But, we are looking for the smallest possible
 a, so, we should choose the furthest distance from the sun, i.e., the value of 19. Now,

 at the position illustrated in the figure, OM is greater than OM at conjunction, but the

 difference is so small (being the angle between them a bit bigger than half a degree)

 that they could be considered equal. So:

 SM η
 > >
 MO MSO

 Therefore:

 And, because MO/SM is 1/19:

 MSO < —
 19

 Finally, from (13), (14), (15) and (18), we have that:

 61

 (13)

 (14)

 (15)

 (16)

 (17)

 (18)

 (19)

 7 Actually, the distance between AB and CD should be a bit bigger than the distance between FG and IJ,

 because they are exactly the same only at conjunction. But the difference is absolutely negligible.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 62 C. C. Carman

 Fig. 16 A hexagon inscribed in
 the moon sphere

 to S
 to S

 Now, from (11) and ( 19), we know that:

 10

 JAO = —η
 19 '

 (20)

 Line AQ

 In order to obtain line AQ, we first have to find LA.

 Let us draw a hexagon inside the moon's circle. Refer to Fig. 16. Line AP is a side

 of the hexagon and so, it is equal to the radius of the circle, r. So, we know that:

 AP r

 aTXJ ,2I)

 From here, we can infer that:

 AJ > (22)

 If JA is smaller, then, AQ would also be smaller, and a value smaller than AQ will still
 keep the inequality of Eq. 6. for the final value will be even smaller than a.

 But arc AP is 60° and arc AJ is angle AMJ, and so, η (Eq. 19), therefore:

 JA > η (23)

 J A · r

 AP

 20

 60-19

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise 63

 Refer again to Fig. 13. Now, draw a line from M to the middle of AJ, bisecting

 triangle MAJ. Angle AMR would be half of AMJ, but we know that also angle JAO

 is half of AMJ (Eq. 11 ). So AMR = JAQ. In triangle JAQ, we know that angle AQJ is

 right, as is also angle MRA in triangle MRA, so triangle MAR is similar to triangle

 JAQ. Therefore, we can establish the following proportion between their sides:

 MA _ AJ
 MR ~ ÂQ

 (24)

 Now, we know that RA is half of JA, so:

 MA2 = MR2 + { ^ I (25)

 (f)2

 But, because MA is r:

 It follows, from Eqs. (24) and (26), that:

 (tJ

 ir2 - (^)2 · JA

 AQ = — (27)

 (26)

 (28)

 or:

 Line OQ

 If we want to keep the inequality of Eq. (6), we need a value equal or bigger than OQ.

 We know that OQ is a bit smaller than OJ, since OJ is the hypotenuse in triangle

 JQO. And we know that OJ is between OM and OM-r. We need, again, the upper

 limit, for it is obvious from the figure that OQ is bigger than OM-r = OK.

 In proposition 11, Aristarchus calculated that the relationship between OM and r
 is smaller than 60. Now, if AO is smaller than AB, would also be smaller than 60.

 Actually, in this calculation, ρ has been taken as 1°; if we keep ρ as a variable, we
 have

 AB < — (29)

 60

 Ρ

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 64

 C. C. Carman

 So, we have also:

 Finally, from (8) and (29) we have:

 OQ < — (30)

 Ρ

 ' ^

 (45 — p)

 Consequently:

 45·
 45 · JAO · AQ - 60

 π <

 Ρ < an a t~\ (32)

 JAO · AQ

 And, from (20), (23) and (28):

 'AO ■ AQ . J2, - 1.3664. . <33,

 Being η = 12.2 (and r = 1), JAO · JA = 1.3664..., so:

 45 · .3664 - 60 1.4897
 ρ < = = 1.09 34)
 μ - 1.3664 1.3664

 References

 Berggren, J., and N. Sidoli. 2007. Aristarchus's on the sizes and distances of the sun and the moon: Greek

 and Arabic texts. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 61: 213-254.

 Bowen, A.C., and B.R. Goldstein. 1994. Aristarchus, Thaïes, and Heraclitus on Solar Eclipses: An astro

 nomical commentary on P. Oxy. 53.3710 Cols. 2.33-3.19. Physics 31: 689-729.

 Bowen, A.C., and R.B. Todd. 2004. Cleomedes' Lectures on Astronomy: A Translation of The Heavens.

 Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Evans, J. 1998. The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Heath, T. 1897. The Works of Archimedes, Edited in Modern Notation with Introductory Chapters. Cam

 bridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Heath, T. 1913. Aristarchus ofSamos: The Ancient Copernicus. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Heiberg, J.L. (ed.) 1898-1903. Claudii Ptolemaei Opera quae exstant omnia. Vol. I, Syntaxis Mathematica,

 2 vols. Leipzig: Teubner.

 Manitius, K. 1909. Hypotyposis astronomicarum positionum. In aedibus B.G. Teubneri,

 Meeus, J. 1991. Astronomical Algorithms. Virginia: Willmann-Bell.

 Neugebauer, O. 1975 .A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. Studies in the History of Mathematics

 and Physical Sciences /, vol. 3. Berlin: Springer.

 Netz, R. 2004. The Shaping of Deduction in Greek Mathematics. A Study in Cognitive History.

 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Noack, B. 1992. Aristarch von Samos: Untersuchungen zur Ûberlieferungs)>eschichte der Schrif

 περί μεγεθών και Αποστημάτων ήλιου και σελήνης Wiesbaden.

 Sidoli, Ν. 2007. What we can learn from a diagram: The case of Aristarchus's on the sizes and distances of

 the Sun and Moon. Annals of Science 64(4): 525-547.

 Tannery, P. 1883. 'Aristarque de Samos' in Mem. de la Soc. des sciences phys. et nut. de Bordeaux, 2e sér.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Two problems in Aristarchus's treatise 65

 Toomer, G.J. 1998. Ptolemy's Almagest. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 van Brummelen, G. 2009. The Mathematics of the Heavens and the earth: The Early History ofTrigonometry.

 Wall, B.E. 1975. Anatomy of a precursor: The historiography of Aristarchos of Samos. Studies in History

 Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 and Philosophy of Science 6(3): 201-228.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 10:02:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

