 

 

 

 

Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic space
Author(s): Alberto Cogliati
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 69, No. 4 (July 2015), pp. 363-390
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569565
Accessed: 18-05-2020 09:15 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569565?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. (2015) 69:363-390 rwsMarV
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-015-0154-z VB'

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism
 in elliptic space

 Alberto Cogliati1

 Received: 2 February 2015 / Published online: 12 May 2015

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015

 Abstract In 1873, W. K. Clifford introduced a notion of parallelism in the three

 dimensional elliptic space that, quite surprisingly, exhibits almost all properties of

 Euclidean parallelism in ordinary space. The purpose of this paper is to describe the

 genesis of this notion in Clifford's works and to provide a historical analysis of its
 reception in the investigations of F. Klein, L. Bianchi, G. Fubini, and E. Bortolotti.

 Special emphasis is placed upon the important role that Clifford's parallelism played

 in the development of the theory of connections.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 364

 2 A new kind of parallelism in elliptic space 366
 3 Klein's Zur Nicht-Euklidischen Geometrie 371

 4 An approach based upon differential geometry: Bianchi and Fubini .... 376

 5 Absolute parallelism versus Levi-Civita's parallelism: Enea Bortolotti . . . 379
 6 Conclusions 385

 Appendix 386
 References 388

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 H Alberto Cogliati

 alberto.cogliati@unimi.it

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Dipartimento di Matematica, F. Enriques, Université degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy

 364 A. Cogliati

 1 Introduction

 Euclidean parallelism in ordinary 3-space can be defined in a number of equivalent

 ways. According to Zacharias,1 possible definitions can be grouped into three classes:

 Straight lines can be considered to be parallel when (i) they lie in the same plane and

 they do not intersect; (ii) they have the same direction; and (iii) they are equidistant.

 A notion of parallelism can be attributed to non-Euclidean geometries too, but,

 depending on the geometrical setting, namely hyperbolic or elliptic, to use a denomi

 nation introduced by Klein, one has to single out a particular characterization among

 the three just mentioned. Indeed, it is only in the Euclidean case that all of the three

 groups of definitions turn out to be equivalent.

 For example, in order to introduce Lobachevsky's parallelism in (real) hyperbolic

 space, one can adopt the first characterization and define two parallels to a given

 line as those limit lines that separate concurrent lines from those that are not. By

 employing Cayley-Klein projective model,2 one can define Lobachevsky's parallels

 to a given line as those two lines that intersect the given line at a point of the absolute

 (ruled) quadric. In other words, one may define two lines to be parallel in the sense

 of Lobachevsky if they meet the same couple of generators of the absolute quadric

 (i.e., the canonical quadric of hyperbolic space) that belongs to different systems (of

 generators). It might be helpful to recall that every point of a ruled quadric is obtained

 as the intersection of two straight lines that lie upon the quadric. All these straight

 lines can be grouped into two systems: Lines that belong to the same system are skew,

 while lines belonging to different systems always intersect in a point of the quadric

 itself.3 In view of this definition, it is clear, for example, that property (iii) must be
 surrendered.

 It is a discovery due to Clifford that a kind of parallelism could also be introduced

 in elliptic 3-space. The notion can be most easily understood using the Cayley-Klein
 projective model of elliptic space. Contrary to the definition of parallelism adopted

 in the hyperbolic case, we cannot require that two real lines meet at a point of the
 fundamental quadric for the simple reason that there are no distinct real lines in

 the elliptic case that meet at a point of the absolute quadric.4 Nonetheless, since in
 this case too the quadric admits a double system of (imaginary) generators, we can

 define two straight lines to be parallel if they meet two generators that belong to

 the same system of generators. This requires us to consider complex extensions of

 straight lines to the complex extension of P3(R).5 It turns out that such parallels are

 skew lines (i.e., they are not coplanar) that are also equidistant. Furthermore, there

 exist motions (i.e., isometries of the elliptic space) that have the property of leaving

 1 Zacharias (1913, pp. 870-871); see also Vaney (1929, pp. 1-2).

 2 On Cayley-Klein projective models of non-Euclidean geometries, one can consult Giering 1982).

 3 In this connection see, for example, (Castelnuovo 1904, p. 633) or the appendix at the end of the present

 paper.

 4 See in this respect Klein (1928, p. 236) and also Klein (1928, p. 49).

 5 See "Appendix." In the following, as was usual before a rigorous formalization of these concepts was
 attained, a straight line in P3(M) will be tacitly identified with its complex extension, i.e., a real straight
 line of P^C).

 Ô Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 365

 congruences of parallel lines invariant,6 precisely as certain translations in Euclidean

 space conserve all the lines which are parallel to a given line.7 It is interesting to

 observe that none of these properties are shared by Lobachevsky's parallels, while,

 in turn, Clifford's parallels are never coplanar and they never intersect (a fortiori in

 a point of the fundamental quadric). As is remarked in (Bonola 1912, Appendix II)

 equidistant lines can be coplanar only in Euclidean space , while skew parallels can

 exist only in elliptic space.

 It was observed by (Bortolotti 1935, p. 288) that Lobachevsky's and Clifford's

 parallelism are, in a certain sense, complementary phenomena. Usually, properties

 of Euclidean parallels seem to split into two classes whose intersection is empty:

 One class of properties characterizes Lobachevsky's parallels, and the other Clifford's

 parallels. In many respects, Clifford's parallelism seems to acquire a privileged position

 with respect to Lobachevsky's since it retains almost all the essential characteristics

 of ordinary Euclidean parallelism.

 The present article gives a historical account of the emergence and further devel
 opments of this curious and fascinating phenomenon. The history of Clifford's
 parallelism is worth telling, not only for its intrinsic interest in the wider field of

 researches in the history of non-Euclidean geometry but also because it assumed,

 over the decades following its discovery (in 1873), a paradigmatic role. Indeed, new

 developments in geometrical theories, such as Cayley-Klein projective models of

 non-Euclidean spaces, the systematization of Riemannian geometry, the theory of

 connections, and finally the search for generalizations of the notion of Riemannian

 manifolds, often tried to assimilate Clifford's parallelism within new theoretical frame

 works. As will be seen, the general aim of mathematicians seems to have been twofold,

 depending on the context: On the one hand, to investigate more deeply its essence and

 its theoretical grounds; on the other, either to employ it at a heuristic level to test new

 conceptual tools or to provide relatively simple examples of more general phenomena.

 Section 1 discusses the genesis of the notion in W. K. Clifford's work by indicating

 its original motivation in the search for an algebraic and geometrical treatment of the

 kinematics and the dynamics of rigid bodies in elliptic 3-space. Section 2 offers a

 detailed account of Klein's interpretation of Clifford's parallelism in the context of

 projective models of non-Euclidean geometries. Section 3 deals with the Italian school

 of differential geometry, namely with L. Bianchi and G. Fubini's fruitful attempts, at

 providing an analysis of elliptic space and Clifford's parallelism in the framework

 of Riemannian geometry. Section 4 treats in detail the problem of understanding

 Clifford's parallelism in light of Levi-Civita's theory of parallel displacement. In this
 context, (Bortolotti 1925) is discussed in which the Italian mathematician Bortolotti

 succeeded in characterizing Clifford's parallelism as a parallel displacement of an

 absolute kind (i.e., independent of the path of displacement). Finally, an "Appendix"

 is attached at the end of the paper that recalls some elementary facts concerning the

 theory of polarity with respect to a given quadric surface.

 6 A congruence is a set of lines which depend on two parameters.

 7 For a list of some properties of Clifford's parallels, see (Bonola 1912, Appendix II).

 Ô Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 366 A. Cogliati

 The general aim of this paper is twofold: both to provide a historical analysis of

 Clifford's parallelism per se and to emphasize its role, in particular within the con

 text of the Italian school of differential geometry, in the historical development of
 the dawning theory of connections. Indeed, as will be seen, Clifford's parallelism

 represented a highly non-trivial example of absolute parallelism which fostered the
 search for extension of the classical framework of Levi-Civita's connection. The his

 torical analysis is here restricted to the Italian milieu with special emphasis on the

 work by Bortolotti. However, in a forthcoming paper, we will provide a discussion of

 Élie Cartan's response to the problem posed by Clifford's parallelism. In particular,

 the important role played by Clifford's parallelism in guiding Cartan's researches on

 absolute parallelisms and symmetrical spaces will be analyzed.

 2 A new kind of parallelism in elliptic space

 What nowadays is known as Clifford's parallelism in three-dimensional elliptic space

 was first sketched by Clifford in a short memoir (Clifford 1873) that was presented

 at the London Mathematical Society in June 1873. Its title, Preliminary Sketch of

 Biquaternions, seems to have little to do with the geometry of elliptic space; however,

 the main focus of Clifford was to provide an algebraic and geometrical analysis of the

 kinematics and dynamics of rigid bodies.

 This subject situated Clifford's investigations in a fertile branch of research that,

 since the works of Pliicker and Mobius, had pursued a geometrization program for

 mechanics based upon projective geometry.8 Already in 1866, for example, Pliicker

 had tried to "connect, in mechanics, translatory and rotatory movements with each
 other by a principle in geometry, analogous to that of reciprocity (Pliicker 1866,
 p. 361)." In 1871, Klein had extended this connection to non-Euclidean geometries

 by observing:

 Let us introduce such a metric [Cayley's metric] and let us replace, at the same

 time, the oc6 movements of our space with as many linear transformations that

 leave invariant the fundamental quadric surface; thus, we can speak in the same

 way of forces acting along a straight line or about a straight line and of motions

 along a straight line or about it. Both kinds or forces and motions would be

 equivalent. A rotation about a straight line is thus equivalent to a translation

 along its polar with respect to the fundamental quadric surface. Similarly, a

 force acting along a straight line is tantamount to a force which produces a

 rotation about its conjugate polar (Klein 1871a, p. 412).

 In Great Britain as well, in the early 1870s, the geometrical representation of

 mechanical entities such as the motion of, and action upon, rigid bodies was at the

 center of the investigations of the astronomer and mathematician Robert Stawell Ball,

 who developed a peculiar approach that welded rotational and linear quantities into

 a single geometrical element, the screw. According to Ball's definition,9 a screw is

 8 On the historical development of geometrical mechanics, see Ziegler (1985).

 9 See, e.g., Ball (1876,1-2 §).

 â Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 367

 a straight line with which a definite magnitude, termed the pitch, is associated. The

 fecundity of this definition was derived from the two fundamental theorems of Chasles

 and Poinsot according to which: Any rigid-body motion could be described as a rota

 tion about a unique axis and a translation parallel to it (Chasles' theorem); any system

 of forces upon a rigid body can be replaced by a force along a unique axis and a couple

 in a plane perpendicular to it (Poinsot's theorem). Indeed, a general rigid-body motion

 could be interpreted geometrically as a screw whose axis coincides with the rotation

 axis and whose associated magnitude (the pitch of the screw) is given by the ratio

 of the moduli of the translational and rotational velocity. Analogously, in the case of

 forces acting on a rigid body, dynamics is described in terms of a screw whose axis is

 the line of action of the single resultant force and the pitch is given by the ratio of the

 magnitude of the couple to the magnitude of the force.

 Apparently, Clifford's main aim (Clifford 1873) was to provide an algebra for

 this extended range of mechanical entities, such as screws. Precisely, in the same

 way as quaternions were introduced by Hamilton in order to extend the set of three

 dimensional vectors to a non-commutative algebra which is closed not only under

 addition but also under multiplication and division, biquaternions were introduced

 by Clifford in order to extend the set of screws (Clifford called them motors) to an

 algebra which is closed under addition, multiplication, and division. As Hamilton

 interpreted a quaternion as the ratio of two three-dimensional vectors, for Clifford

 too, a biquaternion could regarded as a ratio of two screws. The term "biquaternion"
 was not a new one; Hamilton had already employed it to denote a quaternion ai +

 bj + ck + d whose coefficients are complex numbers; however, since, as Clifford

 explicitly remarked, "it is convenient to suppose from the beginning that all scalars

 may be complex," he decided to employ it in a new way (thus, denoting something

 essentially different from a complex quaternion).

 From a purely algebraic point of view, a biquaternion is an expression of the form

 q + cur, where q, r are Hamilton's quaternions, while ω is an operator which converts

 every motor into a vector parallel to the axis of the motor and of magnitude equal to the

 magnitude of the rotating part of the motor (Clifford named it rotor). As a consequence
 of this definition, since the rotating part of a vector is null, one has: ω2 = 0. In

 actual fact, however, the value to be attributed to ω2 remained somehow ambiguous
 in Clifford's treatment: Depending upon the geometrical setting under consideration

 (parabolic, elliptic, or hyperbolic) in which the calculus of biquaternions is carried

 out, ω2 is forced to assume different values (0,1, or -1, respectively). Indeed, as is

 clear from the analysis which Clifford carried out in Sects. 3,4, and 5 of his paper, in

 the case of elliptic geometry the value of ω2 is ω2 = 1.

 Clifford's parallels made their appearance in Sect. 3, where Clifford aimed at devel

 oping an algebra of motors in the special case of elliptic geometry. The main reason

 for such a specialization seems to lie in a technical difficulty which prevented him

 from interpreting a biquaternion as a ratio of motors in a fully general case. The prob

 lem is presented by Clifford as follows. Consider two motors which are denoted by
 the expressions a + ωβ and γ + ωδ (α, β, γ, S are rotors; expressions like a + ωβ
 consists of a translational and a rotational part, in accordance with the aforementioned

 definition of motor); one wants to providing a meaning to the ratio and to write

 it as a biquaternion q + a>r in such a way that the latter could be interpreted as the

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 368 A. Cogliati

 operator transforming γ + ωδ into a + ωβ, γ + ωδ — (q + ojr)(a + ωβ). However,

 Clifford observed, this equation is not susceptible to interpretation as in the case of

 a single quaternion q which transforms a vector into another. Indeed, he wrote, "the
 expression q + a>r does not denote the sum of geometrical operations, which can be

 applied to the motor as a whole; and the ratio of two motors is only expressed by

 a symbol as the sum of two parts, each of which separately has a definite meaning

 in certain other cases, but not in the case in point. [...] this difficulty will be partly

 overcome by showing that the system here sketched is the limit of another in which it

 does not occur." Likely, Clifford was here referring to the possibility of regarding the

 Euclidean geometry as a limit case of the elliptic geometry where, he claimed, such a

 difficulty could be evaded.

 The reason for this was that, in this particular geometrical setting, Clifford was

 able to provide a decomposition of a general motion (a motor) into what he called

 left and right vectors, which, as will be seen, are a special kind of transformations

 of elliptic space, similar in some respects to translations of ordinary space. Such a

 decomposition allowed him to providing a precise geometrical meaning to both of the

 addends in q + cor.

 The geometrical setting is that of the so-called Cayley-Klein geometries. Clifford

 explicitly referred to Cayley (1859) and Klein (1871b). Thus, he shared Cayley's
 and Klein's view according to which metric geometry could be regarded as a part of

 descriptive (i.e., projective) geometry. This interpretation of metric geometry could

 be attained by fixing a quadric surface (the absolute) in (real) projective space (or

 complex extension thereof) which, in the case of elliptic geometry, is characterized by

 the fact that all of its points are imaginary.

 After recalling the basic formulas for distance and angle in terms of cross-ratio,

 Clifford considered two straight lines a, b (not lying in the same plane) and observed

 that in general two lines that are polars of one another can be drawn so that each

 meets a, b at right angles. These polar lines, Clifford claimed without proof, can be
 determined as the lines which meet the two lines a, b and their polars a', b'. Indeed,

 any line that cuts both a and a' is perpendicular to both (this is a consequence of the

 trivial fact that any point of a is conjugate to any point of a'). Thus, any line which

 meets the four lines a, a', b, b' cuts them all at right angles. Now, the three lines a, a', b

 determine a ruled quadric surface10 since they are (pairwise) skew11 and the fourth

 line b' meets this quadric in two points Ρ and Q. The generators p,q of the opposite

 system (opposite with respect to the system of generators to which a, a', b belong)

 passing through Ρ and Q are common transversals of the four lines a, a', b,b' and

 thus cut them all at right angles. The fact that ρ and q are polar one of the other follows

 by assuming that there are no more than two common perpendiculars.

 However, there is an exceptional case that is of the utmost importance to the analysis.

 This is the case in which the line b' belongs to the same system of generators as the
 lines a, a', b. Then, there exists an infinite number of common perpendiculars to the

 lines a, a', b, b' that coincide precisely with the second system of generators of the

 10 This is an auxiliary quadric that is not to be confused with the absolute quadric of elliptic geometry.

 11 See Castelnuovo (1904, §361-365).

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 369

 quadric. It can be proved in this case that the skew lines a and b are equidistant and,

 furthermore, that they cut the same two generators of one system of the absolute

 quadric. Depending upon the type of system of generators cut by the two lines a and

 b, Clifford spoke of right or left parallels. This denomination appeared to him most

 appropriate since he observed, again without proof, that "there are many points of

 analogy between the parallels here defined and those of parabolic geometry." Clifford

 cited a few of them, namely (i) the isogonality property according to which a line cuts

 two parallels at equal angles, (ii) the existence of a ruled quadric of zero curvature

 generated by all the parallel lines which meet a given line (this is the well known

 Clifford's quadric).

 Let us now turn to the aforementioned decomposition of a general movement

 (motor) of elliptic space into the sum of two vector motions which, in a way, can

 be assimilated to translations. In this respect, Clifford remarked:

 A twist-velocity of a rigid body must be regarded as having two axes. For a

 motion of translation along any axis is the same thing as a rotation about the

 polar axis, and vice versa. Hence a twist-velocity is compounded of rotation

 velocities about two polar axes; say these are θ, φ. Then the motion may be

 regarded either as a twist-velocity about a screw whose pitch is | and whose

 axis is the first axis, or about a screw whose pitch is | and whose axis is the polar
 axis. In general, then, a motor has two axes and is expressible in one way only

 as the sum of two polar rotors. There is, however, one case of exception which

 the axes of a motor are indeterminate; that, namely, in which the magnitudes of

 the two polar rotors are equal. [...] Such [...] a motor of pitch unity, or which

 is its own polar, may [...] be regarded as having the nature of a vector [...]. For
 we may define a vector as a motor whose axes are indeterminate; and the case

 we are now considering is the only case of such indétermination which occurs

 in elliptic geometry. Vectors will be called right or left according as the twist of

 them is right- or left-handed (Clifford 1873, p. 390).

 On the basis of these observations, Clifford stated the proposition according to which

 every motor in elliptic space is the sum of a right and a left vector. Indeed, Clifford

 observed, if A indicates a motor and A' is its polar motor then A = j(A + A') +

 \ (A - A') and, by construction, A + A' and A — A' are right and left vectors.

 Clifford's treatment suffers from a certain lack of technical details, but we can try to

 make sense of it by making recourse to more familiar tools as follows. A twist-velocity

 can be interpreted as motion of the elliptic space, i.e., as a real homography leaving the

 absolute quadric invariant. In general, such a motion leaves invariant four generators

 gi.gl, g'vg'2 of the absolute quadric (they are two couples belonging to different

 systems of generators). This set of four lines determines a skew quadrilateral whose

 diagonals are straight lines that are polar one of the other and are left invariant by the

 motion itself. These are the axes of the motor to which Clifford referred. Furthermore,

 the correspondence between translation along a line and rotation about its polar is due

 to an elementary property of polarity according to which, while a point moves along

 a line /, its polar plane rotates about I', the polar line of I. Furthermore, the case of

 exception of a motor whose pitch is equal to 1 corresponds to what are nowadays called

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 370 A. Cogliati

 Clifford's translations. In view of Clifford's observation according to which a motor

 is compounded of rotation velocities (θ, φ) about polar axes, we recognize that the

 notion of motor with pitch equal to 1 can be interpreted in light of the characterization

 of Clifford's translation provided by Coxeter (1998, p. 135): "a Clifford's translation

 may be defined as the product of rotations through equal angles θ about two absolute

 polar lines." Finally, the asserted decomposition of any motor into right and left vectors

 corresponds to the possibility of writing a general motion Φ of the elliptic space into

 the product of two Clifford's translations.

 On the basis of these premises, Clifford was able to obviate the above-mentioned

 difficulty concerning the definition of a biquaternion as the ratio of two motors. To

 this end, he introduced the operator ω such that ω2 = 1; it is defined by means of

 the following prescription: If α is a rotor, then "ωα will denote the rotor polar to

 a and equal to it in magnitude." Then, he observed that a general motor could be

 expressed in the form a + ωβ, where a and β denote two rotors; he then defined two

 operators, namely ξ = ^ψ- and η = In view of the decomposition described
 above, Clifford could finally write a generic motor as ξ y + ηδ and thus provide the

 summands of a biquaternion with a geometrical meaning. Indeed, the operator which
 converts a motor ξ γ + ηδ into a motor ξα + ηβ could be chosen to be Çq + ψ

 where q, r are quaternions equal to the ratios of rotors α/γ, β/δ, respectively. As a

 consequence of ηξ = ξ η = 0, each of the two summands Çq and ψ acquired a definite

 meaning.

 Far from being a fully satisfying treatment of the algebra of motions, Clifford (1873)

 remained, in many respects, an exposition of audacious and fertile ideas which required

 a patient work of systematization. Attempts at it were undertaken by R. Ball himself,

 with whom the theory of screws had originated, A. Buchheim in the early 1880s
 and, some years later, by E. Study. In particular, Ball devoted to the topic a memoir

 which he presented to the Royal Irish Academy in November 1881. Interestingly,

 Ball was able to characterize Clifford's vector motions of elliptic 3-space in terms of

 invariance properties of the generators of the fundamental quadric, a characterization

 which had remained implicit in Clifford's treatment, thus preparing the ground for

 Klein's subsequent analysis. In this respect, Ball observed:

 [The] name [vector] was applied by Clifford to a particular description of
 displacement which a body can receive in elliptic space. In the most general

 displacement of a rigid system two right generators and two left generators of
 the absolute remained unaltered. In the movement which we call a vector, two

 of the generators of one system and all of the generators of the other remained

 unaltered. Clifford had shown that when a body is displaced by a vector each

 point of the body moves through equal distances along parallel lines. [...] He

 distinguishes between a right vector and a left vector, according to which system

 of generators remains unaltered (Ball 1881, pp. 159-160).

 Systematic investigations on biquaternions were carried out by Arthur Buchheim

 ( 1859-1888). A most brilliant student of the Savilian Professor of Geometry in Oxford,

 Henry Smith, who "spoke of him as the most promising young mathematician that

 had appeared in the University of Oxford for a long series of years," he devoted a great

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 371

 deal of attention providing a comprehensible treatment of Clifford's pioneering views

 by seeking for an algebraic foundations of the new concept and also by exploring their

 geometrical meaning. Before his premature death in September 1888, Buchheim, who

 also studied with Klein in Leipzig, devoted three papers to this project of systematiza

 tion. Of these, Buchheim (1883) provided a reinterpretation of Clifford's calculus of

 screws in light of Grassmann's Ausdehnungslehre. In particular, Buchheim was able

 to identify the notion of screw with that of linear complex and Clifford's operator

 ω with that of Grassmann's conjugation Κ (Ergdnzung)12 By means of these tools,

 extraneous to Clifford's original treatment, in Buchheim (1883, p. 91) deduced con

 ditions for Clifford's parallelism in a very easy way; if a and b denote two lines, then

 a, b are Clifford parallel lines if a ^ Ka = X(b ψ Kb), λ being an arbitrary constant.

 Only a year later, Buchheim came back to the same topic in Buchheim (1884) by

 providing an extension of Grassmann's calculus to the three kinds of uniform space

 (i.e., parabolic, hyperbolic, and elliptic). The idea was simply that of interpreting the

 operator Κ (ω in Clifford's notation) no longer as the Ergdnzung but as the polar of a

 given geometric figure with respect to the absolute (in the sense of Cayley and Klein).

 Eventually, this insight was fully developed in a long memoir (Buchheim 1885) where

 he not only furnished an algebraic discussion of biquaternions but also conveyed a

 very interesting treatment of their useful geometrical applications. In particular, the

 algebra of the operator ω was explicitly linked to the curvature of the space under

 consideration; indeed, Buchheim show how a consistent definition of the operator ω

 could be attained by posing ω2 = k, where k indicates the curvature of the space

 which is equal to -1,0,1 in the hyperbolic, parabolic, and elliptic cases, respectively.

 A few years later, namely in Study (1891), Eduard Study also had recourse to the

 notion of biquaternion in his researches upon the representation of motions in space,

 and much later in Study (1913) he provided a general outline of the application of

 biquaternions in theoretical kinematics.

 3 Klein's Zur Nicht-Euklidischen Geometrie

 After the introduction by Clifford of the notion of parallelism in three-dimensional

 elliptic space, the matter was thoroughly discussed by Klein in the first part of Klein

 (1890), which appeared in the Mathematische Annalen. Klein had met Clifford in
 September 1873, on the occasion of a session of the British Association for the
 Advancement of Science in Bradford (UK) where Clifford had delivered a lecture
 with the title "On a surface of zero curvature and finite extent." Since the text of Clif

 ford's conference was not extant, Klein thought it useful to tackle the topic anew and

 to discuss in more analytical detail some results that Clifford had sketchily dealt with

 in various memoirs of his, such as Clifford (1873).13

 Undoubtedly, Klein must have welcomed the publication of Clifford (1873) with

 great favor, as Clifford took great profit from Klein's unitary approach to (non

 Euclidean) geometry through the general framework offered by projective geometry

 12 In this respect, see Buchheim (1883, p. 85).

 13 On the relationship between Clifford and Klein, see Ziegler (1985, p. 175).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 372 A. Cogliati

 that he (Klein) had been developing since the early 1870s.14 In particular, Klein com

 mitted himself to providing an analytical expressions of those transformations of the

 elliptic space that Clifford had called "vector motions." This special type of displace

 ment of elliptic space plays a prominent role in the theory of Clifford parallels.

 Klein started his analysis by first recalling the essential notions of the projective

 interpretation of non-Euclidean geometry: He considered real three-dimensional pro
 jective space P3(R) and its extension to the complex projective space P3(C); then,
 he fixed a quadric surface Q C P3(C) which he called the absolute. Thus, a metrical

 geometry can be interpreted as the theory of the projective relations of certain geo

 metrical forms that are fixed by the introduction of the quadric surface with all other

 geometrical forms. In the case of elliptic geometry, the absolute is a quadric Q with

 real coefficients but with no real points (nulltheilege Flàche),

 Q = |(*ο.*ι.*2,*3) e P3(C) I Xq + x\ + x\ -barf = θ].

 This is a ruled quadric which admits two systems of (complex) generators (Erzeugen

 den). They can easily be obtained starting from the following decomposition of the
 quadric equation:

 (*o + ixi)C*o ~ txi) + (X2 + ix3)C*2 - ix3) = 0.

 The first system of generators parameterized by the complex number λ is given by:15

 (/W; t = *» + '·*■ =_x

 X2 — IX3 *0 - IX1

 In turn, the second system can be written as follows (μ 6 C):

 f. ! X0 + i*l X2-ÎX3
 {Μ : μ = -r- = —· (2)
 X2 + IX 3 XQ — 1*1

 At this point, Klein considered all the real collineations of P3(C) which fulfill the

 following requirement:16 (i) They leave the absolute quadric invariant; (ii) they trans

 form generators of one system into generators of the same system. As a consequence

 of the fact that a collineation transforms straight lines into straight lines in a bijective

 way, these collineations induce, in a natural way, projective transformations of the

 parameters λ, μ € C:

 , _ αλ + β , _ α'μ + β'
 γλ + 5 ' ^ γ'μ + δ1'

 14 On Klein's early geometrical works, see Rowe (1989).

 15 To uniform notation throughout the paper, the purely conventional choice of naming one system of

 generators either "first" or "second" system adopted by Klein has been modified.

 16 Such collineations are sometimes called proper or direct collineations; see, e.g., Klein (1928, p. 112).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 373

 Among such collineations, there exist special ones, which Klein called scrolls

 (Schiebungen) of the first and the second type which are characterized by the property

 of transforming generators of one system while leaving invariant the generators of the

 other. Analytically, that means for a Schiebung of the first type:

 Φ : (λ, μ) η» (λ', μ') with λ' = + f, μ' = μ,
 χλ + <5

 and analogously for scrolls of the second type.

 Let us now focus upon scrolls of the first type only. Besides leaving invariant the

 generators of the second system {i/x}, the maps Φ leave two generators R\x, R\2 of
 the first system pointwise-invariant. The parameters λι, λ 2 are the solutions of the

 quadratic equation λ = It should be observed that if Rx, is left invariant by a

 scroll, and then Rx2 = Rx, ; i.e., the two generators of the first system that are left

 invariant are complex conjugate one of the other.

 Furthermore, under the action of a scroll of the first type, every point of the space

 is displaced along straight line which intersects the generators Rxl, Rx2.

 In order to obtain an analytical expression for the scrolls of the first type, Klein

 deduced the following:

 Lemma 1 Let RA indicate the straight line which is conjugate to a generator Rx

 of the first system. Then, Rx is a generator of the first system too; i.e., there exists

 X* 6 C such that Rx = Rx*. Furthermore, if X has polar expression X = re"^, then
 χ* = -ϊείφ.

 On the basis of this result, Klein's well-known correspondence between homographies

 of the complex plane and rotations on the sphere could be applied. Let us see why and
 how.

 Klein recalled a standard technique which represents the extended complex plane

 C U oo on the unit sphere

 S2 = {(M,£)eR3l£2 + f2 + <2 = l}

 by means of the stereographic projection π : S2 -> C U oo on the equatorial plane
 that is given, for ζ φ 1, by:

 x + iy = π(ξ, η, ζ) =

 1 - ζ

 Points of the complex plane of type re'^ and —je'^ (just as λ and λ* in the preceding
 lemma) are called diametral points since they correspond, through the stereographic

 projection, to antipodal points on the sphere. As a consequence of this, the projective
 transformation X' = Φ (λ) = corresponding to a scroll of the first kind, was
 characterized by Klein as a Môbius transformation that is conjugate to a rotation on

 the sphere; more explicitly, Φ can be written as π Rrt ~1, where R is a rotation. Already

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 374 A. Cogliati

 in his Vorlesungen iiber das Ikosaeder, Klein had conveyed an explicit formula for
 transformations of this kind, which can be written as follows:

 λ' = IlImI il!—a,b,c,de R, a2 + b2 + c2 + d2 = 1. (3)

 (b + ια)λ + (d - ic)

 In view of this result, the analytic expression for scrolls of the first type is achieved

 by observing that from (1) and (2), and one obtains:

 where ρ is an arbitrary proportionality factor. Upon substitution of (λ, μ) with (λ', μ),

 where λ' is given by (3), Klein attained the desired expression:

 for a general scroll of the first kind. In a completely similar way, upon consideration of

 the second system of generators of the absolute quadric, Klein deduced the expression

 for a general scroll of the second kind which reads as follows:

 px ο = λμ + 1,

 px ι=ι(-λμ + 1),

 px2 = μ- λ,

 . (4)

 px 3 = /(λ + μ).

 Xq = +dxo — cx ι + bx 2 — ax 3,

 x\ = +cx0 + dxi — ax2 - bx3,

 x'2 = -bx 0 + ax 1 + dx2 + cx 3,

 X3 = +axo + bx 1 — CX2 + djC3,

 Xq = +δχο - γχ ι + βΧ2 + <XX3,

 x\ = +γχο + 5χι - ax2 + βΧ3,

 I ' ~ - ■

 (ο)

 χ'2 = -βχο + αχ\ + 5x2 + yx3,

 Χ3 = -αχο - βχ\ - γχ2 + 5x3,

 where α, β, γ, δ € Μ are such that a2 + β2 + γ2 + S2 = 1. Thus, we can reformulate

 Klein's result in the following

 Theorem 1 A real collineation of the complex projective space P3(C), Φ : χ η*· χ'

 that leaves the absolute quadric Q invariant andprojectively transforms the generators

 {Rx} of the first system while leaving invariant the generators {Ιμ} of the second

 system can be written in the form (5). In a completely analogous way, an analytical

 representation for the scrolls of the second kind can be obtained. Furthermore, by the

 action of a scroll of the first kind, a point of the space moves along the straight line

 that meets the generators left invariant by the scroll itself. In other words, to any scroll

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 375

 there is an associated congruence of straight lines, i.e., a 2-parameter set of straight

 lines which meet on two generators of the quadric,17

 Klein also pointed out that an isometry of the elliptic space could be represented by
 means of unitary quaternions in a way that render evident the decomposition of a

 general motion into scrolls of first and second kind. By indicating by q the unitary
 quaternion q = d + ai + bi + ck and by identifying a point with homogeneous
 coordinates (x\,X2, *3, xt) with the quaternion X3 + 1x2 + jx\ + kx 0, a scroll of the

 first kind could be represented by

 x3 + ix2 + îx'\ + kx'o = (*3 + ÎX2 + jxl + kxo) ■ q.

 where it is intended that the product follows the multiplication rules for i, j, k. If a

 scroll of the second type is represented analogously by left quaternion multiplication

 by q' = 8+oti + fj + yk, then a general motion of the elliptic space, Klein remarked,
 could be written as:

 *3 + ix2 + jx[ + kx'0 = q' ■ (*3 + ix2 + jx 1 + kxo) · q■

 At this point, Klein turned to investigating the geometrical significance of the scrolls.

 To this end, he recalled the expression of the non-Euclidean distance (the so-called

 Cayley-Klein metric) between two points χ, χ' e Ρ3 (Ε) which takes on the following
 form:

 , xLo xjx'i

 d(x, χ ) = arccos . -, -. (7)

 Klein observed that if x' is the image under the scroll Φ of an arbitrary point χ then

 d(x,x') is constant. Furthermore, he explicitly pointed out an outstanding analogy

 with the group of translations in ordinary, Euclidean space that in a way admitted a

 generalization of the notion of Euclidean parallelism. Just as in ordinary space parallel

 straight lines are preserved under a translation that is parallel to a given line, so in

 elliptic geometry a given scroll preserves the line congruence corresponding to it via

 theorem (1). Consequently, it was a natural choice to define two straight lines to be

 parallel in the sense of Clifford if they belong to the same line congruence or, equiva

 lently, if they meet the same conjugate pair of (imaginary) generators of the absolute.

 Depending on the kind of congruence or of generators under consideration, Klein

 spoke of right (rechtsgewundene) parallel straight lines or of left (linksgewundene)

 parallel straight lines.

 Interestingly, in (Klein 1890, p. 552) Klein referred to the introduction by Clifford

 of parallels in elliptic space as a new theory of parallels (neue Parallelentheorie) and

 explicitly emphasized the distinctiveness of the new parallelism with respect to the

 17 For a proof that this set of straight lines is a 2-parameter family, see, for example, Bianchi (1902,
 pp. 446-447).

 â Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 376 A. Cogliati

 ordinary (i.e., Lobachevsky's) parallelism of non-Euclidean geometry. The passage in

 question is worth quoting:

 In the light of the theorem just given [Klein referred to Theorem 1], the ground

 for Clifford's new theory of parallels is attained. What parallel lines in parabolic

 (Euclidean) space are, is a well established notion. As for the definition of parallel

 lines in non-Euclidean space, we simply have to pay attention to the fact that

 the definition must coincide with the ordinary Euclidean one as soon as the
 non-Euclidean space reduces to the Euclidean one. This condition is fulfilled

 through the ordinary position according to which lines are called parallel that

 intersect in a point at infinity (i.e., in a point of the fundamental surface of

 second degree). However, as Clifford has emphasized, the parallel lines thus

 defined lose almost all the elegant properties that one encounters in Euclidean

 space. These properties, according to Clifford, rely essentially upon this: by the

 action of certain motions of the space, Euclidean parallel lines can be displaced

 along themselves. But the lines that belong to a congruence (of either type) just

 referred to have precisely this property in non-Euclidean space. Thus, a bundle of

 Euclidean parallel lines can be regarded as the limiting case (Ausartung) of such

 a congruence. Hence the following suggestion (Vorschlag): to treat as parallel

 lines in non-Euclidean geometry those (skew) lines which belong to the same

 congruence (either of first or second type) or, which is the same, that intersect

 the same couple of imaginary generators (either of first or of second type) of our

 fundamental surface (Fundamentalflche).

 4 An approach based upon differential geometry: Bianchi and Fubini

 Soon after Klein's reexamination of Clifford's parallelism in the framework of pro

 jective geometry, Luigi Bianchi devoted a great deal of attention to it. As early as his

 degree thesis (1877), Bianchi explicitly referred to Klein's geometrical work, namely

 (Klein 1871b), as a valuable source of inspiration for his early investigations on the

 applicability of surfaces in spaces of constant curvature.

 After his graduation at the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa, where he was student

 of Enrico Betti and Ulisse Dini, Bianchi spent a year (Autumn 1879 to Autumn 1880)

 of study under Klein's guidance in Munich, during which, besides dealing with the

 theory of elliptic curves, he surely had the possibility of better assimilating Klein's

 viewpoint on non-Euclidean geometries.

 The first couple of papers18 by Bianchi on the subject of Clifford's parallelism

 appeared in 1895 and 1896 when Bianchi tackled the subject of Clifford's zero
 curvature surface that was mentioned before. In 1899, Bianchi included some of his

 results on this subject in the German edition of his lectures on differential geometry.

 But it was in the greatly augmented second Italian edition of his Lezioni di Geometria

 Differentiate that Bianchi presented a complete account of Clifford's parallels in a

 chapter devoted to spaces of constant curvature.

 18

 Bianchi (1895, 1896).

 <£] Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 377

 Bianchi's approach was based upon a reinterpretation of Clifford's and Klein's

 results in light of metric Riemannian geometry to which he had been introduced by

 the works of Eugenio Beltrami and Dini himself. After discussing the typical form of

 the metric for spaces of constant curvature, Bianchi derived the metric of the elliptic
 space from the Cayley-Klein distance as follows.

 He first introduced homogeneous coordinates [xo x„] for the (complex) pro

 jective space and fixed the quadric surface Ω(χ, χ) = Σ"=0xf = 0, in order to
 obtain the so-called geodetic representation of elliptic space in Weierstrass's coor

 dinates. This was a particular representation of spaces with constant curvature that
 Beltrami had already used in his classical memoirs (Beltrami 1868a, b). The denom

 ination "geodetic representation" means that geodesies of the non-Euclidean space

 and those of the representative Euclidean space are paired off by the representation

 map.19 Furthermore, Weierstrass's coordinates are deduced from Beltrami's geodetic

 representation by passing to homogeneous coordinates. By indicating with d(x,x')

 the Cayley-Klein distance between two points χ, χ', one has, in accordance with (7):

 cos - = , (8)

 . - . Ω (χ, χ')
 (!)=
 1 D ' νΩ(χ,χ)·Ω(χ',χ')

 where R is a real constant.

 Interestingly, Bianchi did not deduce the Cayley-Klein metric from projective

 considerations; on the contrary, he observed that (8) essentially coincides with the

 expression for the length of a geodetic arc in Beltrami's (geodetic) representation as

 given, for example, in Beltrami (1868b). In this respect, it should be borne in mind

 that Klein himself had been explicit in recognizing the essential equivalence of Bel

 trami's formulas with those of the so-called Cayley-Klein metric for non-Euclidean

 geometries when he remarked that "[...] there is barely a step to be taken to pass from

 Beltrami's formulas to those of Cayley."20

 In order to derive the expression for the Riemannian metric corresponding to (8),

 Bianchi considered two infinitesimally near points x,· and x,· + dx, upon an arbitrary

 curve and indicated with e the infinitesimal increment of the arc-length in passing
 from x,· to x,· + dx,. Then, he posed

 / dx,· 1 d2x,· λ ,

 d=e x,=Xl+-e+il-r^+0^)

 and, upon replacement of these expressions into (8), he obtained:

 1 - £+»«>) = 0(.,x)+. + ϊ Σ*#2+»«2>· m

 ί=0 ι=0

 20 See Klein (1871b, p. 578).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 19 Beltrami (1865) has shown that surfaces of constant curvature can be represented upon a plane in such

 a way that geodetic lines are mapped into straight lines and also that this property is shared by no other
 surfaces.

 378 A. Cogliati

 By equating the coefficients of the terms in e2, Bianchi deduced X x, and

 thus, as a consequence of the fact that one can suppose Ω(χ, x) = X"=o x2 = 1,

 he could conclude that Σ"_0 or, equivalently, that di2 = R2 Xdx2,

 where it is understood that the x;'s are not independent variables, but they are linked
 by Ω(χ,χ) = 1.

 In this framework, as was said, geodetic lines are mapped into straight lines of

 the representative Euclidean space. Thus, a geodesic is defined by giving of a point
 Xj, i = 0 η and of the direction parameters ξ;, i = 0,..., η of the normal plane

 to it.21 The coordinates of any other point x{ belonging to the geodesic are given by
 the equations

 x\ = λχ; + μξ(, i=0, ...,n

 where λ2 + μ2 = 1. Now let d indicates the distance between x,· and x·. Then, as a

 consequence of (8), Bianchi obtained λ = cos j and μ = sin and thus:

 xi = cos +sin ι =0,... ,n.

 It is then evident that straight lines are closed and of a finite length that is equal to π R.

 On the basis of these results, which were specialized to the case η = 3, Bianchi set

 out to provide a discussion of Clifford's parallelism that, contrary to Clifford's and

 Klein's presentations, started from a definition of the elliptic scrolls Ψ (scorrimenti)

 as those motions of the elliptic space which are characterized by the property that
 d(jc, Ψ*) = cost for every x. Their characterization as biaxial homographies of the

 underlying projective space, whose axes are identified with a couple of generators of
 the absolute quadric, was obtained as a consequence of the aforementioned metric
 definition.

 In 1900, Guido Fubini, one of the Bianchi's most brilliant students at the Scuola

 Normale Superiore in Pisa, dealt with Clifford's parallelism in his degree thesis. Once

 again, the approach was that of metric geometry. Fubini's main achievement consisted

 of an important technical innovation that obviated the need for extremely long and

 tedious calculations in the study of curves and surface in elliptic space. This was the

 introduction of new line coordinates, which Fubini called scroll parameters (parametri

 di scorrimento). The idea was simple but at the same time very ingenious. As was

 seen, a straight line (i.e., a geodetic line of the elliptic space) could be identified

 by means of the coordinates (xo, *i> *2> *3) of one of its points and the coordinates

 (to- 11» ?2> I3) °f a plane normal to it in (xo, x\,X2, *3)· In other words, a straight

 line r is determined by specification of two conjugate points upon it. Now, there exist

 two scrolls (one right-handed and one left-handed) which take the point (x) to the
 point (ξ). Their parameters are (A, B, C, D) and (α, β, γ, S). As a consequence of

 Σ?=ο = 0 and °f the explicit expressions for scrolls (5)—(6), one gets A = a = 0
 and B2 + C2 + D2 = β2 + γ2 + S2 = 1. These quantities are what Fubini termed the

 21 f; are such that they satisfy £,· £,·*,■ = 0.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 379

 scroll parameters of the line. It is easy to see that they can serve as line coordinates

 since they are nothing other than a linear combination of the usual Plucker coordinates.
 Indeed, by indicating with pik = x£k-Xkh (i,k = 0,, 3) the Plucker coordinates

 of the line, the scroll parameters take on the following form:

 B = P01 + P23, C = P02 + P31, D = P03+Pl2

 β = P01 - P23> Y = P02- P31, S = po3 ~ Pl2·

 An elementary application of this new notion led to a straightforward procedure for

 the determination of the two parallels through a point y = (yo, yi, y2. >3) to a given

 line. Indeed, the scroll parameters realize the following property which Fubini termed

 invariance under parallelism. This means that if two lines r, r' have equal (in module)

 parameters of the same triple, B,C, D οτ β,γ,δ, then the two lines are Clifford paral

 lel; in particular, if (Β, C, D) = ±(B', C', D'), r and r' are right Clifford's parallels,

 while if (β, γ, δ) = ±00', γ', S), r, r' are left Clifford's parallel. As a consequence of

 this, we get the following expressions for the cosine directions (|) of the two parallels:

 for the right Clifford parallel to r \

 fo =-Byι - Cy2 - Dy$

 |l = Byo - Dy2 + Cy3

 h = Cyo + Dyi - By3

 f4 = Dyο - Cyi + By2,

 fo = -βy\ - yy2 - <$y3

 ft = βνο + Sy2 - yy3

 f3 = yyo - Sy] + fiyi

 f4 = δyo + yy 1 - βγ2.

 for the left Clifford parallel. Another application of scroll parameters, which is useful

 for our purposes,22 was offered by easy determination of the angle of parallelism

 (angolo di parallelismo) between a pair of Clifford parallels through a point to a given

 straight line r. The scope of Fubini's thesis went far beyond the mere introduction of

 more efficient techniques of calculus; indeed, it made good use of the notion of scroll

 parameter by applying it to a wide class of problems, already tackled by Bianchi

 (1896), in the realm of the theory of curves and surfaces in elliptic 3-space.

 5 Absolute parallelism versus Levi-Civita's parallelism: Enea Bortolotti

 Clifford's parallelism had been considered for decades as an isolated phenomenon

 which was not susceptible of being interpreted within a general theoretical framework.

 22 See next section.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 380 A. Cogliati

 Still in 1917, when Levi-Civita first proposed a geometrical interpretation of Christof

 fel 3-index symbols by introducing the notion of metric connection in Riemannian

 geometry,23 it was remarked that Clifford's parallelism (together with Lobachevsky

 parallelism of hyperbolic geometry) represented, in a way, an anomaly that could not be

 framed within the new theoretical scheme. Indeed, as Levi-Civita explicitly observed,

 although elliptic space (regarded as a Riemannian manifold of constant curvature)

 could be equipped with Levi-Civita's parallelism, nonetheless Clifford's parallelism

 constituted a distinct phenomenon.

 The following fact can be singled out as the most outstanding difference between the

 two: While Levi-Civita's prescription for parallel displacement depended essentially

 upon the chosen path, the notion of Clifford's parallelism was completely independent

 of the path, thus qualifying it as a kind of absolute parallel displacement.

 Interestingly, Levi-Civita chose a rather roundabout strategy to prove the irreducibil

 ity of one kind of parallelism to the other. The matter was tackled by him in (Levi-Civita

 1917, §6). He first specialized his notion of parallelism to the case of manifolds with

 constant positive Riemannian curvature and observed that, when such manifolds are

 interpreted as submanifolds of Euclidean space, there is a close link between the ordi

 nary parallelism of the ambient space and Levi-Civita's parallelism of the immersed

 manifold. Indeed, let the submanifold Vn be represented by the the equation:

 i>,2=i. <i3)

 i=0

 A vector stemming from Vn is identified with a direction of the surrounding Euclidean

 space. Its components, denoted by a,·, satisfy the following condition which translates

 the fact that the direction belongs to the hyperplane tangent to Vn :

 ]Γα,·χ,·=0. (14)

 ί=0

 On the basis of these premises, Levi-Civita was able to characterize the notion of

 parallelism upon Vn in terms of the ordinary parallelism in Euclidean space.

 Theorem 2 (Levi-Civita 1917) Let C be a geodetic curve in Vn. Let a = («ο, · · ·,οίη)

 be a direction orthogonal to C at some point χ 6 C. Then, the conditions which guar

 antee that a(s) (now consider as a function of the arc-length s) is parallel displaced
 along C are α· (s) = 0,i = 0,..., η. In other words, as far as orthogonal directions

 are concerned, Levi-Civita's parallelism in Vn coincides with ordinary parallelism in

 the surrounding Euclidean space (Levi-Civita 1917, p. 18).

 If this result is specialized to the case η = 3, Levi-Civita observed, it is clear that the

 notion of parallelism just introduced has no relation at all with the so-called Clifford's

 parallelism. Indeed, if one considers a geodetic line C and considers through each

 23 On the history of Levi-Civita's parallelism and its early reception, see Reich (1992).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 381

 point of it a line belonging to the same Clifford's congruence, the lines so obtained,

 though orthogonal to C, are not parallels (in the ordinary sense) of the surrounding

 space.

 As Levi-Civita proved in full detail,24 it is indeed impossible to find a geodetic curve

 C through each point of which lines belonging to the same Clifford's congruence are

 drawn with equal inclination (as would be required by ordinary parallelism).

 In his lectures on "infinitesimal Geometry" which he delivered at the University of

 Pisa in 1922, Bianchi provided a treatment of Levi-Civita's innovative views "by pre

 senting them in analytical form without recourse to infinitesimal considerations which

 had represented Levi-Civita's starting point (Bianchi 1922, p. 150)." On this occasion,

 Bianchi criticized Levi-Civita's employment of the denomination "parallelismo" to

 denote the notion that Levi-Civita had introduced in 1917. A partial justification of

 such usage, Bianchi admitted, was provided by the fact that Levi-Civita's parallelism

 coincides with the ordinary parallelism in the case of Euclidean space. Nonetheless,
 he wrote:

 [...] in every other curved space, including all spaces with non-vanishing con

 stant Riemannian curvature, Levi-Civita's parallelism is essentially bound to the

 path along which the displacement is carried out. This circumstance, together

 with the not irrelevant fact that in the geometry of spaces with constant, non

 vanishing curvature the name parallelism is employed with a distinct and absolute

 meaning (Lobachevsky's parallelism and Clifford's parallelism) render it doubt

 ful whether the usage of this word should be regarded as appropriate. Instead, I

 believe it more convenient to speak of bound parallelism of Levi-Civita's type.

 Obviously, Bianchi's criticism was not directed toward the notion of Levi-Civita's

 parallelism in itself which, on the contrary, he regarded very highly as a herald of

 fertile advances. Nonetheless, his perplexity upon an apparently lexical issue hid a

 much more fundamental question pertaining the relationship between Levi-Civita's
 parallelism and those types of parallelism (in primis Clifford's parallelism) which were

 termed by him absolute, in view of their independence from the path of displacement.

 Some years later, Enea Bortolotti25 ( 1896-1942), a former student of Bianchi at the

 Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa, took up these observations and produced a detailed

 treatment of Clifford's (and Lobachevsky's) parallelism that aimed at reinterpreting

 it in light of the absolute differential calculus of Ricci and at providing an intrinsic
 characterization thereof.

 Clearly influenced by Bianchi's views, in the introduction to (Bortolotti 1925) where

 Bortolotti explained the main motivation at the basis of his investigations, he wrote:

 Already in 1917, in his classical memoir on parallelism in any variety, Levi

 Civita remarked that the notion introduced by him was totally distinct from

 that of Clifford in spaces 53 with constant curvature. Also, the parallelism of

 24 See in particular footnote 13 in Levi-Civita (1917, p. 18).

 25 For a biographical sketch of E. Bortolotti, see Bompiani (1942). Bortolotti's interest in the theory of

 connection, namely in the notion of Levi-Civita's parallelism, can be traced back to January 1923, when he
 wrote to Levi-Civita to ask him for some reading advice on the topic. See Archivio Levi-Civita, Biblioteca
 della Accademia dei Lincei, E. Bortolotti, 1923.

 Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 382 A. Cogliati

 Lobachevsky, which can be defined in any S3 with negative constant curvature,

 as is well known, never coincides with that of Levi-Civita. The only exception is

 represented by Euclidean space, in which case all three types of parallelism coin

 cide. This circumstance induces us to think that, despite the fact that the notions

 of absolute parallelism according to Clifford and Lobachevsky are distinct from

 that of bound (vincolato) parallelism of Levi-Civita and that it is not possible

 to reduce one to the other, there should exist between them some noteworthy

 relationship (Bortolotti 1925, p. 821).

 Bortolotti's primary object was thus to draw a comparison between Levi-Civita's par

 allelism on the one side and the parallelisms of Clifford and of Lobachevsky on the
 other. The result was unexpected since he was able to obtain an invariant characteri

 zation of the latter in terms of the former. This achievement could be attained using

 the notion of associated directions that Bianchi had recently introduced in (Bianchi

 1922) while providing his own reformulation of Levi-Civita's parallelism. This inno

 vation grew out of Bianchi's investigation of what he termed subordinate parallelism,

 that is into the notion of parallelism on Riemannian submanifolds Vm that is naturally
 induced by Levi-Civita's parallelism in the ambient manifold Vn (1 < m < η).

 In modern terms, Bianchi's associated directions are, modulo an invariant factor,

 no other than the values of the covariant derivative of the vector field ξ along the path

 γ. Bianchi posed:

 *-§+t{T λ,μ=1 1

 and defined the associated directions /j,, i = 1,...,« by means of the following
 formulas:

 = « = 1,..., (16)

 where R is a scalar quantity defined by

 — /^~l. aik

 V ik

 Since, as was proved by Bianchi in full detail, the quantities Ω, transform under a

 change of coordinates in a controvariant manner, is an invariant. Bianchi termed it

 associated curvature (curvatura associata). Its geometrical meaning can be described

 as a measure of the rapidity of deviation from Levi-Civita's parallelism of the directions

 ξ(ί) along the curve γ.

 In view of its intuitive geometrical interpretation, it must have been a natural choice

 for Bortolotti to employ Bianchi's notion of associated directions in order to provide a

 characterization of Clifford's parallelism in terms of its deviation from Levi-Civita's.
 Let us see in some detail how this characterization was attained in (Bortolotti 1925).

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 383

 In following Bianchi's treatment as described in the preceding section, Bortolotti

 employed Weierstrass' coordinates Qto, x\, X2, *3) for the elliptic 3-space; the corre

 sponding metric is thus given by ds2 = R2 Σ?=ο dxf, where, as usual, it is intended

 that xq, ;q, X2, X3 are linked by the relation Σΐ=ο xf — 1 · The first step of Bortolotti's
 analysis consisted in deriving the analytical expression for finite Clifford's displace

 ment (trasporto finito per parallelismo di Clifford), i.e., the analytical prescription

 according to which a direction ξ at a given point χ is Clifford parallelly displaced at

 another point χ a finite distance from χ. To this end, it was crucial to use Fubini's scroll

 parameters, which we referred to in the previous section. Let r be a geodesic in S3, i.e.,

 a straight line of the associated projective space; let x, and £,· indicate the coordinates

 of one of its point Ρ and the coordinates of the normal plane in Ρ, respectively. Then,

 following Fubini, the scroll parameters of r are given by

 Β = (£i*o - £0*1) ± (£3*2 _ £2*3)

 C = (£2*0 - £0*2) ± (£1*3 - £3*1) (17)

 D = (£3*0 - £0*3) ± (£2*1 - £1*2).

 where it is intended that the upper and the lower signs refer to right-handed and

 left-handed scrolls, respectively. After that the six scroll parameters of r have been

 calculated, the directions f of the right and left Clifford's parallels drawn through a

 point jc are given by the following equations:

 £0 = —Bx 1 - Cx2 - Dx3

 fi = Bx ο τ Dx2 ± Cx 3

 12 = Cx0 ± Dx 1 ψ Bx3

 13 = Dx ο Τ Cx 1 ± Bx 2.

 Upon substitution of the expressions for B, C, D as given by (17), Bortolotti finally
 obtained the equation for finite Clifford's displacement (there are actually two of
 them):

 £/ = τ(-ΐ)'

 Xk Xr Xs

 xk xr xs

 £* £r £s

 - xi Σ χχξλ + £(· Σ *λΧλ ' (19)

 λ=0 λ=0

 where (ikrs) is any even permutation of (0123).

 Interestingly, Bortolotti provided a very intuitive description of the geometrical

 significance of Clifford's displacement as compared to Levi-Civita's displacement

 along geodetic lines. He obtained the following26

 Theorem 3 (Bortolotti 1925) If a given direction ξ is (Levi-Civita) parallelly dis
 placed along an orthogonal geodesic, then at every point of the geodesic the
 Levi-Civita's parallel is the bisector of the two Clifford's parallels.

 26 The same result had been obtained by Cartan (1924).

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 384 A. Cogliati

 As for Levi-Civita's parallelism in S3, Levi-Civita himself had explicitly writ
 ten down27 the differential equations for parallel displacement of a given vector

 Hi, (i = 0,..., 3) (to be regarded as function of the arc-length s of a curve γ) along

 a curve Xi(s) = y(s). By indicating with λ,· = R~j^' (i = 0,..., 3) the direction

 cosines of the tangent vector ^ and with cos φ the cosine of the angle between the

 vectors λ and ξ (i.e., cos φ = Σ; λ,-ξ;), these equations read as follows:

 At this point, Bortolotti recalled that equations (20) could be most easily integrated

 along a geodesic to give:

 cos<^ · η ο ηηΛ
 — = —Xi, ι=0, ...,3. (20)
 ds R

 Ht = £1 - cos φ —s— (x i + χ,), (21)

 s ,
 cos — - 1

 sin —
 R

 where it is intended that \L indicates the direction parallel to Η in the point χ that is

 obtained by Levi-Civita's displacement along the geodetic line joining χ to x; s is the

 arc-length of the geodesic joining χ to x. Now, by defining ψ to be the angle between the

 two Clifford's parallels f c and the Levi-Civita's parallel Hl, i.e., cos φ = Σί=0 %t '

 it immediately follows from equations (19) and (21) that, independently from the kind

 of Clifford's parallelism, one has:

 cos  ψ = cos φ ^cos — 1^ + cos . (22)

 The assertion of the theorem is readily deduced by setting cos φ = 0. Indeed, as

 Bortolotti observed, one has cos φ = cos i.e., Φ = ρ which is exactly one half of

 the angle between the two Clifford's parallels.28

 Theorem (3) provided a vivid illustration of the geometrical relationship between the

 two parallelisms; nonetheless, Bortolotti aimed at characterization of this relationship

 also at an infinitesimal level, that is by means of the differential equations presiding

 over parallel displacement. To this end, he first deduced the infinitesimal counterpart
 of equations (19); by setting λ,· = (x,'(s), i = 0,..., 3 is now a generic curve,
 not necessarily a geodesic), he obtained:

 d£= (-1y
 ds ^ R

 λ-k ks

 Xk Xr Xs

 Hk Hr Hs

 cos</>

 27 See Levi-Civita (1917, p. 18).

 28 As is clear from its expression, the angle between the two Clifford's parallels depends upon the distance

 of the point xj and i,·. For an easy computation of this angle (first calculated by Fubini (1900)), see, e.g.,
 Bianchi (1902, p. 453).

 <£l Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 385

 where (ikrs) is an even permutation of (0123). Now, since equations (20) could be
 interpreted by saying that the covariant derivative of ξ along the curve χ = x(s),

 which is the same as Bianchi's associated direction Ω,·, is vanishing, equations (23)
 could be rewritten as:29

 λk kr ks

 Xlc xr xs

 Ik Ir Is

 (24)

 Correspondingly, Bortolotti determined Bianchi's associated curvature C that in this

 case is easily seen to be equal to: C = ^ |sin φ\, φ being λξ.

 This achievement constituted the starting point of an extensive research program

 that Bortolotti developed in a series of papers that appeared in late 1920s. His aim

 was to generalize Clifford's (and Lobachevsky's) parallelism to general Riemannian
 manifolds other than those of constant Riemannian curvature. A first result in this

 direction, which was limited to the case of three-dimensional Riemannian manifolds,

 was attained already in (Bortolotti 1925) where Bortolotti indicated a generalization

 of the parallel displacement defined by equations (23). The idea was to replace the

 curvature Κ = ^ of the space by the sectional curvature of the 2-plane generated by
 ξ and λ. Further investigations into absolute parallelism were carried out by him in a

 brief memoir (Bortolotti 1927) presented by Levi-Civita to the Reale Istituto Veneto

 in January 1927, where he provided a generalization of a type of absolute parallelism
 in Riemannian manifolds introduced by Cartan and Schouten (1926) in the realm

 of the geometry of Lie groups.30 Over the following years, Bortolotti developed a

 peculiar approach to the theory of connections that took great profit of Giuseppe
 Vitali's researches on absolute differential calculus. Before his premature death in

 1942, Bortolotti became the undisputed Italian leader in the field of connection theory.
 As Fabio Conforto put it, Bortolotti's "main scientific achievements are concerned

 with the study of spaces with connection, a theory which he brought back to Italy

 where it was born [undoubtedly, here Conforto referred to Levi-Civita's 1917 paper];

 Bortolotti enriched it with new concepts and results by constantly striving to grasp the

 geometrical significance of the analytical developments beyond the intricacy of the
 formalism."

 6 Conclusions

 Starting from the early 1920s, Clifford's parallelism, which until then had represented
 an isolated phenomenon, could finally be understood within the theoretical framework

 of the dawning theory of connections. In this respect, the contribution of Bortolotti

 constituted one of the first reflections of this general tendency. Almost at the same

 time, in a joint work (Cartan and Schouten 1926) with Jan Arnoldus Schouten, Cartan

 29 An equivalent form for Clifford's displacement which does not require any recourse to Weierstrass'
 coordinates was provided by Bortolotti (1930, p. 243).

 30 See Cartan and Schouten (1926).

 ·£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 386 A. Cogliati

 succeeded in providing group-theoretical grounds for the explanation of this phenom

 enon.31 By using techniques and notions stemming from his theory of generalized

 (non-holonomic) spaces, he was able to interpret Clifford's parallelism as particular

 case of a property shared by all Lie groups. More explicitly, Cartan and Schouten's

 main achievement consisted in the discovery of three different types of connections

 with which a given Lie group manifold can be endowed. Two of them define an absolute

 parallelism (precisely as Clifford's parallelism is), and the other, insofar as far as the

 Lie group can be provided with a Riemannian structure, defines a parallelism of Levi

 Civita's type. As a consequence of the fact that the elliptic 3-space can be regarded as

 a simple compact Lie group, a higher standpoint was thus obtained in virtue of which a

 clear comprehension of the relation between Levi-Civita's and Clifford's parallelisms

 was finally attained.

 Cartan and Schouten (1926) marked somehow the beginning of a new and most

 interesting story which eventually led Cartan (and Schouten) to build up a new disci

 pline of research, the geometry of Lie groups. According to this innovative standpoint,

 which implied at the same time major technical innovation with respect to classical

 differential geometry, Lie groups came to be regarded as proper abstract manifolds

 deserving of geometrical investigation in their own respect.

 Appendix

 This section provides some elementary material concerning projective geometry and

 the theory of polarity with respect to a given quadric. Since the discussion of sections

 (2) and (3) heavily relies upon these notions, it appears useful to gather some relevant

 information in the present appendix.32

 A second-order surface, i.e., a quadric, is the locus of points (either complex or

 real) in the three-dimensional projective space that satisfies a second-order equation;

 by employing homogeneous coordinates (xo, x\,X2, *3), the equation of a quadric Q
 can be written as follows:

 fix) = Σ aVx'xj ~ °> (25)

 3

 1,7=0

 where a,·; are symmetrical constant coefficients. Consider now two distinct points of
 the space Ρ = (χ,·), Ρ' = (y;); let Ρ Ρ' be the straight line connecting them consisting
 of the points of type (kx, + yi),i = 0,..., 3. The intersections of PP' with Q are

 easily obtained by replacing in (25) x,· with kxi +y,·, i = 0,..., 3. By doing so and

 by setting fty = Eij=oa'jx'yj>one obtains:

 k ■ fix) + 2k · f\ +/(y) = 0. (26)

 ϋ

 31 We will deal with the collaboration between Cartan and Schouten upon this topic in a forthcoming paper.

 32 For a more extensive treatment, see, e.g., Bianchi (1904), Castelnuovo (1904), and Seidenberg (1962)

 upon which this appendix relies.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 387

 Now, by denoting by k\, ki the solutions of (26), the two intersections Q, Q' are given

 by g = (Xi + k\yi) and Q' = (jc,· + kzyt). In the case in which /(*) = 0 (i.e., when
 k\, ki are equal in modulus but with opposite sign), the cross-ratio of the four point
 Ρ, P', Q, Q! is harmonic and the points Ρ, P' are said to be conjugate with respect

 to the quadric. The set of points Qco, χ ι, xi, *3) which are conjugate to a fixed point

 (xq, x\,x'v x'3) is given by the equation

 («00*0 Η 1" Û03*3)*0 + b (α30χ'ο H + «33*3)*3 = 0.

 This set of points represents a plane which is called the polar plane with respect to

 the point (Xq, *ί . *2- *3) (Ae pole of the plane). In the case of an irreducible quadric;

 i.e., when the determinant of the matrix [a,7], i, j = 0,..., 3 is not equal to zero,
 the quadric determines a bijective correspondence a between points and planes; to

 the point (yo, yi, y2, W). there corresponds the plane Σ*=ο &xk — °> where Çk =

 Σΐ=οαΜί· Furthermore, if a point Ρ runs along a straight line P'P" so that its
 coordinates can be written as χ; = χ ·+£*·',33 then the coordinates of the corresponding

 polar plane are given by

 &=!/ + *?/', i = 0.....3. (27)

 Any two planes of the form (27) intersect in a straight line that is called the polar line

 with respect to the line P'P". In other terms, while the pole Ρ runs along a straight

 line r, the corresponding polar planes rotate around a fixed axis which coincides with

 the polar line r' = a(r). As a consequence of this, any point of a given straight line r

 is conjugate to any point lying on the polar line (with respect to r) r'.

 It seems helpful to recall some basic properties of ruled quadric. To this end, we

 appeal to the synthetic definition of quadric in terms of reguli of straight lines. By a

 regulus, one means the set of lines meeting three mutually skew lines of the projective

 space. In addition to the analytical definition given above, a quadric surface can be
 defined as the set of points (either real or complex) lying on the lines of a regulus

 (such regulus will be said to be the first regulus of the quadric or the first system of

 generators of the quadric). It can be proved that any two lines of a regulus are mutually

 skew. Furthermore, if a line meets three lines of the first regulus of the quadric then

 it meets all the lines of the regulus. As a consequence of this, the lines that meet all

 the lines of the first regulus form a new regulus that is called the second regulus of

 the quadric (or alternatively, the second system of generators of the quadric). In a

 completely symmetrical way, the first regulus consists of all the lines that meet all the

 lines of the second regulus. Finally, through any point of the quadric, there are exactly

 two lines belonging to distinct reguli.

 In the case of the imaginary quadric surface which is relevant in the context of the

 Cayley-Klein projective model of elliptic space,

 Q = {(*o>*i,*2,*3) e ^(C) I x% + x\ + x\ + x\ = oj,

 33

 It is intended that (x{) and (xj') are homogeneous coordinates of the points Ρ', P", respectively.

 £) Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 388 A. Cogliati

 through every (imaginary) point we have two imaginary lines belonging to distinct
 reguli whose analytic expression is provided by formulae (1) and (2).

 Let us consider the so-called elliptic polarity a induced by the absolute quadric Q

 in the real projective space P3(R). It can be defined by the following equivalence:

 (x0, *1, X2, X3) e a((y0, yi>y2, B))

 xoyo+ *iyi +X2yi + X7,y?, =0, x,ye

 Accordingly, we have an induced polarity involving straight lines which is denoted

 by a, as well. In light of section (1), Clifford's original definition of parallels can be

 reformulated in the following way: Two distinct straight lines a, bin P3(R) are said to

 be Clifford's parallels if the four straight lines a, b, a(a), a(b) belong to one regulus
 otir(K).34

 This definition does not require any recourse to a complex extension of the real

 projective space, which is instead required if one wants to define Clifford's parallels

 in terms of the generators of the absolute quadric. In order to do so, one has to embed

 the real projective space into its complex extension P3(C). A point χ € P3(C) is said
 to be real if χ = (kxo, kx\, kx2, kx3) for xo, x\, X2, X3 e R and k e C. Points in

 P3(C), which are not real, are said to be imaginary. Accordingly, a straight line I is

 said to be real if there exist two real points x, y such that I consists of all points of

 type λχ + μγ for λ, μ e C.35 As a consequence of this, a straight line in P3(C) is

 real if / = I, where the bar denotes complex conjugation.36 It is easy to see that a real

 line in P3 (C) is completely determined by one imaginary point. In this context, it is

 important to note that a line in P3(R) was usually identified (e.g., by Klein) with its
 complex extension in P3(C).

 References

 Co.

 Ball, R.S. 1876. The theory of screws: A study in the dynamics of a rigid body. Dublin: Hodges, Foster and

 Ball, R.S. 1881. Certain problems in the dynamics of a rigid system moving in elliptic space. Transactions

 of the Royal Irish Academy 28: 159-184.

 Beltrami, E. 1865. Risoluzione del problema: "riportare i punti di una superficie sopra un piano in modo

 che le linee geodetiche vengano rappresentate da linee rette". Annali di Matematica pura ed applicata
 7:185-204. Also in (Beltrami Opere Matematiche, 1,262-280).

 Beltrami, E. 1868. Saggio di interpretazione della geometria non-euclidea. Giornale di Matematiche 6:

 284-312. Also in (Beltrami Opere Matematiche, 1,374-405).

 Beltrami, E. 1868-1869. Teoria fondamentale degli spazi a curvatura costante, Annali di Matematica pura

 ed applicata, 2: 232-255. Also in (Beltrami Opere Matematiche, 1,406-429).

 Beltrami, E. 1902-1920. Opere Matematiche, 4 Volumes, Hoepli, Milano.
 Betten, D., and R. Riesinger. 2012. Clifford parallelism: Old and new definitions, and their use. Journal of

 Geometry 103: 31-73.

 34 This is the formalization of Clifford's original definition provided in Betten and Riesinger (2012, pp.
 32-33).

 35 In this way, a line in IP3 (R) can be extended to a real line in P3 (C).

 36 It should be noticed that a real line I actually contains imaginary points. However, if ζ e / then also
 ζ el.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Variations on a theme: Clifford's parallelism in elliptic ... 389

 Bianchi, L. 1895. Sulle superficie a curvatura nulla negli spazi di curvatura costante. Atti dell'Accademia

 delle Scienze di Torino 30: 475-487. Also in (Bianchi Opere, VIII, 256-265).

 Bianchi, L. 1896. Sulle superficie a curvatura nulla in geoemtria ellittica. Annali di Matematica Pura ed

 Applicata 25(2): 93-129. Also in (Bianchi Opere, VIII, 266-301).
 Bianchi, L. 1902. Lezioni di Geometria Differenziale, vol. 1. Pisa: Spoerri.
 Bianchi, L. 1904. Lezioni di Geometria Analitica. Pisa: Spoerri.
 Bianchi, L. 1922. Sul parallelismo vincolato di Levi-Civita nella metrica degli spazi curvi. Rendiconti délia

 Accademia delle Scienze di Napoli 28: 150-171. Also in (Bianchi Opere, X, 43-64).

 Bianchi, L. 1952-1959. Opere, vol: 11. Roma: Edizioni Cremonese.
 Bompiani, E. 1942. Enea Bortolotti. Rendiconti di Matematica e delle sue Applicazioni 3: 241-281.
 Bonola, R. 1912. Non-euclidean geometry. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company.

 Bortolotti, E. 1924-1925. (Enea), Parallelismo assoluto e vincolato negli S3 a curvatura costante ed esten

 sione aile V3 qualunque, Atti del Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, 84: 821-858.

 Bortolotti, E. 1927. Parallelism! assoluti nelle V„ riemanniane. Atti del Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze,

 Lettere edArti 84: 455-465.

 Society 5: 242-248.

 Bortolotti, E. 1930. On parallelisms and teleparallelisms in curved space. Journal of London Mathematical

 Bortolotti, E. 1935. Lezioni di Geoemtria Superiore. Firenze: Poligrafica Universitaria.

 Buchheim, A. 1883. On the theory of screws in elliptic space. Proceedings of the London Mathematical

 Buchheim, A. 1884. On the theory of screws in elliptic space (supplementary note). Proceedings of the

 Society 15: 83-98. (Read January 1884).

 London Mathematical Society 16: 15-27.

 Buchheim, A. 1885. A memoir on biquaternions. American Journal of Mathematics 7: 293-326.

 Cartan, E., and J.A. Schouten. 1926. On the geometry of the group-manifold of simple and semi-simple

 groups. Proceedings of the Royal Academy Amsterdam 29: 803-815. Also in (Cartan OEuvres, Part
 1, vol. II; 573-585).

 Cartan, É. 1924. Les récentes généralisations de la notion d'espace. Bulletin des Sciences Mathématiques

 48: 294-320. Also in (Cartan OEuvres, Part 3, vol. I; 863-889).

 Cartan, É. 1952-1955. Œuvres Complètes. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
 Castelnuovo, G. 1904. Lezioni di Geometria Analitica e Proiettiva, Roma-Milano.

 Cayley, A. 1859. A sixth memoir upon quantics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London

 149: 61-90. Also in (Cayley Mathematical Papers, II, 561-592).

 Cayley, A. 1889-1897. Collected mathematical papers, 13 Volumes, Cambridge.

 Clifford, W.K. 1873. Preliminary sketch of biquaternions. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society,

 4, 64-65,381-395. Also in (Clifford Mathematical Papers, 181-200).

 Clifford, W.K. 1882. Mathematical papers. London: MacMillan.
 Conforto, F. 1948. Enea Bortolotti. Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani, II Appendice. Rome: Treccani.
 Coxeter,H.S.M. 1998. Non-euclidean geometry, 6th ed. Washington D.C.: The Mathemamatical Association

 of America.

 Fubini, G. 1900. IIparallelismo di Clifford negli spazi ellittici. Tipografia Successori, Pisa: Tesi di Laurea.
 Giering, O. 1982. Vorlesungen tiber hohere Geometrie. Braunschweig-Wiesbaden: Vieweg.

 Klein, F. 1871. Notiz, betreffend den Zusammenhang der Liniengeometrie mit der Mechanik starrer Kôrper.

 Math. Ann. 4:403-415. Also in (Klein Ges. Math. Abh., I, 226-240).

 Klein, F. 1871. Ober die sogennante Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie. Math. Ann. 4: 573-625. Also in (Klein

 Klein, F. 1890. Zur Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie. Math. Ann. 37:544-572. Also in (Klein Ges. Math. Abh.,

 Ges. Math. Abh., I, 254-305).

 1,353-383).

 Klein, F. 1921-1923. Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, 3 volumes. Berlin: Springer.
 Klein, F. 1928. Vorlesungen iiber nicht-Euklidische Geometrie, Berlin.

 Levi-Civita, T. 1917. Nozione di parallelismo in una varietà qualunque e conseguente specificazione geo
 metrica della curvatura Riemanniana. Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo 42: 173-205.

 Levi-Civita, T. 1954-1973. Opere Matematiche, 6 Volumes, Zanichelli, Bologna.

 Pliicker, J. 1866. Fundamental views regarding mechanics. Philosophical Transactions of the London Royal

 Also in (Levi-Civita, IV, 1-39).

 Society 156: 361-380.

 Reich, K. 1992. Levi-CivitascheParallelverschiebung, affiner Zusammenhang, Ûbertragungsprinzip, 1916—

 1917-1922/1923. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 44: 77-105.

 Spring* ;er

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 390 A. Cogliati

 Rowe, D.E. 1989. The early geometrical works of Sophus Lie and Felix Klein. In The history of modern

 mathematics /, eds. D.E. Rowe and J. McCleary, 210-273. New York.

 Seidenberg, A. 1962. Lectures in projective geometry. New York: Dover.
 Study, E. 1891. Von den Bewegungen und Umlegungen, I und II Abhandlung. Math. Ann. 39: 441-566.

 Study, E. 1913. Grundlagen und Ziele der analytischen Kinematik. Sitzber. d. Bert. math. Ges. 13: 36-60.

 Vaney, F. 1929. Le parallélisme absolu dans les espaces elliptiques réels à 3 et à 7 dimensions et le principe

 de trialitédans l'espace elliptique à 7dimensions. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Zacharias, M. 1913. Elementargeometrie und elementare nichteuklidische Geometrie in synthetischer

 Behandlung, Enzyklopddie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Einschlufi ihrer Anwendungen,
 Bd. 3-1-2, 862-1162. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner Verlag.

 Ziegler, R. 1985. Die Geschichte der geometrischen Mechanik im 19. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart: Steiner.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Mon, 18 May 2020 09:15:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

