 

 

 

 

Whittaker's analytical dynamics: a biography
Author(s): S. C. Coutinho
Source: Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 68, No. 3 (May 2014), pp. 355-407
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569606
Accessed: 19-05-2020 09:59 UTC

 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24569606?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Archive for
History of Exact Sciences

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Arch. Hist. Exact Sei. (2014) 68:355-407
 DOI 10.1007/s00407-013-0133-1

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics: a biography

 S. C. Coutinho

 Received: 12 February 2013 / Published online: 7 November 2013

 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

 Abstract Originally published in 1904, Whittaker's A Treatise on the Analytical
 Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies soon became a classic of the subject and

 has remained in print for most of these 108 years. In this paper, we follow the book as

 it develops from a report that Whittaker wrote for the British Society for the Advance

 ment of Science to its influence on Dirac's version of quantum mechanics in the 1920s

 and beyond.

 Contents

 1 Introduction 356

 2 The author and his book 357

 2.1 The author 357

 2.2 The report 359
 2.3 The book 360

 S. C. Coutinho (El)

 e-mail: collier@dcc.ufrj.br

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Communicated by: Jeremy Gray.

 This paper was made possible by the Internet Archive, the Gallica site of the Bibliothèque nationale de

 France, Project Euclid, the American Mathematical Society and the Jahrbuch Database of the European

 Mathematical Society, where many of the books and papers we mention can be downloaded at no cost.

 I would like to thank Antonio Roberto da Silva for his help with the translations from the German, Jeremy

 Gray for his many suggestions and R. Abraham, H. Bursztyn, J. Koiler, Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach,

 S. Sternberg and A. Weinstein for their help in clarifying the history of the geometric approach to

 mechanics. The work on this paper was partially supported by a grant from the Brazilian National
 Research Council (CNPq).

 Departamento de Ciência da Computaçâo, Instituto de Matemâtica, Universidade Federal do Rio de
 Janeiro, P. O. Box 68530, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21945-970, Brazil

 356 S. C. Coutinho

 3 Contents 361

 3.1 The principles of dynamics 361
 3.2 Hamiltonian systems and contact transformations 366
 3.3 Celestial mechanics 377

 4 Reception 380
 4.1 An American point of view: E. B. Wilson 380
 4.2 A British point of view: G. H. Bryan 383
 4.3 The "Fictitious Problem" polemic 385
 4.4 Other reviews 388

 5 Discussion 391

 5.1 Style 392
 5.2 Impact 396
 5.3 Conclusion 402

 1 Introduction

 Mathematics as a whole changed quite dramatically during the twentieth century, with

 the appearance of new areas, like topology, and the complete refashioning of already

 established ones, like algebra. Another area that underwent considerable changes in

 this period was classical mechanics. Once a flourishing subject, where a remarkable

 cross-breeding of mathematics and physics took place, classical mechanics was con

 sidered by many to have reached a dead end by the first decades of the twentieth century,

 except for eventual applications to other fields. By the 1950s, some physicists consid

 ered classical mechanics as useful only as "the springboard for the various branches of

 modern physics" and because it afforded "the student an opportunity to master many

 of the techniques necessary for quantum mechanics" (Goldstein 1950, p. ix).

 At about the time that physicists were expressing such thoughts, the tide was already

 turning in favour of classical mechanics. This was spearheaded by the needs of the

 age of space exploration and by new advances on the theoretical side. Chief among
 these were Kolmogorov's results concerning Poincaré's "Problème Général de la
 Dynamique" (Poincaré 1899, vol. 1, chapter 1, §13, p. 32). Presented at the 1954
 International Congress of Mathematicians, these results would give rise to what is
 now called KAM theory; see Arnold (1989, Appendix 8, p. 405) or Arnold et al.
 (1997, Chapter 5, §3, p. 182). This new phase in the history of classical mechan
 ics was characterized by a growing use of geometrical methods, especially those of

 symplectic geometry. Although the word symplectic was only coined by H. Weyl

 in 1939 Weyl (1939), the subject has its roots in the work of Lagrange and Poisson

 Marie (2009), with important contributions by G. Darboux and S. Lie. The present

 approach, in terms of differential forms, goes back to Lie's theory of contact trans

 formations (Berührungstransformation) Geiges (2001); Hawkins (1991). Given the

 cradle in which it was born, it is not surprising that symplectic geometry offers the

 perfect language in which to express classical mechanics.

 So dramatic have been the changes that mechanics has undergone in the twentieth

 century that the style and even the contents of most books on dynamics written before

 the 1930s look hopelessly dated to present-day readers. But there are exceptions.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 357

 A remarkable one is Whittaker's Analytical Dynamics or, to give it its full title A

 treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies, with an introduction

 to the problem of three bodies. Published originally in 1904, the book went through

 four editions and remains in print to this day. Moreover, it is not being used merely

 as a historical document. Of the 114 papers and books listed in MathSciNet between

 2000 and 2012 that cite Analytical Dynamics as one of their references, only three

 are of a historical nature. Even a cursory look at the table of contents of Analytical

 Dynamics suggests why it is still useful: although couched in an older language,

 one finds there most of the topics dealt with in modern tracts, including several that

 we commonly associate with the symplectic approach that became prevalent since
 the 1960s.

 The main question we try to answer in this paper is what caused this book's remark

 able longevity. We begin with some biographical information on Whittaker's life, with

 emphasis on those aspects of it that seem most relevant to the history of the book. This

 is followed by a sketch of the chronological history of the book itself, its editions

 and translations. Next, we discuss the book's content, with emphasis on the chap
 ters that deal with Hamiltonian dynamics. There are two reasons for this choice. The

 first is that they present, in incipient form, the symplectic approach that we now use;

 the second is that it provided the concepts from which Dirac developed his version

 of quantum mechanics in 1925. Any book that has seen so many editions and that

 has been in print for so long has also been often reviewed. In §4, we analyze some

 of these reviews and the way they present Analytical Dynamics in the light of the
 changes that mechanics underwent between 1904 and the 1990s. In the final section,

 we discuss the book's style and its impact, and attempt to answer the question posed
 above.

 2 The author and his book

 We begin with a short biographical note with the aim of calling attention to those
 aspects of Whittaker's life that help to explain both the choice of contents and the

 style of his Analytical Dynamics.

 2.1 The author

 Edmund Taylor Whittaker was born in Southport on the 24 of October 1873. Because

 of his frail health as a child, he was taught by his mother until he was eleven years

 old, when he was sent to study at Manchester Grammar School. As Temple writes in
 (1956, p. 299):

 [Whittaker] was on the classical side, which meant that three-fifths of his time

 was devoted to Latin and Greek: in the lower forms, where the study was purely

 linguistic, he did well: but his lack of interest in poetry and drama caused a

 falling-off when he was promoted to the upper school, and he was glad to escape
 by electing to specialize in mathematics. Only after he had left school did he

 <0 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 358 S. C. Coutinho

 discover the field of Latin and Greek learning that really appealed to him—

 ancient and mediaeval theology, philosophy and science.

 He kept this interest in classical learning throughout his life, and it must have been

 of great help in his many scholarly pursuits. The most clear expression of Whittaker

 the scholar is probably his book A history of the theories of aether and electricity

 Whittaker (1910) first published in 1910. However, his scholarship is also apparent in

 Analytical Dynamics where, as we shall see, he displays an impressive knowledge of

 classical works by Newton, Euler, Lagrange, Laplace and many others.

 Whittaker entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1892, where he

 was a pupil of G. H. Darwin and A. R. Forsyth. For the first two years, he was
 coached by R. R. Webb, whom he left because he disliked the way he crammed
 his students with tripos problems. As an undergraduate, he was more interested in

 applied than in pure mathematics, and in 1894, he was the winner of the Sheepshanks

 exhibition in astronomy. He was bracketed second wrangler (with J. H. Grace) in

 the tripos of 1895 with T. J. I'A. Bromwich as senior wrangler. In 1896, he was

 elected a Fellow of Trinity, and a year later, he was first Smith prizeman on a topic

 of pure mathematics. His students at Cambridge included G. H. Hardy, J. H. Jeans,
 A. S. Eddington, G. I. Taylor, J. E. Littlewood and G. N. Watson, who would col
 laborate with him in the second (1915) edition of Modern Analysis Watson and

 Whittaker (1963). The first edition, published in 1902, had Whittaker as its sole
 author.

 In 1898, the Council of the British Association for the Advancement of Science

 requested that Whittaker write a "report on the planetary theory". His Report on the

 progress of the solution of the problem of three bodies was published in the proceedings

 of the Association's 69th meeting Whittaker (1900) which took place in Dover in 1899.

 This report, which we will analyze in Sect. 2.2, formed the basis of the second part

 (Chapters XIII to XVI) of Analytical Dynamics, whose first edition appeared in 1904.

 Whittaker remained in Cambridge until 1906, when he was appointed Royal

 Astronomer for Ireland and Andrews Professor of Astronomy at the University of

 Dublin, the same posts held by W. R. Hamilton between 1827 and his death in 1865.

 Among his duties were those of giving twelve lectures "open to the public" at every

 session. This "public" consisted basically of students from Trinity College, Univer

 sity College and the Royal College of Science of Ireland. A history of the theories

 of aether and electricity was partly based on some of these lectures. According to
 McCrea (1957, p. 237):

 For what Whittaker regarded as the comparative leisure of his conditions of

 life together with the very fine library facilities of Dublin, particularly of Trinity

 College, permitted him to do the enormous amount of reading required to produce
 the book.

 In 1912, Whittaker left Dublin to take up the post of Professor of Mathematics

 at the University of Edinburgh, where he succeeded George Chrystal. He stayed in

 Edinburgh for the rest of his life and died there in 1956.

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 359

 2.2 The report

 As mentioned above, the second half of Analytical Dynamics derives from a report
 that Whittaker wrote for the British Association. In 1898, "the Council of the British

 Association resolved that 'Mr. E. T. Whittaker be requested to draw up a report on the

 planetary theory'" (McCrea 1957, p. 236). Whittaker's paper, delivered the next year,

 was called Report on the Progress of the Solution of the Problem of Three Bodies. In

 the very first paragraph, he explains that the "above title has been adopted in place of

 that originally chosen, as indicating more definitely the aim of the Report". And he

 goes on to explain that:

 The fundamental problem of dynamical astronomy is that of determining the

 motion in space of any number of particles which attract each other according to

 the Newtonian law. [...] The theory has hitherto been developed chiefly with the

 object of determining the motion of the moon and the planets. While, however,

 the lunar and planetary theories are, both of them, attempts to solve the problem

 of three bodies, yet the results of the two theories are quite different in form; this

 is owing to the fact that the assumptions on which the approximations are based
 are not the same in the two cases.

 He then explains that in the case of two planets "the mass of one body preponderates,

 and the other bodies circle round it," while in the lunar theory, "it is assumed that two

 of the bodies circle around each other, while circling together round a preponderating

 third body". This gives rise to two different solutions in terms of infinite series.

 The report covers "the last thirty years, 1868-1898", a period that "opens with
 the time when the last volume of Delaunay's 'Lunar theory' was newly pub
 lished" and closes with the publication of "the last volume of Poincaré's 'New
 Methods of Celestial Mechanics" (p. 122). The second volume of Delaunay's La
 théorie du mouvement de la lune was published in 1867 and the third volume of
 Poincaré's Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique Céleste appeared in 1899, the
 same year the Report was published. As Whittaker explains at the beginning of the

 Report:

 The work will be distributed under the following seven headings:

 §L- The differential equations of the problem.

 §11.- Certain particular solutions of simple character.

 §111- Memoirs of 1868-1889 on general and particular solutions of the differen

 tial equations, and their expressions by means of infinite series (excluding

 Gyldén's theory).

 §IV- Memoirs of 1868-1889 on the absence of terms of certain classes from the

 infinite series which represent the solution.

 §V.- Gyldén's theory of absolute orbits.

 §VI.- Progress in 1890-98 of the theories of §§III. and IV.

 §VII- The impossibility of certain kinds of integrals.

 Since these headings give a fair description of the contents of each section, we restrict

 our comments to those topics that made their way into the second part of Analytical

 Dynamics. As was to be expected, Whittaker begins §1 explaining that

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 360 S. C. Coutinho

 The motion of three mutually attracting bodies is determined by nine differential

 equations, each of the second order, or, as it is generally expressed, by a system

 of the eighteenth order.

 He then shows that it is possible to reduce the problem to a system of the sixth order

 using a number of elementary first integrals. This is followed by a precise description of

 "several problems of a more special character", such as the problem of three bodies in a

 plane and the restricted problem of three bodies, after which he describes various ways

 in which the equations for these problems can be formulated. The very short §11 deals

 with generalizations of Lagrange's work on bodies that move on a line or that occupy

 the vertices of an equilateral triangle (Lagrange Points). The next section is devoted

 to the "derivation, nature, and properties of the infinite series by means of which the

 problem [of three bodies] can be solved" and includes a sketch of G. W. Hill's work.

 Hill's paper of 1877 Hill (1886) is described by Whittaker as marking "the beginning

 of a new era in Dynamical Astronomy" (p. 130). The section also includes a discussion

 of the problem of small divisors (p. 134). Section IV reports on miscellaneous results
 related to the solutions mentioned in its title, while section V discusses the method

 introduced by H. Gyldén (1841-1896) to calculate the motions of planets. Whittaker

 begins section VI stating that "a new impetus was given to Dynamical Astronomy

 in 1890 by the publication of a memoir of Poincaré" (p. 144). Not surprisingly, this

 section, which discusses the results obtained by Poincaré (1890) and further polished

 in Poincaré (1899), is the longest of the whole Report. Among the topics mentioned

 by Whittaker are the definition of integral invariant, the existence of periodic and

 asymptotic solutions and the question of the stability of the solar system. However,

 as Barrow-Green points out (Barrow-Green 1997, p. 147), he does not mention some
 of the ideas that we now regard as most characteristic of Poincaré's work, such as the

 Poincaré map, and he says very little about Poincaré's doubly asymptotic solutions, the

 ones that display the behaviour that has become known as chaotic. The final section

 (VII) is less than three pages long and is mostly concerned with Bruns's theorem on

 the algebraic integrals of the three body problem, which we discuss in more detail in
 Sect. 3.3.

 2.3 The book

 The publication history of the book, whose full title is A treatise on the analytical

 dynamics of particles and rigid bodies; with an introduction to the problem of three
 bodies, is as follows:

 First edition: Cambridge University Press, 1904, xiii + 414.
 Later editions: second edition, 1917; third edition, 1927; fourth edition, 1937, all

 of them by Cambridge University Press.

 First American printing: Dover Publications, 1944.

 Reprint of the fourth edition: with a foreword by Sir William McCrea, Cambridge

 University Press, 1988.

 German edition: Analytische Dynamik der Punkte und starren Körper. Mit e. Einf

 i.d. Dreikörperproblem u. mitzahlr. Übungsauf g, Grundlehren der mathematischen

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 361

 Wissenschaften in Einzeldarstellungen, based on the second edition, Springer,
 Berlin, 1924.

 Russian edition: Analiticheskaya dinamika, [B] Izhevsk: Nauchno-Izdatel'skij

 Tsentr "Regulyarnaya i Khaoticheskaya Dinamika" (1999).

 The first edition consisted of sixteen chapters, subdivided into 188 consecutively

 numbered sections. Although Whittaker added many new sections to the second and

 third editions, he never altered the chapter structure. Even the chapter titles were

 kept, with two exceptions. Chapter IX, which was originally called The principles of

 Hamilton and Gauss, became The principles of least action and least curvature in the

 second edition, and Chapter XVI had its original title Integration by trigonometric

 series shortened to Integration by series in the third edition. Both changes were kept
 in later editions.

 The book can be naturally divided into two parts. Part I, which consists of the

 first twelve chapters, is an exposition of the basic principles of dynamics. The second

 part (Chapters XIII to XVI) draws heavily on the report Whittaker had written for

 the British Association. While the first part hardly changed from the second edition

 on, the second part kept growing until the third edition. The fourth and final edition

 differs from the third only in the correction of some errors and the addition of a few
 references.

 3 Contents

 A list of the chapters that make up the book, with their corresponding titles, is given in

 Table 1. Throughout this section, all page numbers refer to the first edition of Analytical

 Dynamics unless stated otherwise.

 3.1 The principles of dynamics

 The purpose of part I is to give a state-of-the-art introduction to the principles of

 dynamics as they stood in the first years of the twentieth century. As we will see, this

 was considered as one of the book's strong points by the reviewers of the first edition.

 The first chapter deals basically with the mathematical formalism required for

 describing rigid motions, namely rotations (§§1 to 12) and translations. The latter

 are introduced in terms of vectors (§13). More precisely, a vector quantity is defined

 to be "any one of the equal and parallel lines of space which have a given length"

 and which can be added together. Whittaker then proceeds to explain that not only

 displacements but also velocities and accelerations are vector quantities (§ 14). Since

 Whittaker defines vectors as what we would call equivalent classes of directed line

 segments under parallelism, his vectors do not all have the same origin, as vectors are

 now meant to have. This causes a problem when it comes to explaining the vectorial

 character of angular velocity for, as he says in § 15, "an angular velocity about one line

 is not equivalent to an angular velocity of the same magnitude about a parallel line".

 He concludes that angular velocity "must therefore be regarded as a vector which is

 localised along a definite line". It should be noted that although he defines vectors,

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 362 S. C. Coutinho

 Table 1 The chapter heads of
 Analytical Dynamics

 Chapter

 Title

 I

 II

 III

 IV

 V

 VI

 VII

 VIII

 IX

 X

 XI

 XII

 XIII

 XIV

 XV

 XVI

 Kinematical preliminaries

 The equations of motion

 Principles available for the integration

 The soluble problems of particle dynamics

 The dynamical specification of bodies

 The soluble problems of rigid dynamics

 Theory of vibrations

 Nonholonomic systems, dissipative systems

 The principles of Hamilton and Gauss (1st edition)

 The principles of least action and least curvature

 (2nd edition)

 Hamiltonian systems and their integral invariants

 The transformation theory of dynamics

 Properties of the integrals of dynamical systems

 The reduction of the problem of three bodies

 The theorems of Bruns and Poincare

 The general theory of orbits

 Integration by trigonometric series

 Integration by series (3rd edition)

 Whittaker never uses the concept systematically, in the way that has become standard
 since the 1930s, so that his equations are always expressed in terms of coordinates.

 We will discuss Whittaker's use of vectors in Analytical Dynamics in Sect. 5.1.

 With Chapter II, it becomes clear that this is by no means an elementary introduction

 to mechanics. Although the chapter begins with a rather leisurely discussion of the

 meaning of such concepts as rest, motion, frame of reference (§19), mass (§20) and
 force (§21), it soon picks up momentum so that by §26 we are introduced to the

 equations of motion in Lagrangian form. Other concepts discussed in this chapter

 include work (§22), rigid body (§23), holonomic and non-holonomic systems (§25),

 kinetic energy (§26), conservative forces (§27) and impulsive motions (§35).

 There is very little in Chapter II about the integration of the equations of motion. The

 closest we get to it is Whittaker's explanation in §32 that, in the absence of singularities,

 power series provide solutions that "will give any information which may be required

 about the initial character of the motion". However, the topic is exhaustively studied in

 Chapter III, where after stating (§37) that a problem is soluble by quadrature when it

 "can be completely solved in terms of the known elementary functions or the indefinite

 integrals of such functions", he explains (p. 53) that

 The problems of dynamics are not in general soluble by quadratures; and in those

 cases in which a solution by quadratures can be effected, there must always be

 some special reason for it,—in fact, the kinetic potential of the problem must

 have some special character. The object of the present chapter is to discuss

 those peculiarities of the kinetic potential which are most frequently found in

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 363

 problems soluble by quadratures, and which in fact are the ultimate explanation

 of the solubility.

 Topics discussed in this chapter include systems with ignorable coordinates (§§38^10),

 conservation of energy and its use in reducing the number of degrees of freedom of a

 system (§§41-42) and the method of separation of variables (§43). It is only in Chapter

 IV that Whittaker gives examples of equations for concrete dynamical systems, and

 then he proceeds to integrate them using the methods of Chapter III—among these, the

 pendulum (§44), a particle free to move in a smooth tube whose motion is constrained

 in some way (§45), central forces (§§46-50 and §53) and motion on a surface (§§54

 55). Not surprisingly, this is the first chapter where he uses elliptic functions (in §§48

 and 54). Note that up to this point only systems of point masses have been considered.

 Chapter V prepares the ground for the study of the dynamics of rigid bodies by

 introducing "a number of the constants which can be assigned to a rigid body, and

 which depend on its constitution" (§57), among them the moment of inertia (§§57—
 61) and the angular momentum (§62). The eleven articles of Chapter VI are con
 cerned with the solution of problems of the dynamics of rigid bodies. These range

 from exercises like describing the "motion of a rod on which an insect is crawling"

 (§65) to the motion of a top (§§71-74). As usual, Whittaker is not shy at introducing

 special functions whenever they are required. Thus, Weierstrass's ^-function, Riem

 man's Ç-function and the Jacobi elliptic functions sn and cn are all used to solve

 various problems concerned with the "motion of a body about a fixed point under
 no forces" (§69). However, some functions were too exotic even for Whittaker. In

 his study of Kovalevskaya's top (he calls her Mme S. von Kowalevski) in §74, he

 derives the equations but stops short of solving them with the help of hyperelliptic
 functions.

 Chapter VII is concerned with another standard theme of classical dynamics, the

 theory of vibrations. Whittaker presents the approach that has become standard; see,

 for example Arnold ( 1989, Ch. 5) and Landau and Lifschitz ( 1976, Ch. V). He begins
 explaining that only small oscillations will be considered, which are those whose

 "divergence from the equilibrium-configuration will never become very marked"

 (§76). This hypothesis implies that both the kinetic and the potential energies of the
 system are quadratic forms. Assuming also that no coordinates have been ignored,

 Whittaker shows that these two quadratic forms can be simultaneously diagonalized

 using orthogonal transformations. The examples given in §85 include "vibrations about

 steady circular motion of a particle moving under gravity on a surface of revolution

 whose axis is vertical" as well as a top on a perfectly rough plane and a sleeping top.

 As we will see in Sect. 4.3, Whittaker's use of the expression "perfectly rough plane"

 caused an interesting exchange of letters in the pages of Nature a year after the book

 was published.

 While the systems considered in previous chapters have been holonomic and con

 servative, those discussed in Chapter VIII are either non-holonomic or dissipative.

 Holonomic systems had already been defined in §25, where it is said that they are

 "characterised by the fact that the number of degrees of freedom is equal to the num

 ber of independent coordinates required to specify the configuration of the system". In

 §§88-90, the machinery developed in the previous chapters is used to study a number

 •ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 364 S. C. Coutinho

 of non-holonomic systems. A system described in §90 illustrates very nicely G. H.

 Bryan's comment in his review of the first edition (Bryan 1905, p. 603) that some of

 the examples in Analytical Dynamics contain "the substance of minor papers that have

 been published abroad":

 A heavy homogeneous hemisphere is resting in equilibrium on a perfectly rough

 plane with its spherical surface downwards. A second heavy homogeneous hemi

 sphere is resting in the same way on the perfectly rough plane face of the first,

 the point of contact being in the centre of the face. The equilibrium being slightly

 disturbed, it is required to find the vibration of the system.

 In a footnote (p. 218), this problem is attributed to "Madame Kerkhoven-Wythoff".

 This is Geertruida Kerkhoven (neé Wythoff), a Dutch mathematician who published

 six papers between 1893 and 1902, several of which on analytical mechanics; see

 Creese and Creese (2004, p. 111). The study of dissipative systems begins in §91 with

 the discussion of frictional forces and includes articles on resisting forces that depend

 on the velocity (§§92 and 93), vibrations of dissipative systems (§94) and impact (§§95
 to 97).

 Having applied the techniques introduced in the first three chapters to the analysis

 of a large number of systems, Whittaker now proceeds to develop more advanced

 topics beginning, in Chapter IX, with action principles. This chapter opens with the

 very short §98, whose aim is to convey a single message: it is useful to consider

 «-coordinates as defining a point in «-space, because that (p. 241) "makes it natural

 to use geometric terms such as 'intersection', 'adjacency', etc when speaking of the

 relations of different states or types of motion of the system". Although a present
 day reader will automatically interpret the many «-tuples of the form (q\,..., qn)
 that have appeared in previous articles as points or vectors in an «-dimensional
 space, Whittaker waits until he gets to the more advanced chapters to make this
 fact explicit. Up to this point such coordinates were considered as degrees of free

 dom, which is essentially the rôle they play in Lagrange's Mécanique Analytique

 (Lagrange 1889, vol. 2, Seconde Partie, Section Septième, p. 2); see also Kline (1990,
 p. 589).

 The next two articles introduce the principles of least action, for conservative holo

 nomic systems that are now usually named after Hamilton (§99) and Maupertius

 (§101). In the book, the appellation principle of least action is reserved for the sec

 ond of these principles; the other one is simply called Hamilton's principle. However,

 unlike present-day accounts, such as those in Arnold ( 1989, § 13A, p. 59) or Landau and

 Lifschitz (1976, §2, p. 2), these principles are not taken as starting points, from which

 the whole of dynamics can be derived. Hamilton's Principle, for instance, is shown

 to follow from Lagrange's equation of motion, which in §26 Whittaker had derived

 directly from Newton's Second Law. More surprisingly still, Whittaker never men

 tions the calculus of variations in this chapter; indeed, in the first edition the expression

 occurs only in § 110 (see below). The reason is probably that Whittaker's approach is

 essentially geometrical. This becomes clear in §103 where, after extending the two

 principles of least action to non-conservative systems (§101) and non-holonomic sys

 tems (§102), he attempts to answer the question: "are the stationary integrals [that

 appear in these principles] actual minima?". His discussion is based, down to the very

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 365

 notation he uses, on the paper of Cul verwell ( 1892), a fellow of Trinity College Dublin.

 Given that the avowed aim of Curvewell's paper is the "discrimination of maxima and

 minima values in the calculus of variation", one is somewhat surprised to read in his

 very first paragraph that although this subject "has possessed considerable interest

 for mathematicians", it is "as yet, at all events, of little if any practical utility". After

 explaining that

 Except for the simplest case [...] the investigation supplied have been so difficult,

 and have required such an amount of analytical skill, as to deter any but the most

 competent mathematicians from considering cases of any degree of complexity,

 he points out that:

 The simplicity of the Jacobian result seemed to indicate that there must be some

 simple way of obtaining it, and, guided by the desire to ascertain the degree

 of continuity required in the variation, the simple, almost geometrical, method

 explained in the following pages presented itself to me.

 The "Jacobian result" is the criterion described by Jacobi (1837), see also Jacobi

 (1838) and Todhunter (1962, pp. 243-253), to determine whether a given curve is a

 maximum of a given integral. For a system with two degrees of freedom, Culverwell's
 version of Jacobi's result can be described as follows. Let

 x"

 V = J fix, y, y)djr

 be "the integral which is to be made a maximum". Culverwell denotes the variation 8y

 by ct<p, where a is a "small constant, the order of magnitude of which determines, gener

 ally speaking, the order of magnitude of <5y, since the function </> is supposed to be finite,

 at least never infinite". Next he defines the coefficients Co, U\, Us, Coo, (A) I, Ci j using

 the Taylor expansion

 f(x,y + a(/),y + a<p) = f(x,y,y) + a(Uo<p + U\<p)

 1

 +-a2(Uoo<t>2 + Uo\4><j> + U\\<i>2)

 + terms involving a3 and higher powers (3.1)

 At the end of § 1 of Part I of his paper, Culverwell defines conjugate points:

 When it is possible to draw between two points P and Q two consecutive sta

 tionary curves having at P and Q the same values for y and its [...] first fluxion,

 the two points may be called conjugate.

 The key result is his Proposition V (Culverwell 1892, p. 247):

 When the limits are fixed, and when L/j jt/jc is negative throughout the integration,

 the stationary value of C is a maximum, provided that x" is not beyond the point

 "conjugate" to x'.

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 In § 103 of Analytical Dynamics, Whittaker essentially repeats Curvewell's proof (with

 maximum replaced by minimum) of this result in the case that

 366 S. C. Coutinho

 U = J (auq\2 + 2a 12*71 <72 + a22<72 2)dt,

 where q\, q2 are the coordinates of the mechanical system. Taking into account that the

 quadratic form in the integrand defines the kinetic energy of the system and, as such,

 must be positive definite, Whittaker concludes that U\\ is positive, so that "for finite

 ranges the [Maupertius] Action is a minimum, provided the final point is not beyond

 the kinetic focus of the initial point", where kinetic focus is used here as a synonym for

 conjugate point. A modernized version of the Culverwell-Whittaker approach can be

 found in Gray and Taylor (2007), where the "simple illustrative example" that appears

 at the end of § 103 of Analytical Dynamics is quoted in full.

 The three final articles of Chapter IX present the principle of least constraint of

 Gauss and that of least curvature of Hertz. In § 107 Gauss's Principle is shown to be (p.

 253) "the basis of a form in which Appell has proposed to write the general equations

 of dynamics".

 3.2 Hamiltonian systems and contact transformations

 We now turn to Whittaker's presentation of Hamiltonian dynamics, which extends

 from Chapters X to XII and includes the transformation-theory of dynamics (Chapter

 XI), which, as we shall see in Sect. 5.2, greatly influenced Dirac's version of quan
 tum mechanics. The exposition begins in §109 where Whittaker derives Hamilton's

 equations

 dqr 3 H dpr 3 H
 — = —, = (r = 1,2 n) (3.2)
 dt opr dt dqr

 from the Lagrangian formalism by equating coefficients of two differential 1-forms,

 in much the same way as it is still done in modern textbooks such as Arnold (1989,

 Chapter 3, section 15, p. 65) and Landau and Lifschitz (1976, Chapter 7, §40, p. 131).

 To justify the importance of these equations Whittaker proves in §110 a theorem of

 Jacobi according to which "all the differential equations which arise from problems

 in the Calculus of Variations, with one independent variable, can be expressed in

 Hamiltonian form". Most of the remaining articles of Chapter X are concerned, directly

 or indirectly, with integral invariants. Although these invariants are introduced with

 a view to their application to Hamiltonian systems, Whittaker begins his exposition

 with two articles in which he considers a general system of differential equations of

 the first order and the first degree which he regards as "defining the motion of a point

 whose coordinates are (jcj ,..., xn) in space of n dimensions". He continues (p. 262):

 If now we consider a group of such points, which occupy a /»-dimensional region

 £o at the beginning of the motion, they will at any subsequent time t occupy

 another /»-dimensional region Ç. A /»-tuple integral taken over Ç is called an

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 367

 integral-invariant, if it has the same value at all times f, the number p is called

 the order of the integral-invariant.

 This is illustrated by the best known example of such an invariant, the volume of an

 incompressible fluid. An article (§112) on variational equations is followed (§113) by

 a discussion of the relation between integral invariants of order one (those defined by

 the integration of 1-forms) and the existence of a first integral for the given system of
 differential equations. In §114, Whittaker considers

 Integrals which have the invariantive property only when the domain over which

 the integration is taken is a closed manifold (using the language of «-dimensional

 geometry); these are called relative integral-invariants.

 He then shows how Stokes's theorem can be used to construct an (absolute) integral

 invariant from a relative one. The application of integral invariants to Hamiltonian

 systems begins in §115, where Whittaker shows that "the quantity /£"=i prdqr
 is a relative integral-invariant of any Hamiltonian system of differential equations".
 Today, this invariant is named after Poincaré, who introduced it and the notion of

 integral invariant, see Barrow-Green (1997, p. 40), Poincaré (1899, vol. 3, Chapter

 XXII) and Arnold (1989, Chapter 9, section 44, p. 238). Having shown that every
 Hamiltonian system has a Poincaré invariant, Whittaker considers, in the next two

 articles, ways by which a system with an integral invariant can be reduced to the

 Hamiltonian form. Indeed, the main result of §116 is that (p. 269):

 If a system of equations

 17= e" 17 = p',r = l'2 ">

 possesses the relative invariant

 (p\8q\ + p2Sq2 + •• • + pnSq„),

 /<

 then the equations have the Hamiltonian form

 dqr dH dpr dH

 j « * j « (^" 1,2,..., «),
 dt opr dt dqr

 which is the converse of the result considered in the previous article. The final articles

 of this chapter are concerned with Jacobi's method of the last multiplier; for a modern

 treatment see Goriely (2001, §2.11, p. 74). The method is described in great generality
 in §§119 and §120 and applied to Hamiltonian systems in §121. In §122 Whittaker

 shows that the last multiplier method can be used to construct "integral-invariants

 whose order is equal to the order of the system"; that is integral invariants obtained

 by integrating a differential n-form when the system of equations has dimension n.

 In the final two articles of this chapter, last multipliers are applied to the reduction of

 second order equations to Lagrangian form.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 368 S. C. Coutinho

 That brings us to Chapter XI, arguably the most celebrated of the whole book. In

 his obituary of Whittaker, published in 1957, McCrea writes, concerning the subject

 of this chapter, that it "seems to have been largely [Whittaker's] own formulation"
 (McCrea 1957, p. 248). I see no reason to believe this statement. A careful look at
 the sources listed in the fourth edition of Analytical Dynamics shows that Whittaker

 merely organized material that he found in the works he cites, mostly papers by
 Poisson, Jacobi and Lie. For example, the presentation of contact transformations in

 terms of differential forms comes from Lie ( 1872) and is very similar to those found

 in expositions of the same material by contemporary mathematicians like Poincaré

 (1910, p. 3) and Liebmann (1914). Indeed, no similar claim is made in the Foreword
 McCrea wrote when the book was reprinted in 1999 Whittaker (1999). Chapter XI

 is also the first one to have changed substantially between the first and the second

 editions. We begin with an exposition of the contents of §125 in the first edition,
 which includes a formal definition of contact transformation.

 Following Lie's approach (Hawkins 1991, p. 419), Whittaker defines contact trans

 formations in terms of differential forms:

 Let (<7i,..., qn, p\,..., pn) be a set of 2n variables, and let (Q\,..., Qn,
 P\, Pn) be 2n other variables which are defined in terms of them by 2n

 equations. If the equations connecting the two sets of variables are such that the
 differential form

 P\dQ\ + PjdQi + h PndQn ~ P\dq\ - P2dq2 Pndqn

 is, when expressed in terms of (q\,... ,qn, pi p„) and their differen
 tials, the perfect differential of a function of (q\,..., qn, p\,..., p„), then
 the change from the set of variables (q\,..., q„, p\,..., pn) to the other set
 (Qi, • • •, ßn, P\. • • •, Pn) is called a contact-transformation.

 A couple of paragraphs later, he rephrases this definition in a less verbose way as
 follows:

 A contact-transformation leaves the differential form £ prdqr invariant, to the

 modulus of an exact differential.

 This surprisingly modern-sounding statement was omitted in later editions. Next,

 Whittaker points out that:

 The result of performing two contact-transformations in succession is to obtain

 a change of variables which is itself a contact-transformation; this is gener

 ally expressed by the statement that contact-transformations have the group

 From our point of view, this definition leaves much to be desired, for no mention is
 made of inverses and, furthermore, the examples show that these transformations do

 not always have the same domain, so composing them may not even be possible. By

 the time Analytical Dynamics was written, the modern concept of group had already
 been defined, for instance, in Jordan's Traité des substituitions ( 1870, p. 22, §27) and

 in Burnside's Groups of finite order ( 1897, § 12, Chapter II, p. 11 ). However, both these

 property.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 369

 books dealt with finite groups while, as we have seen, Whittaker wrote from the point

 of view of Lie's theory of continuous groups of transformations. Now, as pointed out

 by Hawkins ( 1991 ), a group for Lie consisted of a set of invertible transformations of

 an "m-dimensional manifold" whose elements were taken to be /n-tuples". Moreover,
 Hawkins (1991, p. 191):

 It was tacitly assumed that any group G possesses the defining property of

 a permutation group: if 7j and 73 belong to G, then so does the composite

 transformation 7j o 73. [Lie and Klein] took it for granted that, as in the case of

 permutation groups, closure under composition implies closure under inversion.

 Thus, if G had "the group property" of closure under composition, it was assumed
 that T~] is in G whenever T is.

 Article 125 is the first one to have changed substantially between the first and

 the second editions of Analytical Dynamics. As Whittaker explains in the preface to

 the second edition, "the new explanation of the transformation-theory of Dynamics

 in §125 sprang from a desire to do justice to the earliest great work of Hamilton's

 genius", by which he means Hamilton's Theory of Systems of Rays Hamilton (1828)

 and its three supplements Hamilton ( 1830, 1831, 1837). Whittaker begins the new

 §125 pointing out that Hamilton's work is based on the "connexion between dynam

 ics and optics" which arises by comparing Fermat's Principle of least time to the

 Principle of Least Action, "a connexion which is perhaps less obvious in our day

 [1917] than in his, when the corpuscular theory of light was still widely held", (Whit

 taker 1999, p. 288). This "connexion" allows one to conclude that "the trajectories

 of the particles in the dynamical problem are the same as the paths of the rays in

 the optical problem" (Whittaker 1999, p. 289) (italicized in the original). Moreover,

 Whittaker (1999, p. 289)

 The statement in itself is true whatever hypothesis regarding light be adopted:

 therefore it supplies a means of connecting dynamics with the undulatory hypoth

 esis. This idea is the starting-point of Hamilton's theory.

 Now, the undulatory theory allows one to discuss the propagation of light in terms of

 Huygens method of wave-fronts (Whittaker 1999, p. 289):

 Consider a wave-front, or locus of disturbance in an optical medium, as it exists

 at a definite instant t, having the form of a surface a. Each element of this
 wave-front may be regarded as the source of a secondary wave, propagated

 outwards from it; so that at a subsequent instant t'', the disturbance originating

 in any point (x, y, z) of the original wave-front will extend over a surface. To

 obtain the equation of this surface, we observe that the time taken by light to

 travel through the medium from an arbitrary point (x, y, z) to another arbitrary

 point (x', y', z') depends only on the six quantities (jc, y, z, x', y', z') : let it be

 denoted by V(x, y, z, x', y', z'). This function V(x, y, z, x', y', z') was called

 by Hamilton the characteristic function for the medium in question.

 Therefore, at time t', the equation of the wave caused by the disturbance that occurred

 in (x, y, z) at time t has the form

 •Ö Springe:

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 370 S. C. Coutinho

 V(x,y,z,x',y',z') = t-t'. (3.3)

 However, by Huygen's Principle (Whittaker 1999, p. 289),

 The wave-front that represents the whole disturbance at the instant t' is the

 envelope of the secondary waves which arise from the various elements of the

 original wave-front.

 Let £ be the wave front at time f and denote by (/, m, n) the unit vector normal (or

 "direction-cosines of the normal" in Whittaker's terminology) to a at (x, y, z) and by

 (/', m', n') the unit vector normal to £ at (x', y', z'). Assuming that the medium is

 isotropic, we have that the ray is normal to the wave front. Since "E is the envelope

 of the surfaces V corresponding to points of a", it follows that there exist constants k
 and X such that

 /dV dV dV\ „ x /9V dV dV\ WI, , ,x
 (a7-37- fe) = ">•■n)™d(i?'Wä?)='•m'"h ' '

 Eliminating k and X from these equalities we find that

 i dV _ i dv _ i dv i dV _ i dv _ l dV
 7 dx m dy n dz ^ /' dx' m' dy' n' dz'

 which together with

 i2i 2i 2 i/2 I /2 i „tl i
 l m -f- n = i m -\- n — l,

 give rise to a system of six equations from which we can determine the primed vari
 ables in terms of the unprimed ones. Whittaker (1999, p. 290) observes that by these

 equations

 The behaviour of rays of light in the medium is completely specified in terms

 of the single function V(jc, y, z, x', y', z'). It will be observed that they are not

 differential equations, but that they give directly, in the integrated form, the

 changes in any system of rays after a finite interval of propagation through the
 medium.

 Then comes the punch line:

 From the point of view of Pure Mathematics, we regard the change from the

 set of variables (x, y, z, l, m, n) to the set of variables (x', y', z', I', m', n'), or

 (to express it geometrically) from the surfaces a, to the surfaces E, as a trans

 formation. The function V is thus to be regarded as determining a transforma
 tion of space which changes any surface a into a new surface E. It is evident
 that if two surfaces o and a' touch at a point, the corresponding transformed

 surfaces E and E' also touch at the corresponding point: on this account the

 transformation has been called by S. Lie a contact-transformation. Thus any

 function V(x, y, z, x', y', z') defines a contact-transformation, which transforms

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 371

 any wave-front o into the wave-front £ which is derived from a by propagation

 through the medium in the interval of time t' — t.

 But it follows directly from (3.4) that the total differential of V satisfies the equation

 dV = ic(ldx + mdy + ndz) + k(l'dx' + m'dy' + ndz). (3.5)

 Considering the time it would take to move an infinitesimal distance along the radial

 from the given points, Whittaker concludes that if the units are chosen such that the

 speed of light in the vacuum (or "free aether" in his terminology) is one, then k = -p

 and k = p', where p and p' represent the refractive indices of the optical medium at

 (x, y, z) and (jc\ y', z'), respectively. Therefore, writing

 I c. 4. 'l' *.///// f ta*

 /i/ = Ç, \im = rç, un = £,/// = £ , fi m = rj, // n = £ ,

 the total differential of V takes the form

 r/V = (fi'dx' + r\dy + Ç'dz) - (Çdx + tjdy + Çdz). (3.6)

 Hamilton called the vectors (if, p, Ç) and (if', p', f') the components of the normal
 slowness of propagation of the wave at (jc, y, z) and (x',y',z'), respectively; see
 Arnold (1989, p. 251) for more details. This illustrates how the definition of contact

 transformations used by Whittaker can be accounted for in the context of Hamilton's

 work on optics, for (3.6) can be interpreted as saying that the differential ë,dx + qdy +

 Çdz is invariant, modulo the exact form dV, under the transformation (defined by V)

 that takes (x, y, z, £, n, Ç) to (x', y', z', H', t)', Ç').

 Assuming next that the interval /' — t = Ar is very small, Whittaker deduces from

 (3.6) that there exists a function H such that

 uu dxue , dy u , dzA* d$ u dnu d$ J
 dH = —dÇ + —dt] + —dÇ - —dx - —dy - —dz. (3.7)

 dt dt dt dt dt dt

 The usual Hamiltonian system can be derived by equating the coefficients of dx, dy,

 dz, dÇ, dp, dç on both sides of the equation. Whittaker ends the "new § 125" stating

 that (Whittaker 1999, p. 292) (italicized in the original):

 Our investigation shews that [the Hamiltonian system derived from (3.7)] may

 be regarded as representing an infinitesimal contact-transformation, that is to

 say, the motion of a wave-front from one position to a position indefinitely near

 it.

 As we shall see, he discusses this remark in more detail in § 134 which, unlike §§ 125

 and 126, remained unchanged between the first and second editions.

 With § 125 taken over by Whittaker's effort to commemorate the work of his illustri

 ous predecessor as Royal Astronomer, the formal introduction of contact transforma
 tions in the second edition was moved to § 126. In the first edition, this article contains

 only a short discussion of ways under which a contact transformation can be defined

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 when it happens to be (p. 283) "possible to eliminate (P\, Pi,..., Pn, p\,.. ■, pn)
 completely, so as to obtain one or more relations between the variables

 (Ô1, 02, ■ • •, Qn,ql, • • • ,qn)"

 The remaining articles of Chapter XI were not changed in any essential way between
 the first and later editions. Articles 127 and 128 are concerned with the bilinear

 372 S. C. Coutinho

 covariant of the form a — £ prdqr. In modern parlance this is the 2-form da. As

 usual, Whittaker begins (§127) by defining the bilinear covariant of a general 1-form

 X\dx\ + Xjdx2 + ■••-(- Xndxn,

 where "(Xi, Xi,..., X„) denote any functions of (jcj , X2,..., *„)" which are implic

 itly assumed to be differentiable. He denotes the above expression by Oj and writes

 Og = X]5xi + X2SX2 + • • • + X„8x„,

 where "S is the symbol of an independent set of increments". A formal computa

 tion "using the relations 8dxr = dSxr, which exist since the variations d and 8 are

 independent" shows that

 86d - ddg = ^ ^ ajjdxjSx j (3.8)

 n n

 t=1 7=1

 where "a,7 denotes the quantity 'dXj/dxj - dXj/dx". He finishes §127 proving
 that this "quantity" is independent of the choice of coordinates, thus justifying the

 name bilinear covariant by which he calls it. In §128, Whittaker shows that since the

 "bilinear covariant of a differential form is not affected by the addition of an exact

 differential to the form", it follows that

 If the transformation from

 (q\,...,qn,p\,...,pn) to (Ql,...,Qn,Pl,...,Pn)

 is a contact-transformation, the expression

 ^(8prdqr - 8qrdpr)
 r=l

 is invariant under the transformation.

 The next three articles are concerned with the bracket expressions named after

 Lagrange and Poisson. Lagrange's brackets were originally introduced as part of his

 application of the method of variations of coefficients to the problem of the move

 ment of bodies in the solar system, see Lagrange (1760/1761, p. 730). His approach

 takes as its starting point the fact that the description of the elliptic orbit of a planet

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 373

 around the sun requires six parameters, or constants of the movement, if the sun and

 planet system remains isolated. Taking into account the effect of the attraction of the

 other planets, "the planetary orbits must be considered as ellipses whose dimensions

 and positions in space change little by little"1 (Poisson 1809, p. 267). In order to

 determine these changes, one must introduce into the differential equations terms that

 take into account the effect of the other planets. Poisson explains in ( 1809, p. 267)
 that

 In order to solve these equations, one considers as variables the arbitrary con

 stants of the integrals relative to the elliptical movement. It is remarkable that

 this procedure, one of the most fertile of analysis, consists in taking as variable

 quantities that have been until then considered as constants.2

 Lagrange's approach required him to write the derivatives of each of the six keplerian

 elements3 of the planet's orbit in terms of the derivatives with respect to these selfsame

 elements of the potential that defines the perturbative force. The brackets that we

 now name after Lagrange were introduced to simplify these formulae. Assuming that
 <7i,... ,q„, p\ p„ are functions of the variables u and v, Whittaker defines the
 Lagrange bracket of u and v as

 ^\du 9o Su 8 vi

 r=\

 In 16 October 1809, Poisson read at the Institute de France a memoir "relative to that

 same theory [Lagrange's 1808 work on the variation of parameters], that I regard from

 a whole different point of vue" (Poisson 1809, p. 268).4 Comparing this memoir of

 Poisson with his own earlier work, Lagrange writes (1760/1761, p. 812):

 This memoir contains an expert analysis that is like the inverse of mine, and

 whose object is to avoid the eliminations that mine required.5

 Indeed, Poisson writes the derivative of the potential with respect to a keplerian element

 in terms of the derivatives of those elements with respect to the time. Following

 Lagrange, Poisson introduces a bracket notation in order to simplify his formulae.
 Assuming that / and g are functions of q\,..., qn, p\,..., p„, Whittaker defines the

 Poisson bracket of / and g by

 1 les orbite planétaires doivent être regardées comme les ellipses dont le dimensions et les position dans
 l'espace, varient par dégres insensibles.

 2 l'on imagina, pour résoudre ces nouvelles équations, de considérer comme variables les constants arbi

 traires des intégrales relatives au mouvement elliptique. Il est remarquable que ce procédé, l'un des plus
 féconds de l'analyse, qui consiste à faire varier des quantités regradées d'abord comme constantes.

 3 Eccentricity, semimajor axis, inclination, longitude of the ascending node, argument of periapsis and
 mean anomaly at epoch.

 4 relatives à cette même théorie, que je reprends en entier sous un nouveau point de vue.

 ■ Ce Mémoire contient une savant analyse qui est comme l'inverse de la mienne, et dont l'objet est d'eviter
 les éliminations que celle-ci exigeait.

 <£) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 374 S. C. Coutinho

 ^Wdpr dpr dqr /

 Whittaker's notation for these brackets is the same introduced by Poisson in his memoir

 of 1809; see Poisson ( 1809, p. 281 and 290). In Analytical Dynamics both brackets are
 used to characterize contact transformations. Let (ßi,... Q„, P\,..., P„) be func

 tions of (q i q„, p i,..., p„ ). Whittaker shows that "the conditions which must be

 satisfied in order that the transformation from one set of variables to the other may be

 a contact-transformation may be written" (p. 289, italicized in the original) in the form

 [Pi, Pj] = IQi, Qj] = 0 (Ph Pj) = (Qi, Qj) = 0
 [ßj. Pj] = 0if/' -fi j or (Qi, Pj) = 0iff ^ j where 1 < i, j < n,
 IQi, Pi] = 1 (Qi,Pi) = 1

 depending on which bracket one uses. Actually he derives the second of these sets

 of conditions from the first using that if "(n i ,..., U2n) are 2n independent functions
 of (q\,..., q„, p\,..., p„), so that conversely (q\,... ,qn, p\ pn) are functions
 of («i,..., U2n)" then

 2n 2 n

 ^(«f, ur)[ut, u,s] = Owhen r ^ s and ^(ut, ur)[ut, ur} = 1.
 t=l r=i

 These relations make explicit what Lagrange meant when he wrote (see above) that

 Poisson's analysis was the inverse of his own. For a discussion of the rôle of the
 Poisson bracket in the work of Lie on contact transformations see Hawkins (1991).

 Article 132 is devoted to the study of the special case of those contact transfor

 mations that leave the differential form £ prdqr invariant, rather than "invariant to

 the modulus of an exact differential", a case first studied by Mathieu ( 1874, p. 273ff).

 Whittaker points out that these transformations form a subgroup of the whole group

 of contact transformations. However, as it might be expected, given his definition

 of group, he defines a subgroup as what we would call a subset closed under the

 composition of transformations.

 Whittaker then turns to infinitesimal contact transformations (§133), defined as

 "those in which the new variables [...] differ from the original variables [...] by quan

 tities which are infinitesimal". He concludes that (p. 292)

 The most general infinitesimal contact-transformation is defined by the equations

 3K dK

 Qr=qr + — At, Pr = pr~—-At (r = 1,2,,..,«),

 opr dp,

 where K is an arbitrary function of (q\, qi..., qn, p\, • • •, Pn) and At is an

 arbitrary infinitesimal quantity independent of (q\, q2, ■ ■ ■, qn, P\ > • • •. Pn)

 He then points out that if / is a function of the ps and qs then its increment is equal to

 (/, K)At when the arguments are subject to the transformation defined by the above

 equations. He calls the Poisson bracket (/, K) the symbol of the given infinitesimal
 transformation.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 375

 Whittaker begins the very short §134 explaining that, taking into account that the

 motion of a Hamiltonian system is governed hy the equations (3.2),

 It follows that we can interpret [equations (3.2)] as implying that the transfor
 mation from the values of the variables at time t to their values at time t + dt is

 an infinitesimal contact-transformation.

 From which he concludes what has become the book's most often quoted statement
 (p. 293):

 The whole course of a dynamical system can thus be regarded as the gradual

 self-unfolding of a contact-transformation.

 Indeed, "this result, taken together with the group-property of contact-transformations,

 is the foundation of the transformation theory of dynamics". The next major result is

 proved in article 136, where it is shown that "a contact-transformation of the variables

 (q\, qi,..., q,„ p\,..., p„ ) of any dynamical system conserves the Hamiltonian form

 of the equations of the system". The same result is proved again in article 137 using

 what Whittaker calls the first Pfaff's system of equations corresponding to the 1-form

 a = X\dx\ + Xidx2 H + X2„+\dx2n+\,

 which is the system of equations

 2/1+1

 /=l

 Uijdxj = Ofor 1 < j < 2n + 1

 obtained by equating to zero the coefficients of <SjC| ,..., &X2„+\ in the bilinear covari

 ant of a defined in (3.8). These equations are "from the mode of their formation [...]

 invariantively connected" with a. Applying this to the form

 p\dq\ + P2dq2 H \-p„dq„-Hdt (3.9)

 he shows that (p. 297)

 The dynamical system whose Hamiltonian function is H is invariantively con

 nected with the differential form [(3.9)] inasmuch as the equations of motion of

 the dynamical system, in terms of any variables Ui , jc?, *2«. t) whatever,

 are the first Pfaff's system of the differential form

 X\dx\ + X2dx2 -I 1- X„dx„ - Tdr,

 which is derived from the form [(3.9)] by the transformation from the variables
 (<7i, <72, • • • - <7«. P\ Pih t) to the variables (3:1,^2 xs,^ *)■

 This is used, in articles 138 and 139, to determine how the Hamiltonian of a given

 dynamical system changes under contact transformations and, in article 140, to show
 that:

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 376 S. C. Coutinho

 The integration-problem [of a system whose Hamiltonian is //] is thus reduced
 to the determination of a transformation for which the last term of the differential

 form [(3.9)] becomes a perfect integral.

 Chapter XII collects a number of results on Hamiltonian systems, mostly related

 to their integrals. Whittaker begins (§142) by showing that if the Hamiltonian H of

 a system is independent of time, then it can be used to reduce by one the number

 of degrees of freedom of the system. He then (§143) deduces the Hamilton-Jacobi

 differential equation

 dW
 or

 ( dW dW dW \

 + H [q\,q2, , — —-,f) =0 (3.10)

 V dq i dq2 3 qn J

 by assuming the existence of a contact transformation with IV = W{q\,..., qn,
 Ql, • ■ ■, Qn, 0 as generating function (a terminology not used in Analytical Dynam

 ics) that transforms the given system into one whose Hamiltonian is constant. The next

 article is devoted to proving that "the integral of the kinetic potential" (the Hamilton

 action integral) is a solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. He then turns to infini

 tesimal contact transformations and shows that (p. 308):

 Integrals of a dynamical system, and [infinitesimal] contact-transformations

 which change the system into itself, are substantially the same thing.

 This result also brings back the Poisson bracket, for if <p is an integral of the system

 then the corresponding infinitesimal transformation has (f, H) as its symbol. The rôle

 of the Poisson bracket is further developed in § 145, where it is shown that "if <p and rfr

 are two integrals of [a] system, the Poisson-bracket is constant throughout the motion"

 (p. 309). This result, first observed by Poisson ( 1809, §7, p. 281 ), allows one to deduce

 new integrals from old ones whose Poisson brackets are not constant. Whittaker notes

 (§146) that the same holds for the Lagrange bracket, but that

 Lagrange's result, unlike Poisson's, does not enable us to find any new integrals;

 for we have to know all the integrals before we can form Lagrange's bracket

 expressions.

 Suppose now that u \ ur are functions of the ps and qs. If all the brackets

 (ui,uk) are zero, these functions are said to be in involution. Using infinitesimal

 transformations, Whittaker shows in §147 that (p. 311, italicized in the original)

 If (mi, u2,...,ur) are in involution, and the equations

 ui = 0, v2 = 0,..., vr = 0

 are consequences of the equations

 «1 = 0, u2 = 0,..., ur = 0,

 then the functions (vj,..., ty) are in involution.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 377

 This is used (§148) to prove a theorem of Liouville (1855) which we now state as:

 if a system of n degrees of freedom has n integrals in involution then it is integrable

 by quadratures; see Arnold (1989, Chapter 10, section 49, p. 271) and Lützen ( 1990,

 pp. 670-679). This is followed by a discussion of a theorem of Levi-Civita's which,
 as explained in the introduction of Ahmed and Ghori (1984), "provides a procedure

 for constructing particular solutions of a [...] dynamical system by means of time

 independent invariant relations in involution". The last three articles are devoted to

 the integration "of systems which possess integrals of certain special kinds"; namely,

 integrals that are linear in the momenta (§150) and integrals quadratic in the velocity
 (§§152 and 153).

 As we have pointed out before, Chapters XI and XII were the first to which Whittaker

 made substantial changes between the first and second editions, the most obvious of

 which concerns the first article (§125) of Chapter XI. As we saw above, the new

 version of § 125 had its origin in Whittaker's wish to do justice to Hamilton's work on

 dynamics. This may also be the reason why the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of the first

 edition became the Hamilton equation in all later ones, matched by a corresponding

 change in the title of § 142 from the Hamilton-Jacobi equation to Hamilton's partial

 differential equation.

 3.3 Celestial mechanics

 Chapter XIII marks the beginning of what we called in Sect. 2.3 the second part of

 the book, which is devoted to the application of the principles explained in Part I

 to the problem of three bodies. In this chapter, Whittaker introduces the differential

 equations that describe the problem (§ 155) and shows that this system of the 18th order

 (made up of nine equations of the second order) admits a number of first integrals

 that allow one to reduce it to a system of the 6th order (§§157-159). In his words
 (p. 346):

 The problem of three bodies possesses 10 known integrals: namely, the six inte

 grals of motion of the centre of gravity, the three integrals of angular momentum,

 and the integral of energy; these are generally called the classical integrals of

 the problem.

 In the next articles he discusses the problem of three bodies in a plane (§161) and the

 restricted problem of three bodies (§162).

 Although the next chapter is 27 pages long, it contains only two articles, the first of

 which is subdivided into eleven parts, the second into nine. Article 164 contains the

 proof of Brun's theorem. It turns out that the ten integrals of the three body problem

 mentioned in the quotation above are all of them algebraic functions. In a paper pub

 lished in 1887, H. Bruns (1848-1919) showed that "the classical integrals are the only

 independent algebraic integrals of the problem of three bodies" (p. 346). In his Report

 to the British Association, Whittaker had noted that "a defect in Bruns's proof [...]

 was pointed out and remedied by Poincaré in 1896" (Whittaker 1900, p. 159). Curi
 ously, Whittaker's proof in Analytical Dynamics contains the very same mistake fixed

 by Poincaré and mentioned in the Report (Whittaker 1900, p. 159). A modern proof

 £) Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 378 S. C. Coutinho

 that addresses the many flaws found in Bruns's and all subsequent proofs, including

 Whittaker's, can be found in Julliard-Tosel (2000). The second article of Chapter XIV

 is concerned with (p. 368):

 Another theorem on the non-existence of a certain type of integrals in the problem

 of three bodies, which is in many respects analogous to that of Bruns, and was
 discovered in 1889 by Poincaré.

 This is one of the results for which Poincaré won the King Oscar Prize in 1889

 Poincaré ( 1890). It is also the content of the chapter called Non-existence des intégrales

 uniformes, of Poincaré's Méthodes Nouvelles (Poincaré 1899, Chapitre V, p. 233). See

 also (Barrow-Green, 2002, p. 7Iff) and Verhulst (2012, p. 133ff).

 Chapter XV is concerned with the description of the "motion of a particle which

 is free to move in a plane under the action of conservative forces". In an introductory

 article (§166) Whittaker explains that (p. 374)

 The principal results which have been obtained hitherto relate to periodic orbits

 (§§167-171), to the stability of a given orbit (specially of a periodic orbit) with

 respect to small displacements from it (§§172-176), and to the stability of a

 given group of orbits with respect to the time, i.e. the question as to how far

 the orbits preserve their general character after the lapse of a very great time
 (§§177-179).

 The topics studied in this chapter include Lagrange's special solution of the three

 body problem when the "mutual distances of the bodies are invariable throughout the

 motion" (§170) and Poincaré's study of stability in terms of the system's characteristic
 exponents (§§175-176).

 The last chapter opens with an article where Whittaker explains the difficulties one

 faces in finding a solution of a dynamical system in terms of convergent series. He men

 tions analytical continuation of solutions and a transformation, based on Poincaré's

 work on zetafuchsian functions Poincaré (1884), that maps a band of a given width

 on each side of the real axis into a circle of radius one. However, as he explains at the

 beginning of the next article (p. 397):

 The series discussed in the preceding article are all open to the objection that

 they give no evident indication of the nature of the motion of the system after

 the lapse of a great interval of time [...]. Under these circumstances we are led

 to investigate expansions of an altogether different type.

 These are trigonometric series, and he motivates their introduction with examples of

 their use in the "problem of the simple pendulum" and in celestial mechanics. The

 remainder of the chapter is devoted to Whittaker's work Whittaker (1902) (p. 398) on

 A method which is applicable to all dynamical systems and leads to solutions in

 the form of trigonometric series: the method consists essentially, as will be seen,

 in the repeated application of contact-transformations, which ultimately reduce

 the problem to the equilibrium-problem.

 This method applies to a system whose Hamiltonian H is independent of time. Solving

 the equations

 <?) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 379

 dH dH
 — = — =0 (r = 1,2 n),
 dp,- dqr

 one obtains

 One or more sets of values (a\, az, ■ ■ ■, a„, b\, bi b„) for the variables
 (q\.qi,..., <7h, p\ Pn)', and each of these sets of values correspond to a
 form of equilibrium or (if the above equations are those of a reduced system)

 steady motion of the system.

 One then chooses one of these equilibrium points and translates the variables so that

 the chosen point is at the origin. Thus, for sufficiently small values of the variables, it

 is possible to write H as a power series whose homogeneous component of degree k
 we will denote by HMoreover, Hq = H\ = 0 because the origin is an equilibrium
 point of the system. Assuming that Hi is positive definite and that the eigenvalues

 of the corresponding bilinear form are imaginary and distinct, Whittaker shows that

 there exists a contact transformation that changes Hi into

 \ ]£(/>,2 + sWr)

 /•=!

 Applying another (§184) contact transformation, the Hamiltonian can be written in
 the form

 «0.0 o + Xa"'-"2 "» cos(" 1 Pi + n2P2 + • • • + n„p„),

 where the coefficients a are functions of q\,..., <7,, only. Moreover, the periodic part

 of H is small when compared with the non-periodic part «0.0 0. so that (p. 403)
 "when the variables <71, <72,..., q„ are small they vary very slowly, while the vari
 ables p\, pi p„ vary almost proportionally to the time". In §§ 186-187, he shows

 that by applying yet more contact transformations to the system one obtains a Hamil

 tonian H whose periodic part "will become so insignificant that it may be neglected"

 (p. 187). Therefore, we end up with a system whose Hamiltonian depends only on the
 variables (q\,..., q„). Hence,

 dqr
 —— = Oand pr = — / —dt (r = I,...,«);
 dt J dqr
 J dqr

 r dH

 which allows us to integrate the system, obtaining

 Pr = Pr' + Cr, whereP, = (r = 1 n).

 dH

 dqr

 As we have mentioned before, the chapters on celestial mechanics were those that

 changed the most between the first and the fourth editions. In both editions, Chapter

 XV begins in article 166. However, in the first edition, Chapters XV and XVI have,

 respectively, 14 and 9 articles, while in the fourth edition these numbers have increased

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 380 S. C. Coutinho

 to 22 and 18. Instead of discussing the various topics that constitute the subjects of the

 new articles, some of which are of a very technical nature, we will be satisfied with

 pointing out some of the more conspicuous changes. From now on, article numbers

 refer to the fourth edition of Analytical Dynamics. In Chapter XV, these include the

 definition of Poincaré's doubly asymptotic orbits (§169), a study of the orbits of the

 planets in the "general relativity-theory" (§ 170) and a whole article on The theory of

 matrices (§ 176). The new articles in Chapter XVI are concerned with Whittaker's the

 ory of adelphic integrals, originally published in Whittaker ( 1917). In §200, Whittaker

 defines adelphic transformations as (Whittaker 1999, p. 442, italicized in the original)

 Those infinitesimal transformations which change each trajectory of the system

 into an adjacent trajectory, in such a way that every ordinary periodic solution

 is changed into an adjacent periodic solution of the same family, i.e. having the

 same period and the same constant of energy.

 As he explains in a footnote (Whittaker 1999, p. 442), the name comes from the Greek

 for brotherly because the original orbit and the transformed one are closely related

 and also because "the integral corresponding to the transformation stands in a much

 closer relation to the integral of energy than do other integrals of the system". For

 the sake of simplicity, he studies in detail only systems with two degrees of freedom.

 There are three cases depending on the ratio s\/s2 of the coefficients of <71 and qi

 in the linear component of the Hamiltonian. In article 196, he derives the terms of

 the adelphic integral up to order four in ^/q\ and Jqï when s\/s2 is irrational. The
 resulting formula covers pages 434 and 435 of the fourth edition. Whittaker admits

 that no proof of the convergence of these series "has yet been devised" (Whittaker
 1999, p. 437), but expresses the hope that the analogy with similar series devised by

 Bruns, that have been proved to be convergent, "is favourable to the convergence" of

 his adelphic integrals (Whittaker 1999, p. 438). As we will see in Sect. 4.4, Whittaker's

 optimism concerning the convergence of these series was not shared by T. M. Cherry

 in his review of the third edition Cherry (1928). He thought instead that they would

 be "generally divergent and only exceptionally convergent".

 4 Reception

 In this section, we use various reviews of the four editions of Analytical dynamics

 to examine how the mathematical community reacted to Whittaker's book. The fact

 that the book remains in print helps us to trace the evolution of the attitudes of that

 community both to the subject and to the style of the book.

 The first edition of Analytical Dynamics was reviewed very thoroughly in the

 Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society by E. B. Wilson and in Nature by

 G. H. Bryan. We discuss these long reviews in detail and then briefly mention a few

 more reviews up to the 1980s.

 4.1 An American point of view: E. B. Wilson

 Edwin Bidwell Wilson (1879-1964) graduated from Havard in 1899 and received
 a Ph.D. from Yale four years later. In (Hunsaker and MacLane, 1973, p. 287)

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 381

 Wilson is described as "the last student of Gibbs", whose lecture notes he brought

 "to a full and polished written form" in the book Wilson (1901). Wilson spent
 the period 1902-1903 studying mathematics in Paris, mainly at the École Nor
 male Supérieure. On his return to the United States, he became assistant professor
 at Yale, but moved to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1907, becom

 ing a full professor there in 1911. He had a wide range of interests that extended
 beyond mathematics and physics and included statistics and economics. The Bio
 graphical Memoir (Hunsaker and MacLane 1973, p. 291) mentions his "extraordi
 nary activity in reviewing books": between 1911 and 1914, for example, he wrote

 thirty reviews for the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society. Wilson's six

 page-long review Wilson (1906) of Analytical Dynamics was published in the Bul

 letin in 1906. The review opens with a lament for what Wilson sees as the imminent

 encroachment by pure mathematics of territory that traditionally belonged to applied
 mathematics:

 At Cambridge, England, mathematics means for the most part mechanics, math

 ematical physics, or even physics sometimes not so very mathematical. The

 famous tripos—the mathematical tripos, of course, which goes back at any rate

 to 1747—seems, at least to an outsider, to lay its main stress on the theoreti

 cal applications of mathematics rather than on pure mathematics. Very likely
 this is a tradition that has come down from the time of Newton, and it is cer

 tainly maintained by the eminent physicists such as Stokes, Kelvin, Maxwell,

 Rayleigh, J. J. Thomson, who have been high wranglers. This tripos with its

 great prestige gives an attractive and distinctive touch to the university and

 although the ever-increasing pressure of pure mathematics, with its possibili

 ties for various kinds of unessential and mediocre work infinitely wider than

 those to be found in theoretical applied mathematics, will probably tell on the

 training at Cambridge sooner or later, may we not look forward to that date with

 some regrets on the general uniformizing that is taking place and lament the

 fact that other realms than physics are possessed of an entropy? (Wilson 1906,
 p. 451)

 But he immediately changes tone: "At present, however, there seems no immediate

 danger" and the reason for that is Wilson ( 1906, p. 452)

 The publication by Cambridge University Press of three large and highly impor

 tant volumes by as many recent graduates of Cambridge typically Cantabrigian

 in that they exhibit great mathematical power and attainements directed firmly

 and unerringly along the direction of physical research.

 The books are James Walker's Analytical Theory of Light, James Jeans's Dynamical

 Theory of Gases and Whittaker's Analytical Dynamics. According to Wilson:

 Mechanics is more largely a part of pure mathematics than the other branches

 of physics because the data are fewer and simpler; the transition to the systems

 of differential equations less recondite (Wilson 1906, p. 452).

 He justifies his opinion by pointing out that most of the recent progresses in this area

 have been attained by mathematicians. However,

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 For the mathematician [...] the way has unfortunately been barricaded by the kind
 of treatise on mechanics which has been available to the intermediate student.

 382 S. C. Coutinho

 Among these, he mentions the "famous works of Routh", by which he means a series

 of treatises on various aspects of mechanics that Routh published in the second half

 of the nineteenth century; see Routh (1860, 1882, 1884, 1891, 1898). His opinion of

 Routh's books, whose subject he considers "not so much mathematical as distinctly

 mechanical", is not very high: "the reader learns how to do difficult and often artifi

 cial problems rather than how problems are done". Although he admits that the kind

 of training provided by Routh's books is "highly valuable and should precede other

 work", he considers that Whittaker's book "breaks the barricade and opens the way to

 fruitful advance". However, he also makes clear that this book "starts at the beginning

 of the subject—but it is not for the beginner". Indeed, "the book is mathematical in

 nature, written with a precision and developed with a logic sure to appeal to mathe

 maticians". Moreover, the "diversity of method taken with the compact style makes

 the book hard reading for any but the somewhat advanced student". Since "to solve

 the exercises requires on the part of the reader a similar versatility", he concludes
 that

 One may see why and how it is that the Cambridge student well versed in

 mechanics is also in reality thoroughly equipped in pure mathematics in so far

 as present applications are concerned.

 After these initial considerations, Wilson discusses the contents of the book. His

 description of Chapters I to IX extends to four pages, halfway through which he

 points out that from Chapter VII on

 The amount of mathematics which the reader must know, or assimilate from the

 meager indications in the text, is by no means inconsiderable—calculus of vari

 ations, elementary divisors, integral invariants, and contact transformations may

 be mentioned as examples. It is, then, just at this point that modern mechanics

 begins.

 In comparison, the last eight chapters are dealt with in just one paragraph, of which

 we quote the beginning and the end:

 The remaining one hundred pages of the book become successively more and

 more full of the most recent researches. [...] How much the student of mechanics

 proper may be interested in this matter [the subjects of the last four chapters] is

 a question. The advisability of including such a treatment here cannot, however,

 be well open to doubt. Mathematical astronomy as one conclusion of mechanics

 is quite in the spirit of the present time.

 Having said that, he concludes by suggesting two topics that he "should have been

 happy to see introduced". The first is "the study of the application of Lagrange's

 equations and the kinetic potential to problems of physics and chemistry" and the
 second is "statistical mechanics". These choices are not at all surprising, given

 that Wilson was a student of Gibbs and that he prepared Gibbs's lecture notes for

 publication.

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 383

 4.2 A British point of view: G. H. Bryan

 G. H. Bryan (1864-1928) was brought up by his mother and his grandparents after

 the death of his father, a Cambridge don, when he was still very young. Mrs Bryan

 lived in the continent for long periods and, as a consequence, Bryan acquired a good

 knowledge of several languages. He went up to Cambridge in 1883, graduated as fifth

 Wrangler in 1886 and stayed there, as a fellow of Peterhouse, until 1895, the year he

 was appointed Professor of Pure and Applied Mathematics in the University College

 of North Wales, in Bangor. He stayed in Bangor until his retirement in 1926. Bryan's

 research was mostly concerned with problems in hydrodynamics and thermodynamics,

 but he also contributed important results to the bourgeoning science of aeronautics. His

 book Stability in aviation, published in 1911, is described in Hunsaker (1916, p. 278)

 as "the first rational theory of the dynamical stability of aeroplanes". According to

 Bairstow ( 1933, p. 139), Bryan was a "friendly, kindly, very eccentric individual with a

 keenness for 'unsolved problems' in dynamics and hydrodynamics". His eccentricity

 was "attributed largely to the circumstances of his early upbringing". His strengths

 and weaknesses were summed up by Love (1929, p. 240) as follows:

 To understand Bryan, his achievement and his limitations, one must think of him

 as a man with a passion for accuracy, a remarkably clear head, and a severely

 practical outlook on life. His writings reflect his mind—always lucid and to the

 point, never vague or mysterious, generally seeking for something of practical

 value. He took little interest in laboratory work in physics, and perhaps less in

 speculations as to the constitution of the universe or the nature of time and space.

 He should be remembered as a man with a very uncommon gift for mathematics,

 who was actuated by an intense desire to utilize it for the purpose of promoting

 material progress.

 As we will see this goes a long way towards explaining his criticisms of Analytical
 Dynamics.

 Whittaker's book was the last one of three "Cambridge Mathematical Works" that

 Bryan reviewed for the issue of Nature published on April 27,1905, see Bryan ( 1905),

 the other two works being Grace and Young's The algebra of invariants and James

 Jeans's The dynamical theory of gases, which is also mentioned in Wilson's review.

 The very first paragraph sets the tone for the whole review:

 Whatever opinions may be felt as to the desirability of University Presses compet

 ing with private firms in swelling the already too large flood of school geometries

 or issuing cram books for compulsory Greek examinations, there can only be one

 opinion as to the series of standard treatises on higher mathematics emanating

 at the present time from Cambridge. In a country which, in its lack of national

 interest in higher scientific research, particularly mathematical research, stands

 far behind most other important civilised countries, it necessarily devolves on

 a University Press to publish advanced mathematical works. We may take it as

 certain that the present volumes will be keenly read in Germany and America,

 and will be taken as proofs that England contains good mathematicians, though

 "£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Englishmen as a nation may be unaware of their existence, with the exception

 of the senior wrangler of one year, who is forgotten the next.

 Bryan's first mention of Whittaker's book is in a paragraph which one can safely call
 polemical:

 384 S. C. Coutinho

 It is remarkable that physicists strain at gnats when put down to study kinetic the

 ory or thermodynamics, and yet they swallow camels with complacency when

 they read the subject of Mr. Whittaker's book, "Analytical Dynamics." Some

 writers even go so far as to introduce pages and pages of the most unreal dynam

 ical problems into what they call treatises on physics.

 The next paragraph elaborates this further

 "The soluble problems of particle dynamics" [which is the title of Chapter IV

 of Analytical Dynamics] mostly represent things which have no existence. It

 is impossible for a particle to move on a smooth curve or surface because, in

 the first place, there is no such thing as a particle, and in the second place

 there is no such thing as a smooth curve or surface. What constitutes the chief

 interest of "Analytical Dynamics" is the possibility of forming clear mental

 pictures of its results by imagining bodies capable of performing the motions
 discussed.

 He summarizes the contents of the book in two paragraphs. The first begins with "Mr.

 Whittaker's treatment is essentially mathematical and advanced" and the second is

 followed by: "The book is thus written mainly for the advanced mathematician". The

 "large number of examples both in the text and at the end of the chapters" include "a
 good many" that contain "the substance of minor papers" (cf. Sect. 3.1) while others

 are followed by the reference Coll. Exam. :

 Some of the questions bearing these references may give foreign mathemati
 cians a little insight into the unpalatable nuts which Cambridge students are

 expected to waste time in trying to crack for examination purposes. The antics

 of insects crawling on epicycloids, or the vagaries of particles moving along the

 intersections of ellipsoids with hyperboloids of one sheet, are of no scientific

 interest, and the time spent in "getting out" problems of this character might

 better be employed in learning something useful. Moreover, Cambridge college

 examiners have a habit of endowing bodies with the most inconsistent properties

 in the matter of perfect roughness and perfect smoothness. A perfectly rough

 body placed on a perfectly smooth surface forms as interesting a subject for

 speculation as the well-known irresistible body meeting the impenetrable obsta

 cle. What the average college don forgets is that roughness or smoothness are

 matters which concern two surfaces, not one body.

 He proposes to replace such "fictitious problems" by "the more frequent introduction

 of simple problems in resisted motion". Moreover,

 Those who have the ability to do more difficult work should pass on to the

 advanced parts of a book like Mr. Whittaker's and learn what foreign mathe

 maticians have been doing; this is much more useful.

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 385

 The high regard for what continental mathematicians had been doing and the insis

 tence on problems of interest in applications immediately remind one of A. E. H.

 Love's opinion of Bryan, quoted above. It is also interesting to compare Bryan's com

 ments with those of Wilson. As it is so often the case, the outsider Wilson is touched by

 the mystique of the mathematical tripos, whose "great prestige gives an attractive and

 distinctive touch to the university". Bryan, the fifth wrangler, sees much to criticize in

 a system under which a student must spent a lot of his time solving problems about

 "ellipsoids rolling on perfectly smooth surfaces formed by the revolution of cissoids
 or witches about their axes".

 4.3 The "Fictitious Problem" polemic

 The Cambridge establishment must have been piqued by Bryan's comments, for a
 letter was published (1905, p. 56) in Nature on May 18, 1905 under the title Ficti

 tious Problems in Mathematics. Taking his cue from the comment by Bryan repeated

 above, the writer signs himself simply "An Old Average College Don". After briefly

 summarizing Bryan's criticisms, the anonymous writer adds

 Will your reviewer give a reference to some page of Whittaker's book (that

 under review), or to some page of any other text-book used in the last half

 century at Cambridge, in support of his charge against Cambridge examiners?

 Fifty years ago, William Hopkins was still directing the mathematical teaching of

 Cambridge, and enforcing the conservation of energy where friction is taken into

 consideration. A perfectly rough sphere moving on a rough surface is intended

 to mean that, during the motion considered, the sphere rolls without any slip.

 "A perfectly rough sphere moving on a smooth surface" would no doubt be

 equivalent to "A sphere moving on a smooth surface": but where does the phrase
 occur?

 This is followed by a response from Bryan who claims that

 The alleged inaccuracies of language in stating the assumed conditions of
 smoothness or roughness prevailing between two bodies in contact are unfortu

 nately so common that it is the exception rather than the rule to find any problem

 in which these conditions are correctly worded.

 Bryan claims to have come across two examples of such imprécisions in a chapter of

 Besant's A Treatise on Dynamics but he does not give any exact reference. A search

 through a digitized version of Besant's book Besant ( 1893) comes up with several

 instances of perfectly rough, but perfectly smooth appears only twice and none of them

 supports Bryan's claim. However, the example he quotes from Routh's Elementary

 rigid Dynamics (Routh 1882, p. 69, example 4), where a "person is placed at one end

 of a perfectly rough board which rests on a smooth table", seems a perfect fit. Routh

 had been Bryan's Tripos coach (Warwick 2003, p. 517) and perhaps to soften the blow,

 Bryan adds:

 At the time of writing the review I was quite unaware that such an example

 had found its way into a text-book written by so careful a teacher of applied

 4b Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 mathematics as Dr. Routh, and it says much for the prevalence at Cambridge of

 these erroneous forms of statement that this wording failed to attract the writers
 attention.

 386 S. C. Coutinho

 He finishes by saying that a similar misuse of the terms perfect elastic and inelastic

 has been brought to his attention.

 Besant and Routh had both retired in the 1880s (Warwick 2003, p. 280), but while

 "Besant was too much engrossed by his proper work to add much to mathematical

 literature" (GBM 1917, p. 310), Routh had actually made important contributions to

 dynamics. Perhaps that goes some way towards explaining why Routh was the only

 one to feel the need to reply to Bryan. In a note published on the May 25th, 1905 issue

 of Nature (1905, p. 78), Routh explains that

 When bodies are said to be perfectly rough, it is usually meant that they are

 so rough that the amount of friction necessary to prevent sliding in the given

 circumstances can certainly be called into play. [...] The board in question has

 therefore no special peculiarity. All that is stated is that the coefficient of friction

 between the man and the board exceeds a certain finite quantity.

 He points out that such expressions are only abbreviations used to "make the question

 concise" to allow the students attention to be "specially directed to the dynamical prin

 ciple involved in the solution". He concludes by claiming that the problem mentioned

 by Bryan has been "understood by so many students in the sense above described"

 without any objection been raised that he thinks its "meaning must be perfectly clear",

 so much so that he "cannot imagine what other meaning it could have".

 Routh's letter on the 25th May 1905 issue of Nature is actually preceded by one

 of A. B. Basset on the same subject. Basset notes that the statements about which

 Bryan complains designate "an ideal state of matter" assumed to exist to simplify the

 problem and make it "sufficiently easy for the beginner". He then explains that similar

 "fictitious hypothesis", like that of a friction less liquid are required in hydrodynamics,
 because

 Viscosity leads to such formidable difficulties, that nobody has yet succeeded

 in solving such a simple problem as the motion due to a doublet situated at the

 centre of a sphere; and the solution, if it could be obtained, would throw much

 light on the mode of attacking more difficult problems

 Hydrodynamics was Bryan's main field of research.

 The June 1st, 1905 issue of Nature (1905, p. 102) brought two more contributions

 to the debate. The first, by C. B. Clarke, begins by saying that Routh set the example

 to "test (inter alia) whether the pupil knew that, for any friction to arise, both the

 surfaces must be rough". He then repeats the quote from Bryan's review reproduced

 in the anonymous letter that started the exchange and adds that "this is the statement

 which I called (and still call) in question", thus implicitly identifying himself as the

 "average college don". Like Basset, Clarke explains that such simplifying hypotheses
 are not restricted to exercises in textbooks:

 In considering the pendulum, I probably begin by assuming no friction on the

 axis of suspension, and, if I try afterwards to apply a correction for this friction,

 "Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 387

 I probably make an assumption which is inaccurate. Friction = pressure x a

 constant is inaccurate, statically and dynamically.

 Clarke's letter is followed by another one from Bryan where he tries to make clear

 what it is that he is objecting to. His argument is essentially that if a "perfect rough

 body" is one that never slips when brought in contact with another body and a "perfect

 smooth body" is one that never offers "tangential resistance" then it does not make

 sense to ask what happens when a "perfect rough" body slides against a "perfect

 smooth" body. The problem, he says, is that terms such as "perfect roughness" and

 "perfect smoothness" are not "attributes of a single body" because friction depends on

 the properties of the two bodies that are being brought into contact. At the end of his

 letter, he proposes ways by which this kind of "misleading language" can be avoided.

 He suggests, for instance, that the example from Routh's book could be rephrased

 as a "man walks without slipping along a plank which can slip without friction on a
 horizontal table".

 The issue of Nature published a week later (June 8, 1905) (1905, p. 127) brings

 another letter of Routh on the same subject. He argues that Bryan's definition of a

 "perfectly rough body" in (1905, p. 102) as one "which never by any chance slips on

 any other body it is placed in contact" is not that in common use. Thus, the "proper

 inference" is not that '"the average college' don forgets an elementary law of friction"

 but that Bryan's definition is not "that in common use". Indeed, he says, the "various

 letters sent to NATURE sufficiently show what meaning is usually attached to the
 words".

 The last letter Nature published on the polemic (on June 22, 1905) came from

 Bryan. Turning to Routh's definition of "perfectly rough," he points out that it refers

 to bodies being perfectly rough, while his "attack" is directed against saying that a

 body is "perfectly rough". In his view

 The definition given in the book in which the problem occurs is inapplicable to

 the problem as at present worded. Otherwise we appear to be dealing with a plank

 such that in the given circumstances, one [side] of which is resting on a smooth

 table, the amount of friction necessary to prevent sliding can certainly be called

 into play, and this is apparently inconsistent with Dr. Routh's interpretation.

 He ends by challenging "An Average College Don" to "point to any text-book con

 taining an explicit definition of a perfectly rough body (not bodies)" and adds:

 If he succeeds, I anticipate no difficulty in furnishing him with examples of

 questions which are either inconsistent with his definition, are ambiguously

 worded, or are open to some equally serious objection.

 Reading these letters 100 years after they were written, it is difficult not to view the

 whole polemic as prompted by a bout of hair-splitting on the part of Bryan. His initial

 claim is undoubtedly correct: friction is a property that has to do with how bodies

 behave when they come into contact. Thus, a body on its own cannot be "perfectly

 rough": that expression can only be applied when two bodies come into contact with

 each other. As it often happens in such polemics, the boundary between the two factions

 tends to get blurred when one looks at concrete examples. Although it is true that Routh

 •£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 388 S. C. Coutinho

 refers to a body and Whittaker to a plane (Whittaker 1904, p. 33) as "perfectly rough",

 they do so only as a kind of shorthand, because both of them correctly define only

 what it means for bodies (Routh 1882, p. 280) or surfaces (Whittaker 1904, p. 31 ) to be

 "perfectly smooth". So, from Bryan's point of view, they give correct definitions but

 later use them improperly. Routh, Basset and Clarke, on the other hand, claim that it

 is tacit knowledge (at least in Cambridge) that one writes "a perfectly rough body" to

 stand for the formal definitions correctly given by both Routh and Whittaker. It is hard

 not to ask what it was really all about. Comparing Routh's letter of the 8th of June with

 Bryan's final letter, one might even get the impression that those who opposed Bryan

 simply misunderstood what he was complaining about. Although the whole polemic

 derived from a comment of Bryan's in his review of Analytical Dynamics, the author

 of that book never got involved in the polemic.

 Bryan also wrote a review of the second edition (1917) of Analytical Dynamics

 Bryan (1918). He begins by observing that at the time the first edition was published

 aeroplanes "only existed in people's imagination and in reports of successes by the

 Wright brothers", so that no one expected to find applications to "aerial navigation"

 in a treatise on analytical dynamics. However, although since then "there has been

 plenty of time for pure and applied mathematicians to provide material" to allow the

 aeroplane to be "a predominating feature" of a book like Whittaker's, he finds in that

 book no mention of the aeroplane or of any matter that he judges to be "suggestive, even

 vaguely, of the existence of aerial navigation". He goes on to explain that he thinks

 mathematicians have done very little on the subject and that most of the relevant

 contributions have come from physicists and engineers. The way in which Bryan's
 own interest and enthusiasm for aviation seems to fill his whole field of vision is rather

 amusing. He refers to the problem of "stability of steady motion" as "out-and-out the

 most important development of theoretical dynamics". And he thinks it "rather a pity"

 that Whittaker did not treat of the subject in the second edition of Analytical Dynamics.
 He concludes that:

 The present work will be found of much use by such students of a future gener

 ation as are able to find time to extend their study of particle and rigid dynamics

 outside the requirements of aerial navigation, and it will also afford a valuable
 source of information for those who are in search of new material of a theo

 retical character which they can take over and apply to any particular class of

 investigation.

 4.4 Other reviews

 Ô Springer

 Besides the two detailed reviews discussed above, the first edition of Analytical

 Dynamics was also reviewed in the Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik

 (JFM 35.0682.01). The review was written by Emil Lampe (1840-1918), a professor

 at the Technischen Hochschule Charlottenburg, who was also the Jahrbuch's editor.

 In his review of this "excellent work" (vortrefflichen Werks) Lampe says that

 The careful treatment aimed at the training of students—that for half a century

 has characterized the science of analytical mechanics in England, and which

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 389

 produced such works as Walton's collection of examples and the textbooks of

 Routh, Thomson and Tait, Lamb, Love, Basset and many others—has had, as

 a consequence, that the English student is directed with great energy towards

 the study of mechanics in which he displays excellent performance, as can be

 gauged from the many, and not at all easy, problems appended at the end of each

 chapter of this book.6

 The second edition was reviewed by E. P. Jourdain ( 1879-1919) in both The Mathe

 matical Gazette Jourdain (1917) and Science in Progress (Jourdain 1917). The reviews

 are very similar, but the Gazette one is longer and more detailed. After listing the sub

 jects of the various chapters, Jourdain makes a number of very specific criticisms. The

 first concerns a statement on the aether and the principle of relativity, which he consid

 ers "of no value when put in such a magisterial form". In the second, he complains that

 the "introduction (p. 29) of the equations of motion suffers from a defect". The only
 "equations of motion" in p. 29 of the second edition are those that define Newton's

 first law for cartesian coordinates in 3-space and the "defect" seems to be that Whit

 taker did not give sufficient motivation so that, as Jourdain puts it, the student is "told

 by implication that these equations [...] are identities". The third criticism concerns a

 point of the history of mathematics, a subject that interested Jourdain so much that he

 was preparing a book on it at the time of his death (1921). According to a footnote

 on p. 34 of the second edition of Analytical Dynamics, Lagrange first formulated his

 equations of motion in Lagrange (1760/1761), a paper published 28 years before his

 Mécanique Analytique. Jourdain disagrees with Whittaker's claim and suggests that

 "Prof. Whittaker should have given a rather more detailed justification for such a rev

 olutionary statement". For a recent discussion of the relation between these two works

 of Lagrange see (Pulte 2005, 212ft). The last point concerns, as he puts it at the end

 of the Science in Progress review,

 A rather noticeable [...] neglect of work published from 1904 to 1908 on the
 questions that arise in formulating Hamilton's principle and the principle of
 least action for non-holonomic conditions and generalised co-ordinates.

 This work was done by Jourdain himself, as we learn from the more detailed Gazette
 review, which ends thus:

 However, all these criticisms do not touch the very great value of the book

 which has been and will be the chief path by which students in English speaking

 countries have been and will be introduced to modern work on the general and

 special problems of dynamics.

 G. D. Birkhoff wrote a very short review Birkhoff (1920) of the second edition of

 Analytical Dynamics for the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society in which

 he praises the book for being "invaluable as a condensed and suggestive presentation

 of the formal side of analytical dynamics" but suggests that there is "serious need

 6 Es ist kein Lehrbuch für den Anfänger, sondern vielmehr ein reichhaltiges Kompendium, in welchem der

 Verf. mit grosser Sorgfalt und vielem Geschick alles verarbeitet hat. was die Forschung der besten Gelehrten

 bis in die jüngste Vergangenheit über den Gegenstand zutage gefordert hat.

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Springer

 390 S. C. Coutinho

 for a complementary type of treatise in which the main emphasis is laid upon the

 deeper qualitative side which has played an increasingly larger part since the work of

 Poincaré". As a "single instance of the incompleteness of Whittaker's treatment in this

 respect" he cites the discussion of trigonometric series in Chapter XVI which is done

 "in the spirit of Delaunay and does not even mention that these series are generally

 divergent nor refer to their asymptotic properties".

 Not surprisingly, the first book in English to complement Analytical Dynamics

 in the way proposed by Birkhoff was his own Dynamical systems Birkhoff (1927),

 whose first edition appeared in 1927, the same year that the third edition of Analytical

 Dynamics was published. The Gazette featured a double review of these books by

 T. M. Cherry (1898-1966) in 1928, see Cherry (1928). Cherry begins by explaining

 that "General Dynamics as it has been developed during the past century is simply

 the theory of differential equations of Lagrangian and Hamiltonian form". Of the

 books he is reviewing, Whittaker's deals "largely" and Birkhoff's "almost entirely"

 with "this 'higher' aspect of Dynamics". A brief discussion of Poincaré's work on

 the stability of the solar system and the divergence of the trigonometric series used to

 solve the three body problem sets the scene for the two reviews. Cherry's comments

 are concerned mostly with the last two chapters of Analytical Dynamics which, he

 explains, were "completely re-written in order to take account of recent developments

 in this field". However, in his view, although Chapter XV (on the theory of orbits)

 is a "great improvement on preceding editions", on the whole it "hardly lives up to

 its title". Moreover, the discussion of Whittaker's adelphic integrals in Chapter XVI

 "must be regarded as suggestive rather than conclusive" because "a process is given

 for constructing the "adelphic integral" series [...] without the necessary proof that it
 will be successful". As mentioned in Sect. 3.3, he also criticizes what he considers

 as Whittaker's "optimistic view" concerning the convergence of these series. Unlike

 Whittaker, he thinks that they will be "generally divergent and only exceptionally

 convergent".

 The most recent review of Analytical Dynamics appeared in Zentralblatt (Horneffer

 1988) when the fourth edition was reprinted in the Cambridge Mathematical Library.

 The following quote is from its first paragraph:

 First published in 1904 [the book] reflects the style of late 19th century and the

 state of the mathematical apparatus of those days. The excessive use of elliptic

 functions in the elaboration of explicit formulas, for example, is a fact maybe

 surprising to the modern reader. The bulk of calculations contrasting with the lack

 of figures (not so bad as with Lagrange 200 years ago: there none, here three!),

 the newcomer in the discipline will be bewildered, but soon will appreciate the

 clearness of physical thought and the development of formulas seldom found

 in other texts. Nonetheless, as a first reading one would better give him another

 text.

 Analytical Dynamics has also been mentioned in the reviews of other books that treat

 roughly the same material. For example, the same issue of the Bulletin of the American

 Mathematical Society (volume 2, issue 2,1980) brought two different reviews of books

 on mechanics, both of which mention Whittaker's book. Reviewing both Arnold's

 Mathematical methods of classical mechanics Arnold ( 1989) and volume one of Walter

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 391

 Thirring's A course in mathematical physics Thirring (1978), Ian Sneddon claims in
 Sneddon (1980) that

 The theoretical work of the century and more after the death of Lagrange was

 crystallized by E. T. Whittaker in a treatise Whittaker ( 1904) which has not been

 superseded as the definitive account of classical mechanics.

 However,

 The time was now ripe for a presentation of the theory of classical mechanics in

 terms of the theory of differentiable manifolds which had been developed since

 the appearance of the fourth edition of Whittaker's treatise.

 The other one is a review, written by S. Sternberg, of the second edition of Foundations

 of mechanics by Abraham and Marsden. Sternberg begins the review noting that

 This excellent book is one of several superb books on mechanics which have

 appeared in the past decade, such as those of Souriau [Souriau (1970)], Siegel

 Moser [Siegel and Moser ( 1971 )], Arnold [Arnold ( 1989)] and Thirring [Thirring

 (1978)], indicating a revitalized interest in the venerable subject of classical
 mechanics.

 At the end of the review, he points out that:

 All the above books should be on the shelf of every serious student of mechanics.

 One would like to be able to report that such a collection would be complete.

 Unfortunately, this is not so. There exist topics in the classical repertoire, such

 as Kowalewskaya's top which are not covered by any of these books. So hold

 on to your copy of Whittaker ( 1904).

 Analytical Dynamics also had its share of adverse criticism, the most notorious being

 probably the comments in Goldstein's Classical Mechanics (Goldstein 1950, p. 27),
 where it is called

 A well-known treatise which presents an exhaustive treatment of analytical

 mechanics from the older viewpoints. The development is marked, regrettably,

 by an apparent dislike of diagrams (of which there are only four in the entire

 book) and of vector notation, and by a fondness for the type of pedantic mechan

 ics problems made famous by the Cambridge Tripos examinations. It remains,

 however, a practically unique source for the discussion of many specialised

 We will examine Goldstein's criticism in more detail in the next section.

 topics.

 5 Discussion

 In the last two sections we described the contents of Analytical Dynamics and exam

 ined the way its various editions were received by the community. We will finish by

 examining the book's style and discussing its impact on the development of mechanics

 in the twentieth century.

 ■0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 392 S. C. Coutinho

 5.1 Style

 One characteristic that pleased the reviewers of the first edition of Analytical Dynam

 ics was Whittaker's ability in presenting the very latest results in dynamics. Wilson

 (1906, p. 452) puts it very nicely, when he says that Analytical Dynamics "is modern,

 thoroughly modern with its bibliographical references running quite up into the year

 1904". Even G. H. Bryan, whose review is the most critical of those discussed in

 Sect. 4, writes that (Bryan 1905, p. 603):

 It will thus be seen that Mr. Whittaker's treatise collects into book form the

 outlines of a long series of researches for which hitherto it has been necessary

 to consult English, French, German, and Italian transactions.

 Both reviewers also note that, although the book does not assume any previous knowl

 edge of dynamics on the part of the reader, it is by no means elementary. G. H. Bryan

 points out that the "book is thus written mainly for the advanced mathematician"

 (Bryan 1905, p. 603) and E. B. Wilson observes that it "starts at the beginning of the

 subject—but it is not for the beginner"; (Wilson 1906, p. 452) A similar opinion is

 expressed by Lampe (1918),

 This is no textbook for the beginner, but rather a rich compendium, in which the

 author has handled with great care and much skill all the research that the best

 scholars have brought to light on the subject until very recently.7

 Indeed, the treatment is thoroughly analytical and presupposes a good knowledge of

 special functions, the calculus of variations, and the theory of ordinary differential
 equations. As Wilson (1906, p. 452) says in his review, the "book is mathematical in
 nature, written with a precision and developed with a logic sure to appeal to mathe
 maticians".

 Although this is not attested in any of the reviews that I have found, Whittaker's

 strict mathematical approach seems to have led to the book being criticized for being

 too abstract. In his obituary of Whittaker McCrea (1957, p. 248) says that at the time

 the first edition was published Whittaker "was criticized for wasting space on the

 transformation theory of dynamics". This is echoed by C. Truesdell in the exordium

 [reprinted in Truesdell (1984, p. 30)] of The classical field theories, a book he co

 authored with R. Toupin. Writing about their book, he says they expect that some

 people "will reproach us with too much abstract and useless formalism"; and adds as

 an afterthought "not forgetting that such deprecation was directed towards Whittaker's

 Analytical Dynam/cs'Truesdell ( 1984). Which also indirectly testifies to the status that

 Whittaker's book had attained by the 1960s, when Truesdell's book with Toupin was

 published. Whittaker himself writes in Whittaker (1940, p. 156) that

 When my book Analytical Dynamics was published in 1904, I was criticised

 severely for devoting a large part of it to such topics as the duality between

 7 Es ist kein Lehrbuch für den Anfänger, sondern vielmehr ein reichhaltiges Kompendium, in welchem der

 Verf. mit großer Sorgfalt und vielem Geschick alles verarbeitet hat, was die Forschung der besten Gelehrten

 bis in die jüngste Vergangenheit über den Gegenstand zutage gefördert hat.

 Springe

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 393

 coordinates and momenta, contact-transformations, Poisson-brackets, integral

 invariants, action, and so forth—mere mathematical playthings, the critics called
 them.

 That Analytical Dynamics is abstract cannot be denied. Not only is it not an intro

 duction for beginners, as the reviewers rightly pointed out, it is a presentation of

 mechanics as a mathematical theory. Even a cursory look at the book shows that the

 discussion of the physical principles is kept to a minimum. Moreover the presentation

 is unapologetically analytic, in Lagrange's sense of the word, with very little use of

 geometric language. As the latter's Mécanique Analytique, the first edition of Analyt

 ical Dynamics did not contain any pictures, although by the fourth edition Whittaker

 had added four, all of them in Chapter XV (pages 392, 394 and 411 of Whittaker
 (1999)).

 Despite the fact that this is a book for mathematicians, it is not rigorous in the sense

 we now use the word. One obvious flaw is the constant use of old style infinitesimal

 arguments; a more subtle one is that often there is no clear separation between results

 that hold only locally, and those that hold globally. A typical example occurs in §141

 (p. 302), where Whittaker wants to solve an equation of the form H + h =0, for

 some Hamiltonian function H of q\,..., q„, pi,... p„ and constant h, with respect

 to the variable p\. Faced with a similar equation, we would now apply the Implicit

 Function Theorem, which would allow us to conclude that the equation can be solved,

 as desired, in the neighbourhood of any point where the required Jacobian is nonzero.

 Not so Whittaker; he simply says "let this equation be solved for the variable p\".

 Although this is by no means an isolated example, Whittaker is obviously aware that

 a series often converges only in a small neighbourhood of a point. This is particularly

 evident in the chapters concerned with celestial mechanics, where convergence of the

 series that describe the orbits was one of the outstanding problems of the day. Thus, as

 we saw in Sect. 3.3, he begins Chapter XVI explaining that (Whittaker 1904, p. 396)

 We have already observed (§32) that the differential equations of motion of a

 dynamical system can be solved in terms of series of ascending powers of the

 time measured from some fixed epoch; these series converge in general for values

 of t within some definite circle of convergence in r-plane, and consequently will

 not furnish the values of the coordinates except for a limited interval of time. By

 means of the process of continuation it would be possible to derive from these

 series successive sets of other power series, which would converge for values of
 the time outside this interval.

 A different attitude to a similar problem occurs in Whittaker's discussion of stationary

 integrals (§103). As we explained in Sect. 3.1, Whittaker first shows that "for small

 ranges the Action is a minimum for the actual trajectory" and then determines that

 the action is in fact a minimum "provided the final point is not beyond the kinetic

 focus of the initial point" (p. 248). Therefore, although this result holds only locally,

 it is possible to characterize the bounds within which it works; cf. (Chorlay 2011,

 §3.2). All of this is fairly typical of the way mathematics was practiced in the early

 twentieth century; a time when, as Chorlay shows in (2011 ), mathematicians were just

 beginning to become aware of the local-global dichotomy.

 "Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 394 S. C. Coutinho

 Although, to my knowledge, the book has not been criticized for its lack of rigour

 with regard to the domains of convergence of the various series that it contains, the same

 cannot be said of some characteristics that it also shares with contemporary works.

 Predictably, such criticisms have been advanced in a book and in a review published
 after 1950. As we saw in Sect. 4.4, Goldstein (1950, p. 27) speaks of Whittaker's
 "apparent dislike of diagrams (of which there are only four in the entire book) and

 of vector notation", while Horneffer (1988) talks of the "excessive use of elliptic

 functions in the elaboration of explicit formulas" and also of the "bulk of calculations

 contrasting with the lack of figures (not so bad as with Lagrange 200 years ago: there

 none, here three!)"; actually four, as Goldstein says. Since this kind of criticism often

 arises from a work being taken out of the context in which it was written, which should

 include both its intended public and the historic period, we will first consider the rôle

 of vectors and of diagrams in mechanics at the beginning of the twentieth century.

 To begin with, one should remember that although Newton introduced several

 quantities of a vectorial nature in Principia (Crowe 1967, p. 128), the concept of vector

 and many of the vector operations we use today originated in W. R. Hamilton's works

 on quaternions (1843) and in H. Grassman's Ausdehnungslehre (1844). Despite being

 critical of quaternions, J. C. Maxwell realized that vectors helped to "fix the mind

 at once on a point of space instead of its three coordinates, and on the magnitude

 and direction of a force instead of its three components" as he put it in his Treatise

 on electricity and magnetism (1873) (Maxwell 1954, p. 9). Given the influence of

 Maxwell's book, it is not surprising that J. W. Gibbs and O. Heaviside, the creators

 of vector analysis, became interested in vectors after reading it (Crowe 1967, p. 152

 and 162). Gibbs first lectured on his vector system in 1879, but his Elements of Vector

 Analysis was only privately published (in two volumes that appeared 1881 and 1884).
 Heaviside developed his ideas, independently of Gibbs, in papers published between

 1882 and 1883 and got acquainted with Gibbs's Elements only in 1888. The first

 volume of his Electromagnetic Theory, which "contained the first extensive published

 treatment of modern vector analysis" (Crowe 1967, p. 169), appeared in 1893. Crowe

 (1967, p. 225) points out that "the most influential force in producing acceptance [of
 vector analysis] stemmed from the association of vectorial analysis with electrical

 theory, an association to be credited to Maxwell and Heaviside". The first book solely

 devoted to vector analysis to be commercially published was E. B. Wilson's Vector

 Analysis Wilson (1901), (Crowe 1967, p. 228); see also Sect. 4.1 above.

 Thus, at the time (1896-1904) Whittaker was giving the lectures that would later

 become Analytical Dynamics, the use of vectors was mostly restricted to applications

 in electromagnetism. Moreover, Maxwell's comment in the Treatise that "the methods

 of Des Cartes are still the most familiar to students of science" (Maxwell 1954, p. 9)

 continued to hold in 1904, for the first book completely devoted to vector analysis

 had been published only three years before. A search through Poincaré's Leçons de

 mécanique céleste Poincaré (1910), whose first volume was published a year after

 Analytical Dynamics, shows the same sparing use of vectors and an almost complete

 absence of vector equations. In fact, most uses of the word "vecteur" in volume I of

 Poincaré (1910) occur in the expressions "rayons vecteurs" and "vecteur des aires",

 although Poincaré also mentions "la somme géométrique des deux vecteurs" (p. 32)

 *£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 395

 and "les vecteurs qui représentent en grandeur et direction les quantités de mouvement"

 (p. 251).

 Passing now to the question of diagrams one immediately sees that it cannot be

 settled by any simple appeal to the historical context. Even a cursory look at Routh's
 books Routh ( 1860,1882, 1884, 1891,1898) or Besant ( 1893) show that their texts are

 peppered with diagrams to help the student along. However, these are rather elementary

 texts, aimed at students, which is not the case of Analytical Dynamics, as both Wilson,

 Bryan and Horneffer make clear in their reviews. Whittaker himself says in the Preface

 to the first edition that the "connected account" of recent advances that he presents

 in his book will "prove a stimulus to further research". McCrea observes in (1957, p.

 248) that this was Whittaker's "modest way of saying that this was the first book on

 what was then and still remains [in 1957], modern fundamental dynamical theory". In

 the same preface, Whittaker says that:

 It would ill become of me to omit mention of the debt which I, in common with

 all English students of Dynamics, owe to the influence which Dr Routh has so

 long exercised on the study of the science.

 About this, McCrea comments in McCrea (1957) that "although Routh's books are

 useful even today [1957], Whittaker's book disclosed immeasurably wider horizons".

 These remarks show that Analytical Dynamics should be considered as a research

 monograph, and that it is with similar contemporary works that it should be com

 pared. The title of Whittaker's book and Horneffer's parenthetical remark that it is

 "not so bad as" Lagrange's Mécanique Analytique suggest that it should be compared

 with other works in dynamics written in the tradition of Lagrange's great treatise. In

 this respect, three books immediately come to mind: Jacobi's Vorlesungen über ana

 lytische Mechanik Jacobi (2009) and Poincaré's Méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique

 celeste, both of which are cited in Analytical Dynamics, and the latter's Leçons de

 mécanique celeste. None of these books have anywhere near as many pictures as
 Routh's books or most modern (post-1960) books on dynamics. For example, the first

 volume of Poincaré (1910), published in 1905, a year after the first edition of Ana
 lytical Dynamics, contains only three pictures (pp. 37, 69 and 363) in a total of 365

 pages. One concludes that although Whittaker's book may be a rather extreme case

 (no figures in 409 pages of the first edition), it is by no means atypical. Even Poincaré

 who, by all accounts, was of a more geometric bent than Whittaker, included very few

 pictures in his books devoted to mechanics.

 As far as elliptic functions are concerned, a comparison of the works mentioned

 in the previous paragraph with Analytical Dynamics reveals that the latter abounds

 in them, while they do not appear at all in the first volume of Leçons de Mécanique

 Céleste. As might be expected we fare better when we turn to Jacobi's Lectures on

 Dynamics Jacobi (2009), where elliptic and abelian integrals appear in lectures 25,

 27 and 30 (Das Abelsche Theorem). However, Jacobi's work was, by then, almost

 50 years old and Poincaré's geometrical approach would soon move dynamics away

 from exact solutions. So it seems that Whittaker's abundant use of elliptic functions

 is both an echo of a bygone era and a reflection of his interest in what are now called

 the special functions of analysis.

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 396 S. C. Coutinho

 Another characteristic of the book often mentioned by its reviewers is the examples

 or exercises as we would now say. Some come with solutions and appear interspersed

 throughout the actual text, though printed in smaller type. But there are also many

 that come at the end of each chapter under Miscellaneous examples and are posed as

 problems to be solved by the reader. As we have seen in Sect. 4.2, G. H. Bryan points
 out that (Bryan 1905, p. 603)

 An interesting feature [of Analytical Dynamics] is the large number of examples

 both in the text and at the end of the chapters. Of these a good many really contain

 the substance of minor papers that have been published abroad.

 These examples are followed by the name of the author of the paper they come from.
 However, most of the examples are followed by "Coll. Exam." or "Camb. Math.
 Tripos" showing that they were originally posed as questions in examinations. Bryan

 considered many of these questions artificial and said so very forcibly in his review, see

 Sect. 4.3. The artificial nature of many of these problems was also noted by Goldstein

 (1950, p. 27). It is difficult to argue against the view that, in choosing many problems

 that even to his contemporaries seemed contrived, Whittaker was being not only too

 much of a Cambridge man, but a somewhat old fashioned one at that. In this respect,

 one should remember that those who opposed Bryan in the Fictitious Problems polemic

 were men very much older than Whittaker: in 1904 Basset was 50 years old, Clarke
 was 72 and Routh 73.

 Finally, when reading Analytical dynamics one cannot help noticing the large num

 ber of references to works that have become classical. In the first edition these are

 mostly works by contemporary authors. Whittaker himself mentions "Lie, Rayleigh,

 Klein, Hertz, Lorentz, Poincaré, Siacci, Bruns, Boltzmann, Larmor, Greenhill, Appell,
 Painlevé, Stäckel and Levi-Civita" in the preface of the first edition, adding that a

 "large proportion of the subject matter has hitherto been accessible only in scattered

 memoirs" by these mathematicians. In later editions, however, he goes further back

 in time, systematically quoting, with very specific references, from works by Newton,

 Euler, the Bernoulli brothers, Lagrange and Laplace. This was, perhaps, also a fruit

 of those hours he spent reading at the library during his Dublin years, see Sect. 2.1
 above.

 Analytical Dynamics has been very successful by most of the criteria used to judge a

 book: it went through four editions, it was translated into both German and Russian

 and the reviews published at the time of the various editions are full of praise for the

 book. The main reason for this has to do with the fact, pointed out in all the reviews

 of the first edition, that it presented the very latest results in dynamics. Moreover,

 Whittaker's choice of topics, specially in the more advanced parts of the first half of

 the book, proved to be along two of the main lines that dynamics would take in the

 twentieth century. As McCrea puts it in McCrea (1957),

 With an inspired appreciation of what is in the best sense useful in mathematics,

 [Whittaker] has included in his books much that was found to be needed in

 5.2 Impact

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 397

 the development of quantum mechanics and wave-mechanics more than twenty

 years afterwards. The part that British workers in particular were thus enabled to

 contribute to this development owes a debt to Whittaker which seems scarcely

 to have been sufficiently acknowledged.

 Of course by "books" he means Modern Analysis and Analytical Dynamics.

 The debt mentioned by McCrea was explicitly acknowledged by Dirac in 1977.

 The events to be related occurred in 1925, while Dirac was a PhD student working

 under Ralph Fowler. In August of that year, Fowler received from W. Heisenberg the

 proof-sheets of Heisenberg's latest paper (van der Waerden 1967, pp. 261-276), and

 passed them on to Dirac, who read them but at first found them not very interest

 ing. It was only a week later, when Dirac read the paper for the second time, that

 he realized how revolutionary Heisenberg's ideas really were. However, he felt that

 Heisenberg's formulation was not very satisfactory and he began to try to rework it

 "in a Hamiltonian scheme that would conform with the theory of relativity" (Kragh

 1990, p. 16). However, this required that Dirac find an expression in classical mechan

 ics that would correspond to the commutators introduced by Heisenberg's theory.

 In the course of one of the long walks he usually took on Sundays, Dirac began to

 think about Poisson brackets. As Dirac reminisced in 1977 [quoted in Kragh (1990,
 p. 17)]:

 I remembered something which I had read up previously in advanced books on

 dynamics about these strange quantities, Poisson brackets, and from what I could

 remember, there seemed to be a close similarity between a Poisson bracket of two

 quantities, u and v, and the commutator uv — vu. The idea first came in a flash,

 I suppose, and provided of course some excitement, and then of course came the

 reaction "No, this is probably wrong." I did not remember very well the precise

 formula for a Poisson bracket, and only had some vague recollections. But there

 were exciting possibilities there, and I thought that I might be getting to some
 big new idea. It was really a very disturbing situation, and it became imperative

 for me to brush up my knowledge of Poisson brackets and in particular to find

 out just what is the definition of a Poisson bracket. Of course I could not do that

 when I was right out in the country. I just had to hurry home and see what I could

 then find about Poisson brackets. I looked through my notes, the notes that I had

 taken at various lectures, and there was no reference there anywhere to Poisson

 brackets. The textbooks which I had at home were all too elementary to mention

 them. There was just nothing I could do, because it was a Sunday evening then

 and the libraries were all closed. I just had to wait impatiently through that night

 without knowing whether this idea was really any good or not, but still I think that

 my confidence gradually grew during the course of the night. The next morning

 I hurried along to one of the libraries as soon as it was open, and then I looked

 up Poisson brackets in Whittaker's Analytical Dynamics, and I found that they

 were just what I needed.

 However, this is not the only version of these events left by Dirac. van der Waerden

 reproduces in (van der Waerden 1967, p. 41) what Dirac purportedly told him in an
 interview on June 26, 1961 :

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 398 S. C. Coutinho

 At first I could not make much of [Heisenberg's paper], but after about two weeks

 I saw that it provided the key to the problem of quantum mechanics. I proceeded

 to work it out by myself. I had previously learned the Transformation Theory of

 Hamiltonian Mechanics from lectures by R. H. Fowler and from Sommerfeld's

 book Atombau und Spektrallinien.

 In the second (1921) edition of Sommerfeld's book Hamiltonian mechanics is dis

 cussed in the appendix, which includes a section on contact transformations (Sommer

 feld 1921, §6, pp. 468-472). However, Poisson brackets are not mentioned anywhere

 in the book, not even in this section. Since it is clear that, right from the beginning,

 the brackets played a key rôle in Dirac's version of quantum mechanics (Dirac 1926),
 it seems safe to trust Dirac's later recollection of events, rather than his claims in the
 interview with van der Waerden.

 The exposition of Hamiltonian dynamics and contact transformations in Analytical

 Dynamics also contains, in incipient form, many of the results that would play an

 important rôle in the geometrization of dynamics that took place in the second half of

 the twentieth century. However, although the key players in this process were certainly

 aware of the book's existence, it does not seem to have directly influenced them. Asked

 whether Analytical Dynamics had any influence on his work, R. Abraham, whose

 book on mechanics has become a classic presentation of the symplectic approach,
 said (Abraham, Private communication):

 I can only say that yes, I read Whittaker as a student and made much use of his

 books during my work on mechanics... but no, they did not influence directly my

 work in translating mechanics into modern symplectic geometry. In my book of

 1967, e.g., I did not include his portrait in the historical gallery at the beginning

 of the book. Indirectly, perhaps ... My own history of the symplectic approach is

 given on page 131 (notes for Chapter 3) of the first edition [of Abraham ( 1967)].

 In these notes the history of geometrical mechanics is summarized in one paragraph
 as follows:

 This version of mechanics has been slowly evolving since Cartan [Cartan
 (1922)]. The first modern exposition of Hamiltonian systems on symplectic

 manifolds seems to be due to Reeb [Reeb (1952)] in 1952. An early version of

 Lagrangian systems in this context appears in Mackey [Mackey (1963)]. This

 formulation of mechanics was widely known in mathematical circles by 1962,

 and is explained in a letter by Richard Palais that circulated privately at about
 that time. This and other material from §14 and §15 [of Abraham (1967)] can

 also be found in Sternberg [Sternberg (1964)], Jost [Jost (1964)], and Hermann
 [Hermann (1962)].

 When asked the same question, S. Sternberg, whom Abraham lists as one of his

 direct influences, wrote (Sternberg, private communication):

 I believe that Wintner, in his book The Analytic Foundations of Celestial Mechan

 ics was the first to tie in (linear) "canonical relations" with the symplectic

 group as discussed in the indigestible book The Classical Groups by Hermann

 Weyl.

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 399

 Indeed, the paper van Kampen and Wintner (1936), which Aurel Wintner wrote with

 E. R. van Kampen, is an extension to general canonical transformations of the results

 in Wintner (1934), whose subject is what is now called linear symplectic geometry.

 In van Kampen and Wintner (1936, §4, p. 855), a canonical transformation is defined
 as follows:

 Suppose that the 2n functions (of 2n + 1 variables [X = (jci X2„) and f])
 which occur in [the] transformation formulae [E = E(X; r)] have continuous

 partial derivatives of the second order and that the transformation determines

 for every fixed t a locally one-to-one correspondence between the phase-spaces,

 the 2n-rowed Jacobian being everywhere distinct from zero. A transformation
 [E = Y(X: f)] which satisfies these requirements is said to be a canonical

 transformation if it transforms every canonical system [(3.2)] into a system of

 differential equations which is again canonical.

 As the authors note, although the transformed system is required to be canonical, its

 Hamiltonian function need not coincide with that of the target phase-space; when it

 does, they call the transformation completely canonical. In van Kampen and Wintner

 ( 1936, §7, p. 857) characterize canonical transformations are characterized in terms

 of the Jacobian with respect to X — (x\,... , X2„) of the transformation E = Y(x: t).
 Let C be the Jacobian and let

 where c is the identity matrix and co the zero matrix, both of size nxn. Assuming that
 the Hamiltonian h is time independent, their characterization amounts to the statement
 that

 E = E(jc) is a canonical transformation if and only if there exists a constant s

 such that C'GC = sG, where the prime is taken to mean transposition.

 In this case, the Hamiltonian of the transformed system is sh. Thus, a transforma

 tion will be completely canonical when j = 1. Wintner and van Kampen warn their

 readers that the traditional approach to canonical transformation, as presented, for

 instance, in Prange's article Prange (1935) in the Encyklopädie der Mathematischen

 Wissenschaften starts with the tacit assumption that 5 = 1. As Arnold points out

 (Arnold 1989, p. 239), in the volume Mechanics of their famous Course of Theoret

 ical Physics Landau and Lifschitz (1976, §145, p. 143) mistakenly "prove" that all

 canonical transformations are completely canonical. No similar mistake will be found

 in Analytical Dynamics, where all contact transformations, as defined in §125 of the

 first edition, are automatically completely canonical, a fact proved by van Kampen

 and Wintner in §12 of their paper (van Kampen and Wintner 1936, p. 861).

 Incidentally, Whittaker's book is not listed as a reference in van Kampen and Wint

 ner ( 1936) or Wintner ( 1934); however, both papers cite Birkhoff's Dynamical Systems

 Birkhoff (1927) and Lezioni di meccanica razionale by T. Levi-Civita and U. Amaldi
 Levi-Civita and Amaldi (1927). More surprisingly, Analytical Dynamics is also not

 a reference in Wintner's The Analytical Foundations of Celestial Mechanics Wintner

 <0 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 400 S. C. Coutinho

 (1941), where an exposition of his joint work with van Kampen on canonical transfor

 mations can be found in Chapter 1. It should also be noted that in both van Kampen

 and Wintner (1936) and Wintner (1941) Wintner understands by phase space a 2n
 dimensional euclidean space. Although manifolds are absent from Wintner's work,

 he has full command, unlike Whittaker, of the difference between local and global

 properties. Thus, in the Preface of Wintner (1941), he says that:

 In chapter I, emphasis is laid on a careful distinction between formal questions,

 which are always local in nature, and questions in the large, which are the actual

 problems of mathematical dynamics.

 For a discussion of the use of the expression "in the large" in the early twentieth

 century see Chorlay (2011).

 Having called attention to Wintner's priority in relating symplectic maps to canon

 ical transformations, Sternberg (Private communication) adds:

 Although Prof. Wintner was my teacher and PhD advisor, I had not read his Ana

 lytic Foundations as a student. My introduction to celestial mechanics came from

 Carl Ludwig Siegel. Prof. Siegel gave a course in 1953 on celestial mechanics at

 Johns Hopkins where I was a student. It was of course, amazing, dealing mainly

 with his mastery of the problem of small divisors, but also with Bruns theorem

 etc. I remember this course vividly, and had some correspondence with him. He

 wrote the book Vorlesungen Uber Himmelsmechanik [Siegel (1956)], based on

 this course, and this later morphed into Moser-Siegel [Siegel and Moser (1971)].

 This brings us to another main contributor to the development of the symplectic
 approach, C. L. Siegel. His paper Symplectic Geometry Siegel (1943), begins with
 an introduction to linear symplectic geometry that covers essentially the same ground

 as Wintner had done in Wintner (1941). However, although Siegel had published on

 celestial mechanics, his aim in Siegel (1943) is to contribute to the then incipient

 theory of several complex variables. More precisely, he decomposes an n x n sym

 metric matrix with complex coefficients into real and imaginary parts and considers

 the domain H formed by those symmetric matrices whose imaginary part is positive

 definite. This domain, he claims, "is a generalization of the upper half-plane". The

 symplectic group first appears in Theorem 1: "Every analytic mapping of H onto

 itself is symplectic", (Siegel 1943, p. 3). Given Siegel's motivation, it is not surprising

 that although he devotes Part II of his paper (Siegel 1943, pp. 8-16) to the symplec

 tic group, he never refers to its being connected with the canonical transformations

 of classical mechanics. It is only in his book Siegel (1956), mentioned by Sternberg

 in the comment quoted above, that Siegel makes clear the connection between the

 symplectic group and canonical transformations. Siegel's presentation prompted S. P.

 Diliberto to note in his review Diliberto (1958) of Siegel (1956) that:

 The first sections of Part I have a short but sound introduction to Lagrangian

 derivatives, canonical transformations, and Hamilton- Jacobi theory, all treated

 in a style to which they are not accustomed.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 401

 Diliberto's review is full of superlatives, right from the first paragraph, where he claims

 that the appearance of Siegel's book is "certainly one of the great mathematical events

 Despite of his enthusiasm for Siegel's course, Sternberg (Private communication)

 of the century".

 says:

 What really inspired me, however, was a visiting lecture by Prof. S.S. Chern.

 I was so taken by his version of mathematics that I managed to spend several

 summers at the University of Chicago where I attended his lectures, and was later

 fortunate to have been appointed an instructor there 1957-1959. Prof. Chern
 (who had been a student of Elie Cartan) introduced me to the works of Cartan

 which, in one form or another, have been a major portion of my preoccupations.

 My introduction to what developed into the symplectic approach to mechanics

 came from Cartan's great book, "Leçons sur les Invariants Intégraux" [Cartan
 (1922)].

 Cartan's book is also mentioned by Sternberg in the introduction of Sternberg ( 1964,

 p. ix), where he says:

 This book, like all Cartan's work, is rich in geometrical ideas. It is also quite

 readable—once the reader gets accustomed to the language of infinitesimals.

 Indeed, although the language of Cartan's Leçons may be somewhat antiquated, it

 contains an exposition of the theory of differential forms and its application to problems

 of mechanics that has a far more modern feel than that of Analytical Dynamics.

 The reminiscences of J. Marsden in Marsden ( 1993) nicely complement these com

 ments of Abraham and Sternberg. According to Marsden,

 In the period 1960-1965 geometric mechanics was "in the air". Some key papers

 were available, such as Arnold's work on KAM theory and a little had made it
 into textbooks, such as Mackey's book on quantum mechanics and Sternberg's

 book on differential geometry. In this period Steve [Smale] was working on his

 dynamical systems program. His survey article Smale (1967) contained impor

 tant remarks on how geometric mechanics (specifically Hamiltonian systems on

 symplectic manifolds) fits into the larger dynamical system framework. In 1966

 at Princeton, Abraham ran a seminar using a preprint of the survey article and it

 was through this paper that I first encountered Smale's work.

 As it might be expected, the published version of Smale's survey contains the modern

 definition of symplectic manifold (Smale 1967, section III.I, p. 805). Smale gives

 two references where the interested reader will find "a complete discussion of this

 material", one of them is Sternberg's book Sternberg ( 1964), the other one is Abraham's
 Abraham (1967).

 The conclusion seems to be that the rôle that Analytical Dynamics played at the time

 geometrical mechanics was being developed was that of a useful and self-contained

 source for many classical results. Indeed, this is a rôle it continues to play, as a search
 in MathSciNet will reveal. Between 2000 and 2012, Whittaker's book was cited in 111

 papers (excluding those works of a purely historical nature). Moreover, these citations

 are not limited to works on mechanics and astronomy, but also includes papers on linear

 €) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 402 S. C. Coutinho

 algebra, ordinary and partial differential equations, dynamical systems, differential

 geometry, global analysis, control systems and quantum mechanics.

 Finally, it should be noted that in his short summary of the history of geometric

 mechanics, quoted above, Abraham mentions Jost's paper Jost (1964), which begins:

 It was P. A. M. Dirac who emphasised most strongly the significance of the
 Poisson brackets in classical analytical dynamics [see, e.g., P. A. M. Dirac,
 Quantum Mechanics [sic] (Claredon Press, Oxford, 1947), 3rd. ed., Sec. 21,

 p. 84 and earlier editions]. He not only did this but also gave what turns out

 to be a complete axiomatic characterization of the Poisson brackets [see Dirac,

 Eqs. (2)—(6); see also our Sec. 4 (a—f)].

 Of course, the book mentioned by Jost is Dirac's The Principles of Quantum Mechanics

 Dirac (1947). Further on, Jost adds that

 [...] Diracs [sic] axioms lead to a phase space with coordinates and canonically

 conjugate momenta [...] Once this is established, the "correct procedure" consists

 of course in a complete elimination of any kind of coordinates. The principle

 [sic] results of general analytical dynamics have to be derived by the exclusive
 use of Poisson brackets.

 Given, as we have seen, that Dirac's approach to quantum mechanics was greatly

 influenced by Whittaker's exposition of Poisson brackets, Analytical Dynamics has

 arguably exerted an indirect influence on the development of geometrical mechan

 ics through its rôle in the development of Dirac's version of quantum mechanics.

 More details on the history of symplectic geometry and the development of geometric
 mechanics can be found in Kosmann-Schwarzbach (2013).

 5.3 Conclusion

 As the evidence gathered in this paper shows, Analytical Dynamics had a substantial

 rôle to play in the development of mechanics in the twentieth century, although the

 character of this rôle kept changing with the passing of time. At the time its first

 edition was published, Analytical Dynamics was praised for expounding the state of

 the art in the most advanced parts of mechanics, especially in Hamiltonian dynamics

 and celestial mechanics; see Sect. 4 above. The early reviewers also noted that the

 book presented the fundamental theory of dynamics in great generality, instead of

 developing tools to deal with specific systems. This led to the book being criticized for

 what was considered its excessive abstraction, with some suggesting that the inclusion

 of a chapter on the transformation theory of dynamics (Chapter XI) was wasted space;

 see Sect. 5.1 above. Whittaker's approach would be vindicated in the 1920s when this

 very chapter turned out to contain the tools that allowed Dirac to develop his version

 of quantum mechanics. This was possible because Whittaker turned to continental

 authors like Jacobi, Lie and Poincaré, who influenced both the subject matter and

 the style of the book. The great degree of generality of Whittaker's approach has also

 been one of the keys to the remarkable longevity of his book. Indeed, Routh's treatises,

 even the more advanced ones, look very dated when compared with most books on

 £) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 403

 mechanics written since 1950. This applies both to Routh's choice of topics and to

 his presentation. The same cannot be said about Analytical Dynamics. Except for the

 absence of any tools of global analysis (manifolds, tangent and cotangent bundle), the

 choice of topics is very close to that of a modern text like Arnold ( 1989).

 Of course, like all human artifacts, Whittaker's book is limited, in many ways, by

 the practices of the time and place at which it was written; in this case, early twentieth

 century Cambridge. For example, convergence questions are usually handled in a very

 cavalier fashion, and no clear distinction is made between results that hold globally and

 those that hold only locally. Actually, some limitations were clear even to the reviewers

 of the first edition, as is the case with G. H. Bryan's criticism of the artificial nature

 of many of the exercises proposed by Whittaker. Chosen from college examinations

 and the mathematical tripos, they were a remnant of nineteenth century Cambridge

 and would soon be relegated to the past. Paradoxically, some of the characteristics that

 make the book seem dated, like the frequent use of elliptic functions, may be one of the

 reasons why it has remained useful to this day. As one reviewer Sneddon ( 1980) put

 it, Analytical Dynamics "crystallized" the "theoretical work of the century and more

 after the death of Lagrange" and remains a rich repository of results that otherwise

 would have been scattered in hard to find historical periodicals published in several

 different languages.

 One final question remains: what were the qualities that allowed Whittaker to write

 a book—actually two, for Modern Analysis has proved to be as longevous as Analytical

 Dynamics—that remains useful to mathematicians working in several different areas,

 more than one hundred years after it was written? The analysis in the previous sections

 suggests that this was in good measure due to Whittaker's great knowledge of the

 literature and to his ability to organize this knowledge in a systematic way. Moreover,

 his reading was not limited to contemporaneous works, it also encompassed the classics

 of the 18th and 19th centuries. The most notorious result of Whittaker's familiarity

 with the classical mathematical and physical literature was his A history of the theories

 of aether and electricity Whittaker (1910), which he revised in 1951 Whittaker ( 1951 )

 and to which he added a new volume Whittaker (1953) two years later, to cover the

 period from 1900 to 1926. However, Whittaker's scholarship is present in all of his

 books, markedly so in Analytical Dynamics, where it is most evident in his choice of

 topics and in the huge number of very precise citations of books and papers dating

 back to the eighteenth century that appear in the footnotes of most pages of all editions
 after the second. It seems to me that the success of Whittaker's books owes much to

 the fact that he was one of that rare breed, a scientist who is also a scholar, of which

 D'Arcy Thompson is probably the best known representative. People whose research

 may not have been exceptional, but whose great knowledge of the literature, including

 historical works, allowed them to "crystallize" in their books a vision of a whole

 subject that would greatly influence later generations.

 References

 Ahmed, N„ and Q.K. Ghori. 1984. Levi-Civita's theorem for dynamical equations with constraint multi

 pliers. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 85: 1-13.

 •Ö Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Abraham, R. 1967. Foundations of mechanics: A mathematical exposition of classical mechanics with an

 introduction to the qualitative theory of dynamical systems and applications to the three-body problem,

 with the assistance ofJerrold E. Marsden. New York: W.A. Benjamin.

 Arnold, V.l. 1989. Mathematical methods of classical mechanics, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer.

 Arnold, V.l., V. V. Kozlov, and A.I. Neishadt. 1997. Mathematical aspects of classical and celestial mechan

 ics, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer.

 Barrow-Green, J. 2002. Whittaker and Watson's 'Modern Analysis'. European Mathematical Society

 404 S. C. Coutinho

 Newsletter 45: 14-15.

 Barrow-Green, J. 1997. Poincaré and the three body problem. American Mathematical Society and London

 Mathematical Society. Providence: AMS Press.

 Bairstow, L.E. 1933. George Hartley Bryan. Obit Not Fell R Soc 1: 139-142.

 Besant, W.H. 1893. A treatise on dynamics. Cambridge: Deighton Bell.

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1920. Review of a treatise of analytical dynamics. Bulletin of the American Mathematical

 Birkhoff, G.D. 1927. Dynamical systems. Colloquium Publications IX, American Mathematical Society

 Society 26: 183.

 (1927).

 Bryan, G.H. 1905. Three Cambridge mathematical works. Nature 71: 601-603.
 Bryan, G.H. 1918. Analytical dynamics. Nature 100: 363-364.

 Burnside, W. 1897. Theory of groups of finite order. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Cartan, E. 1922. Leçons sur les Invariant Intégraux. Paris: Hermann.

 Cherry, T.M. 1928. Review of Birkhoff's dynamical systems and the third edition of Whittaker's analytical

 dynamics. Mathematical Gazette 195: 198-199.

 Chorlay, R. 2011. "Local-Global": the first twenty years. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 65: 1-66.
 Creese, M.R.S., and T.M. Creese. 2004. Ladies in the laboratory 2. New York: Scarecrow Press.

 Crowe, M.J. 1967. A history of vector analysis: The evolution of the idea of a vectorial system. New York:

 Dover.

 Culverwell, The discrimination of maxima and minima values of single integrals with any number of

 dependent variables and any continuous restrictions of the variables, the limiting values of the variables
 being supposed given, Proc. London Math. Soc. 23 (1892), 241-265.

 Diliberto, S.P. 1958. Review of Carl Ludwig Siegel's Vorlesungen über Himmelsmechanik. Bulletin of the

 Dirac, P. A.M. 1926. The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. Proceedings of the Royal Society

 American Mathematical Society 64: 192-196.

 A 109: 642-653; also in [105, 307-320],

 Dirac, P. A.M. 1926. Quantum mechanics and a preliminary investigation of the Hydrogen atom. Proceedings

 of the Royal Society A 110: 561-569; also in [105, p. 417-427],

 Dirac, P. A.M. 1947. The principles of quantum mechanics, 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Fictitious problems in mathematics. Nature (72) (1905), pp. 56,78, 102, 127 and 175.
 GBM 1917. DR. W. H. BESANT, F.R.S. Nature 99: 310-311.

 Geiges, H. 2001. A brief history of contact geometry and topology. Expositiones Mathematicae 19:

 25-53.

 Goldstein, H. 1950. Classical mechanics. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

 Goriely, A. 2001. lntegrability and nonintegrability of dynamical systems, advanced series in nonlinear

 dynamics, vol. 19. Singapore: World Scientific.

 Gray, C.G., and E.F. Taylor. 2007. When action is not least. American Journal of Physics 75: 434-458.

 Hamilton, W.R. 1828. Theory of systems of rays. Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy 15:69-174.

 Hamilton, W.R. 1830. Supplement to an essay on the theory of systems of rays. Transactions of the Royal

 Hamilton, W.R. 1831. Second supplement to an essay on the theory of systems of rays. Transactions of the

 Irish Academy 16(part I): 1-61.

 Royal Irish Academy 16(part II): 93-125.

 Royal Irish Academy 17: 1-144.

 187-278.

 ley: University of California, Berkeley.

 Hamilton, W.R. 1837. Third supplement to an essay on the theory of systems of rays. Transactions of the

 Hawkins, T. 1991. Jacobi and the birth of Lie's theory of groups. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 42:

 Hermann, R. 1962. Lectures on Hamilton-Jacobi-Lie theory and the calculus of variations, I, Notes. Berke

 Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 405

 Hill. G.W. 1886. On the part of the motion of the lunar perigee which is a function of the mean motions

 of the sun and the moon. Cambridge. MA: Press of John Wilson & Son; also Acta 8. 1-36 and in (Hill
 1905-1907, Volume I, pp. 243-270).

 Hill, G.W. 1905-1907. The collected mathematical works of George William Hill. The Carnegie Institution

 Horneffer, K. 1988. Review of the 1988 reprint of a treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and

 of Washington.

 rigid bodies, Zentralblatt Zbl 0665.70002.

 of the United States of America 2: 278-283.

 National Academy of Sciences.

 Hunsaker, J.C. 1916. Dynamical stability of aeroplanes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

 Hunsaker, J„ and S. MacLane. 1973. Edwin Bidwell Wilson (1879-1964). Biographical Memoir of the

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1837. Zur Theorie der Variationsrechnung und der Differentialgleichungen. Journal für die

 angewandte Mathematik 17: 68-82; also in (Jacobi 1881. Volume IV, pp. 39-55).

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 1838. Sur le calcul des variations et sur la Thörie des équations différentielles. Journal de

 Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées. Série 1(3): 44-59.

 Jacobi, C.G.J. 2009. Vorlesungen über analytische Mechanik, second edition, edited by A. Clebsch, Georg

 Reimer (1866); translated as Jacobi's Lectures on Dynamics, Hindustan Book Agency.

 Jacobi. C.G.J. 1881. Gesammelte Werke, edited by C. W. Borchardt. E. Lottner. K. T. W. Weierstrass,

 7 volumes.

 Jordan. C. 1870. Traité des substituitions. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

 Jost. R. 1964. Poisson brackets: (an unpedagogical lecture). Review of Modern Physics 36: 572-579.

 Jourdain, E.P. 1917. Review of the first edition of "A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and

 Rigid Bodies". Mathematical Gazette 131: 145-146.

 Jourdain, E.P. 1917-1918. Review of the first edition of "A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles

 and Rigid Bodies". Science Progress in the Twentieth Century 12: 345.

 Julliard-Tosel, E. 2000. Bruns' theorem: The proof and some generalizations. Celestial Mechanics and

 Kline. M. 1990. Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times, vol. 2. Oxford: Oxford University

 Dynamical Astronomy 76: 241 -281.

 Press.

 Kosmann-Schwarzbach, Y. 2013, La géométrie de Poisson, création du XXe' siècle. In Siméon-Denis Pois

 son: Les mathématiques au service de la science, edited by Yvette Kosmann-Schwarzbach, Les Éditions
 de l'École polytechnique, pp. 129-172.

 Kragh. H. 1990. Dirac: A scientific biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 Lagrange. J.-L. 1760/1761. Application de la méthode exposée dans la mémoire précédent a la solution
 de différents problèmes de dynamique. Miscellanea Taurinensia 2: 196-268: also in [59, t. I (1867),
 365-468],

 Lagrange. J.-L. 1808. Mémoire sur las théorie des variations des éléments des planètes et en particulier des

 grandes axes de leurs orbites, Mém. de 1*Institute de France, also in [59, t, VI. 711-768].

 Lagrange. J.-L. 1810. Second mémoire sur las théorie de la variation des arbitraires dans le problèmees
 de mécanique, dans lequel on simplifie l'application des formules générales a ces problèmes, Mém. de
 1'Institute de France, also in (Lagrange 1867-1892, t. VI, 809-816).

 Lagrange. J.-L. Mécanique Analytique, quatrième édition, publié par Gaston Darboux. Gauthier-Villars t.

 1(1888). 1.11(1889).

 Lagrange. J.-L. 1867-1892. Oeuvres de Lagrange, Gauthier-Villars.
 Lampe. E. 1918. Review of the first edition of "A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and

 Rigid Bodies", Jahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik, 35.0682.01.

 Landau, L.D., and E.M. Lifschitz. 1976. Mechanics, course o theoretical physics, vol. 1.3rd ed. Amsterdam:

 Levi-Civita, T., and U. Amaldi. 1927. Lezioni di Meccanica Rationale, vol. II. part 2. Bologna: Nicola

 Elsevier.

 Zanichelli.

 XX: 137-138.

 238-240.

 Lie, S. 1872. Zur Theorie partieller Differentialgleichungen, Göttinger Nachrichten, 480.

 Liebmann, H. 1914. Berührungstransformation in Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften mit

 Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen III.D.7:441-502.

 Liouville, J. 1855. Note sur les équations de la Dynamique. Journal des Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées

 Love, A.E.H. 1929. George Hartley Bryan. Journal of London Mathematical Society Series 1(4):

 <£) Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Lützen, J. 1990, Joseph Liouville 1809-1882: master of pure and applied mathematics, Studies in the

 History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, 15. Berlin: Springer.

 Mackey, G.W. 1963. Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. New York: W.A. Benjamin.

 Marsden, J. 1993. Steve Smale and geometric mechanics in Topology to Computation: Proceedings of the

 Smalefest (Berkeley, CA, 1990), Springer, 499-516.

 McCrea, W.H. 1957. Edmund Taylor Whittaker. Journal of the London Mathematical Society 32:234-256.

 Marie, C.-M. 2009. The inception of symplectic geometry: the works of Lagrange and Poisson during the

 years 1808-1810. Letters in Mathematical Physics 90: 3-21.

 Martin, D. 1958. Sir Edmund Taylor Whittaker, F.R.S. Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society

 406 S. C. Coutinho

 (2)11:1-10.

 Mathieu, E. 1874. Mémoire sur les équations différentielles canoniques de la mécanique. Journal des

 Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées 19: 265-306.

 Maxwell, J.C. 1954. A treatise on electricity and magnetism, vol. 1. New York: Dover.

 Philip Edward Bertrand Jourdain. Proc London Math Soc 19: 59-60 (1921).
 Poincaré, H. Mémoire sur les fonctions zétafuchsiennes. Acta Mathematica IV (1884), 211-278; also in

 Poincaré, H. 1890. Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique. Acta 13 1-270 also in

 (Poincaré 1916-1954, Volume 2, pp. 402-462).

 (Poincaré 1916-1954, Volume VII, 262-479).

 Poincaré, H. 1899. Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, Gauthier-Villars, 1.1 ( 1892), t. II ( 1893),

 1.111(1899).

 Poincaré. H. 1910. Leçons de mécanique céleste : professées à la Sorbonne, Gauthier-Villars 1.1(1905),

 t. II partie 1 (1907), t. II partie 2 (1909), t. III (1910).

 Poincaré, H. 1916-1954. Oeuvres de Henri Poincaré, 12 volumes, Gauthier-Villars.

 Poisson, S.-D. 1809. Sur la variation des constants arbitraires dans le question de Mécanique. Journal de

 l'Ecole Polytechnique, 15éme cahier VIII: 266-344.

 Prange, G. 1935. Die Allgemeinen Integrationsmethoden der Analytischen Mechanik, Encyklopädie der

 Mathematischen Wissenschaften IV.12.U13, 505-804.

 Pulte, H. 2005. Joseph Louis Lagrange, Méchanique Analitique. First Edition (1788), in Landmark Writings

 in Western Mathematics 1640-1940, edited by I. Grattan-Guiness, Elsevier.

 Reeb, G. 1952. Sur certaines propriétés topologiques des trajectoires des systèmes dynamiques, Acad. Roy.

 Routh, E.J. 1860. An elementary treatise on the dynamics of a system of rigid bodies: With numerous

 Belgique, Cl. Sei., Mém., Coll. 8° 27(9), 64 S.

 examples. London: MacMillan.

 Routh, E.J. 1882. The elementary part of a treatise on the dynamics of a system of rigid bodies, being part

 I of a treatise on the whole subject. London: MacMillan.

 Routh, E.J. 1884. The advanced part of a treatise on the dynamics of a system of rigid bodies, being part

 II of a treatise on the whole subject. London: MacMillan.

 Routh, E.J. 1891. A treatise on analytic statics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Routh, E.J. 1898. A treatise on dynamics of a particle with numerous examples. Cambridge: Cambridge

 Siegel, C.L. 1943. Symplectic geometry. American Journal of Mathematics 65: 1-86.

 Siegel, C.L. 1956. Vorlesungen über Himmelsmechanik. Berlin: Springer.

 Siegel, C.L., and J. Moser. 1971. Lectures on celestial mechanics, translation by Charles I. Kalme. Berlin:

 Smale, S. 1967. Differentiable dynamical systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 73:

 University Press.

 Springer.

 747-817.

 Sneddon, I.N. 1980. Review of "Mathematical methods of classical mechanics" and "A course of mathe

 matical physics, vol. 1 : Classical dynamical systems". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
 (N.S.) 2: 346-352.

 Souriau, J.M. 1970. Structure des systèmes dynamiques. Paris: Dunod.

 Sommerfeld, A. 1921. Atombau und Spektrallinien, 2nd ed. Braunschweig: Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn.

 Sternberg, S. 1964. Lectures on differential geometry. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

 Sternberg, S. 1980. Review of Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, "Foundations of mechanics". Bulletin

 of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.) 2: 378-387.

 Temple, G. 1956. Edmund Taylor Whittaker. Biographical memoirs of fellows of the royal society 2:

 299-325.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Thirring, W. 1978. A course of mathematical physics, vol. I. translated by Evans M. Hurrel. Berlin:

 Whittaker's analytical dynamics 407

 Springer.

 Todhunter, I. 1962. A history of the calculus of variations during the nineteenth century. Berlin: Chelsea.

 Truesdell. C. 1984. An idiot's fugitive essays on science. Berlin: Springer.

 van Kampen, E.R.,and A. Wintner. 1936. On the canonical transformations of Hamiltonian systems. Amer

 ican Journal of Mathematics 58: 851-863.

 van der Waerden, B.L. 1967. Sources of quantum mechanics. New York: Dover.

 Verhulst, F. 2012. Henri Poincaré: impatient genius. Berlin: Springer.

 Warwick, A. 2003. Masters of theory: Cambridge and the rise of mathematical theory. Chicago.

 Watson, G.N., and E.T. Whittaker. 1963. A course of modern analysis. 4th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Weyl, H. 1939. The classical groups. Englewood Cliffs: Princeton.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1900. Report on the progress of the solution of the problem of three bodies, in Report of

 the Sixty-Ninth Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science held at Dover in

 September 1899, John Murray.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1902. On the solution of dynamical problems in terms of trigonometric series. Proceedings

 of the London Mathematical Society 34: 206-221.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1940. The Hamiltonian revival. The Mathematical Gazette 24(260): 153-158.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1904. A treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies. I st ed. Cambridge:

 Cambridge University Press.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1910. A history of the theories of aether and electricity from the age of Descartes to the

 close of the nineteenth century. London: Longmans.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1917. A treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies. 2nd edn. Cam

 bridge: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted by Pranava Books (2008).

 Whittaker, E.T. 1999. A treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies, reprint of the

 fourth edition with a forward by W. H. McCrea, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1916-1917. On the Adelphic integral of the differential equations of dynamics. Proceedings

 of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 37: 95-116.

 Whittaker, E.T. 1951. A history of the theories of aether and electricity: The classical theories. London:

 Whittaker, E.T. 1953. A history of the theories of aether and electricity: The modern theories 1900-1926.

 Nelson.

 London: Nelson.

 Wilson, E.B. 1901. Vector analysis: A text-bookfor the use of students of Mathematics and Physics founded

 upon the lectures of J. Willard Gibbs. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

 Wilson, E.B. 1906. Review of the first edition of "A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and

 Rigid Bodies". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 12: 451—458.

 Wintner, A. 1934. On the linear conservative dynamical systems. Annali di Matematica Serial V 13: 14-112.

 Wintner, A. 1941. The analyticalfoundations ofcelestial mechanics. Englewood Cliffs: Princeton University

 Press.

 Ô Springer

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Tue, 19 May 2020 09:59:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

