 

 

 

 

Review: Will the Next Kepler Be a Computer?
Reviewed Work(s): Induction: Processes of Inference, Learning and Discovery by John H.
Holland, Keith J. Holyoak, Richard E. Nisbett and  Paul R. Thagard; Scientific Discovery:
Computational Explorations of the Creative Processes by Pat Langley, Herbert A. Simon,
Gary L. Bradshaw and  Jan M. Zytkow
Review by: Michael E. Gorman
Source: Science & Technology Studies, Vol. 5, No. 2, Annual Meeting Issue (Summer, 1987),
pp. 63-65
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/690423
Accessed: 17-05-2020 09:47 UTC

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide

range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and

facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

https://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Science & Technology Studies

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 REVIEW ESSAY

 Will the Next Kepler Be a Computer?

 John H. Holland, Keith J. Holyoak, Richard E. Nisbett,
 and Paul R. Thagard, Induction: Processes of Inference,
 Learning and Discovery. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986, 384
 pp. $24.95.

 Pat Langley, Herbert A. Simon, Gary L. Bradshaw, and
 Jan M. Zytkow, Scientific Discovery: Computational Explo-
 rations of the Creative Processes. Cambridge: MIT Press,
 1987, 357 pp. $9.95.

 Both of these books are attempts to show how induc-
 tive reasoning can be modeled on computers. Scientific
 Discovery focuses on examples drawn from the history of
 science, though the discussion of historical cases is brief

 and very limited. Induction discusses inductive reasoning
 across a wide range of phenomena, including learning,
 attributions of cause in social situations and, in a next-to-

 final chapter, scientific discovery. Neither book discusses
 the role of social factors in discovery. Therefore, both are

 particularly relevant to those interested in the cognitive
 psychology of science.

 Scientific Discovery

 This book focuses on heuristics as the main ingredient
 in scientific dicovery. Heuristics are "rules of thumb" that
 guide the search for a solution to a problem. Most of the
 book is spent describing heuristic-based computer pro-
 grams designed to model famous scientific discoveries.
 For example, a program called BACON was designed to
 re-discover several scientific laws from data, including
 Kepler's third law. The earliest version of BACON used
 three heuristics to find Kepler's third law:

 If the values of a term are constant, then infer that

 the term always has that value.If the values of two nu-
 merical terms increase together, then consider their
 ratio.If the values of one term increase as those of an-

 other decrease, consider their product. (p. 66)
 Later versions of BACON added heuristics to increase

 generality, e.g., ones to express the ratio in the second
 heuristic as a linear function and check that function by
 gathering further data. BACON is given data on the dis-
 tance between the sun and each planet and the angle
 found by using a fixed star and the planet as two end-
 points with the Sun as the pivot at different times. From
 this data, BACON finds an inverse relation between the

 distance (D) and the slope (s) which it eventually uses to
 discover that D3s2 is a constant.

 Then the program stops, and Langley et al. claim that
 it has "discovered" Kepler's third law, with a simplified
 version of his second law embedded within. To anyone
 familiar at all with Kepler's actual discovery process (see
 Koestler, 1959 for a good account) the program falls ludi-
 crously short. No one presented Kepler with a table of

 data, nleatly arranged, and told him to discover an arbi-
 trary mathematical relationship. Kepler started with a
 belief that geometric solids could be fitted into the orbits

 of the planets with the sun at the center of the solar sys-
 tem. When this belief did not accord with Tycho Brahe's
 data, he had to go through the agonizing process of alter-

 ing his framework, deciding which data were worth using
 to frame and check his new model. His success was due,

 in part, to persistent calculations based on Brahe's data,
 but no one else would have known that such calculations

 were worth doing. As Koestler says,

 He had been searching for this Third Law, that is to

 say, for a correlation between a planet's period and its

 distance, since his youth..Without such a correlation,
 the universe would make no sense to him; it would be

 an arbitrary structure. If the sun had the power to gov-
 ern the planet's motions, then that motion must some-

 how depend on their distance from the sun; but how?
 Kepler was the first who saw the problem-quite
 apart from the fact that he found the solution to it, after

 twenty-two years of labour. The reason why nobody
 before him had asked the question is that nobody had
 thought of cosmological problems in terms of actual
 physical forces. (p. 395)
 To put this in the language of modern cognitive sci-

 ence, Kepler's mental representation of the solar system
 was more important than the heuristics he used to dis-

 cover his laws. (For a similar argument regarding the per-
 formance of subjects in scientific reasoning experiments,
 see Gorman, Stafford, and Gorman, 1987.) BACON has

 no mental representations; it merely searches for quanti-

 tative relationships between arbitrary terms supplied by
 the programmers, who interpret its results to be "discov-

 ery" of Kepler's third law. One feels they have missed the
 point of Kepler's genius entirely.

 There are several points in Scientific Discovery where
 Langley et al. issue disclaimers, pointing out that pro-
 grams like BACON-and the book includes many other
 programs designed to model historical discoveries from
 different sciences-were not intended to model the his-

 tory of particular discoveries. Rather, these programs
 present "ways in which historical discoveries could have

 been made with the help of a few simple heuristics and
 with moderate amounts of computation" (p. 170). But
 this disclaimer does not answer the problem raised in the
 Kepler example. There is no way Kepler could have found

 his laws "with a few simple heuristics"; he had to repre-
 sent the solar system in a way that suggested where to
 look for lawful relations.

 In a final chapter, the authors attempt to address this
 problem of mental representations, including pictorial
 images. Their claim is that the same sort of programs that

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 * 63

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 produced Kepler's third law could be adapted to form
 representations. But they regard these sorts of represen-
 tations as relatively simple (see p. 318) and also talk very
 little about how a machine could form them from the

 kind of information and belifs Kepler had available. Cer-
 tainly we could find a way to program a computer to
 begin with the assumption that the planets' orbits can be
 filled by geometric solids, then provide it with data that
 shows the inadequacy of that view and heuristics that
 would guide it to Kepler's solution. But this isn't what
 Kepler did. He had to decide that geometric solids must
 fit into the planetary orbits, figure out how to test this as-

 sumption, and develop radical new assumptions, e.g., the
 idea that some kind of force emanating from the sun con-

 trolled the motion of the planets. Historians and philoso-
 phers may find some of Langley et al.'s other cases of
 greater interest than their account of Kepler. But there is
 no danger that their programs, even if modified to create
 representations of the form they suggest toward the end
 of the book, will be able to make novel discoveries of the

 sort that Kepler made.

 Langley et al. close by arguing that scientific creativity
 should not be regarded as mysterious, as fundamentally
 different from other human cognitive processes. I
 agree-we need to try to understand the cognitive as-
 pects of scientific and technological creativity. But it
 seems to me that their account of scientific problem-
 solving is as limited as early behavioristic accounts of
 learning-a necessary and halting first step, perhaps,
 but one which we must go beyond as rapidly as possible.

 Induction

 Fortunately, more promising approaches are already at
 hand, and Induction represents one of them. Although it

 has only one chapter on scientific discovery, it is of far
 more interest to psychologists of science than Scientific

 Discovery. Whereas most of the latter book is detailed de-

 scription of computer programs, the former spends only
 one chapter describing the authors' computer
 implmentation of their model and the rest applying the
 model to important areas of psychology, including scien-
 tific discovery.

 Induction's approach relies far more heavily on mental

 ries; cat passes the "confirmation threshold" and Jennifer

 realizes she is looking at a cat. One of the strengths of In-

 duction is that its framework allows for competing rules
 or representations, whereas the programs in Scientific
 Discovery can consider only one rule at a time.

 Sociobiologists hold that each organism acts as if it
 were a sort of "genetic calculator," calculating whether
 kin are sufficiently close to warrant sacrificing its own life
 to save their (Dawkins, 1976). Similarly, Holland et al.
 construct a model of thinking based on rules which in-
 volve complex calculations. Unlike the sociobiologists,
 there is no "as if" involved in Holland et al.'s analysis; they
 assume that these sorts of calculations are being carried
 on by a computational cognitive system. Lest the analogy
 seem too far-fetched, it should be pointed out that Hol-
 land et al. mention biological systems as one area in
 which the mathematics of induction should have its

 greatest application. Critics of the whole computational
 perspective would argue that this mathematical level of
 analysis is unnecessary (see, for example, Searle, 1984).
 For the present, it is best to say that Holland et al. provide
 substantial evidence that in many situations the human
 or organism acts as if it were doing computational calcula-
 tions before recognizing or acting.

 Holland et al.'s more sophisticated computational
 model comes a step closer to Kepler than BACON's sim-
 ple heuristics. In fact, Holland et al. use the Kepler exam-
 ple to criticize BACON along the lines I sketched above
 (pp. 324-5-but I developed my critique independently
 of theirs). They also present a more sophisticated philos-

 ophy of science than Scientific Discovery, due in part to

 the fact that one of the co-authors, Thagard, is a philoso-
 pher. A quotation will illustrate:

 How do scientists arrive at new laws? A common

 view, misattributed to Francis Bacon, is that scientists

 generally start with the data and then by "induction'
 directly derive laws that describe those data. More
 typically, we will argue, the discovery of laws requires
 the kinds of reconceptualizations that are central to
 our account of problem solving; synchroic search
 among concepts is as important as the search for dia-
 chronic realities. We will argue that this is true even
 for observational laws, or laws that cover observable

 representations than heuristics. Holland et al. try to dem-
 onstrate that mental representations are best viewed as
 sets of rules, including rules for transitions from one state

 to another. They use the example of "Jennifer" (p. 58-62),
 who notices that an "object in her visual field is small and
 black, has a long axis in the horizontal direction, and is
 an animal" (p. 59). Then they show how her "system"
 computes values for several mutually exclusive alterna-
 tives, e.g., black dog, black cat, and black squirrel; dog
 gets the highest value, but "the tentative characterization
 ... does not reach some implicit confirmation threshold"
 (p. 60). So the system tells Jennifer to move her eyes
 "along the animal's horizontal axis," which leads to the
 observation that the animal has a round head. This new

 events; it is even more obviously so for theoretical laws
 that require top-down concept-formation. (p. 323)
 In other words, theory formation involves searching
 for relationships among concepts as well as search for
 regularities in the data. Holland et al. incorporate both
 types of search in their model and they recognize that,
 "Although he started with relatively accurate data fur-
 nished by Tycho Brahe, Kepler's discovery of the three fa-
 mous laws would have been impossible without several
 dramatic reconceptualizations of the problem domain"
 (p. 324). The amount of reconceptualization is far greater
 for a Newton or an Einstein; Newton, for example, took
 Kepler's and Galileo's laws and forged them into a single
 system.

 information adds strength to the squirrel and cat catego-

 Holland et al. don't say how exactly their model would

 64 * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES 0 Vol. 5, No. 2

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 explain Kepler's discoveries, but clearly numerical com-
 putations concerning the relative strength of various
 rules would be involved on some level. For example,
 Kepler's system of geometric solids might be represented
 as a set of rules; the system would then seek data, e.g.,
 Brahe's, to see if the geometric-solids model reached a
 "confirmation threshold." Inconsistencies between the

 data and the model would lead to rules that embodied

 exceptions and also to reconceptualizations until Kepler's
 set of rules gradually yielded his three laws.

 Perhaps Kepler did sit in his study poring over Brahe's
 data while his computational system assigned weights to
 different rules, then sent him back to look for more data.

 Certainly, subconscious or semi-conscious processes of
 this sort do go on in scientists-and all of us-much of
 the time. But this model still misses the heart of what it

 meant to be Kepler. While these calculcations may be rel-
 atively automatic in a case where a child perceives a cat
 in the distance (although even that is debatable), they are
 not automatic in a case like Kepler's, where a scientist
 feels he or she has seen through Nature's veils and is try-
 ing to transform the ecstasy of discovery into sober fact.
 He did not compute passively; he made conscious deci-
 sions about where to seek information and what to do

 with it. The program outlined in Induction cannot be a
 Kepler until it develops metacognitive awareness-until
 it can consciously evaluate alternatives and not just auto-
 matically perform calculations.

 For example, Kepler's decision to abandon the Coper-

 nican assumption that planets had circular orbits was not
 a simple, rational response to calculations based on the
 evidence that Mars' orbit could not be a circle. Instead,

 Kepler had to cope with a result that was in drastic con-
 flict with his representation of the way the universe
 worked: the orbit of Mars was an oval.

 The oval ... has an arbitrary form. It distorts the
 eternal dream of the harmony of the spheres, which
 lay at the origin of the whole quest. Who art thou,
 Johan Kepler, to destroy divine symmetry? All he has
 to say in his own defence is, that having cleared the
 stable of astronomy of cycles and spirals, he left be-
 hind him "only a single cart-ful of dung: his oval."
 (Koestler, p. 329)
 To understand Kepler, one must do more than con-
 struct a complex set of competing rules. One must under-

 stand how his emotional reaction to the "cart-ful of dung"
 drove him on to a year of fruitless calculations, lead him
 even to repudiate his own second law-all while using
 ellipses in his calculations without realizing that the el-
 lipse was the key to the orbit of Mars. I don't see how even
 Holland et al.'s computer program could replicate this
 "wild goose chase" unless it were programmed in ad-
 vance to follow these exact steps, in which case it would
 be modeling nothing but the programmer's ingenuity in
 setting up the steps.

 Conclusion

 ignores mental representations. From Induction, we learn
 the prospects and problems associated with translating
 mental representations into sets of rules. My own view
 (see Gorman, 1987) is that a complete view of the creative

 process will have to include both mental representations
 and heuristics; a unique mental representation is a major
 ingredient in scientific genius, but creative scientists also
 utilize or develop powerful heuristics-including some
 of the ones discussed by Langley et al.-that allow them
 to test and modify their representations.

 Like many congitive scientists, the authors of both
 books are working up from lower-order cognitive pro-
 cesses, e.g., in Inducation, how you recognize a cat in the
 distance and in Scientific Discovery, how you perceive re-
 lationships in data already ordered so as to make the dis-

 covery of the relationships easy. What the psychology of
 science needs is more cognitive psychology of higher-
 order processes. (Holland et al. briefly recognize this
 problem on p. 350.)

 Specifically, both books ignore the problem of con-
 sciousness, or what Searle (1984) calls intentionality.
 Cognitive scientists are not alone in their failure to ade-
 quately address this issue; sociologists and social histori-
 ans, for example, frequently treat the individual as
 merely a product of social forces. Certainly, social factors

 play a major role in shaping an individual scientist's rep-
 resentations and choices of heuristic; Kepler's preference

 for circular orbits is, in part, a result of his times. However,

 Kepler is no more a mere product of social circumstances
 than he is a complex calculator or a set of heuristics. A
 successful psychology of science must incorporate con-
 sciousness as well as mental representations and heuris-
 tics. Computer models may be useful in other ways, but
 even the most sophisticated parallel-processing architec-
 tures do not incorporate consciousness.

 One of the most hopeful aspects of the book Induction

 is that the authors come from different disciplines. Only
 through genuinely interdisciplinary collaboration can we
 hope to recapture the whole Kepler, including his con-
 scious intentions as well as the subconscious social and

 cognitive factors that shaped his discoveries.

 References

 Dawkins, R. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976.

 Gorman, Michael E. "A Framework for Understanding the Cognitive
 Style of Inventors." Paper presented to the Society for the History of
 Technology, Pittsburgh, October 24, 1986.

 Gorman, Michael E., A. Stafford, and Margaret E. Gorman.

 "Disconfirmation and Dual Hypothesis on a More Difficult Version of

 Wason's 2-4-6 Task." The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
 39A (1987): 1-28.

 Koestler, A. The Sleepwalkers. New York: Grosset& Dunlap, 1963.
 Searle, J. Minds, Brains and Science. Cambridge: Harvard University

 Press, 1984.

 From Scientific Discovery, we learn the strengths and
 limitations of a heuristic-based approach that virtually

 Department of Humanities
 Michigan Technological University

 Reviewed by Michael E. Gorman

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY STUDIES * Vol. 5, No. 2 * 65

This content downloaded from 203.78.15.150 on Sun, 17 May 2020 09:47:51 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

